Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[An
ordinance
adopting
Parts
I
and
II
of
the
Code
of
the
City
of
Saco
is
presently
proposed
before
the
City
Council.
Upon
final
adoption,
it
will
be
included
here
as
Article
I
of
this
chapter.]
§ 1-1. (Reserved)
§ 1-2. (Reserved)
§ 1-3. (Reserved)
§ 1-4. (Reserved)
§ 1-5. (Reserved)
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. (Reserved)
§ 1-7. (Reserved)
§ 1-8. (Reserved)
§ 1-9. (Reserved)
§ 1-10. (Reserved)
§ 1-11. (Reserved)
§ 1-12. (Reserved)
§ 1-13. (Reserved)
§ 1-14. (Reserved)
§ 1-15. (Reserved)
§ 1-6 SACO CITY CODE § 1-15
1:4
ARTICLE II
Provisions Applicable to Entire Code
[Adopted 5-1-1995 as Ch. I, Secs. 1-2, 1-3, 1-5, 1-6.3, 1-6.4 and 1-7
of the 1994 Code]
§ 1-16. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Code, and in the interpretation and application
of all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the
context may otherwise require, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY — The City of Saco in the County of York and State of Maine.
CITY CHARTER — Chapter 201A, Home Rule Law, Section 1911.
CITY COUNCIL or COUNCIL — The local legislative body of the City,
constituted and elected pursuant to the Statutes of the State of Maine.
CLERK or CITY CLERK — The Municipal Clerk duly appointed pursuant to
law.
CODE or THIS CODE — The Code of the City of Saco.
COUNTY — York County, Maine.
DEPARTMENT — An organizational unit of the government established
or designated by ordinance or this Code as a department, together with
any agency or instrumentality of the government assigned to such
organizational unit by the City Administrator.
LICENSED — Licensed in accordance with the appropriate section or
chapter of this Code.
MONTH — A calendar month, unless otherwise specifically provided.
M.R.S.A. — The Maine Revised Statutes Annotated.
MUNICIPAL OFFICERS — The municipal officers of the City of Saco, Maine.
OATH — Shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which,
by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath.
OFFICER or OFFICIAL (and the title of the officer or official) — Shall be
construed as if the words "of the City of Saco" followed it.
OWNER — As applied to any property, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant-in-common, tenant-in-partnership, joint tenant or tenant by
the entirety of the whole or a part of such property.
PERSON — Shall extend and be applied to associations, firms, partnerships
and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals.
STATE — The State of Maine.
STATUTES or REVISED STATUTES — The latest published edition of the
Statutes or Revised Statutes of Maine.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:5
STREET — Includes public avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys,
lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto and all other public
thoroughfares in the City, and shall mean the entire width thereof between
abutting property lines; it shall be construed to include a sidewalk or
footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or unless such construction
would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City Council.
TENANT — Any person occupying the premises, building or land of another
in subordination to such other person's title and with his express or implied
assent, whether he occupies the whole or a part of those premises, building
or land, whether alone or with others.
WEEK — Seven days.
YEAR — A calendar year.
§ 1-17. Rules of construction.
A. Word usage. In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and
resolutions of the City, the following rules shall be observed, unless
otherwise specifically provided or unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City Council:
(1) "And" may read "or" and "or" may be read "and," if the sense
requires it.
(2) Any citation of a statute, law or ordinance contained in this Code
shall be deemed to refer to such statute, law or ordinance as
amended, whether or not such designation is included in the
citation.
(3) Definitions given within a chapter or article apply only to words or
phrases used in such chapter or article, unless otherwise provided.
(4) Gender. A word importing the masculine gender shall extend and
be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations
as well as to males.
(5) "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
(6) The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
(7) "Time" means an hour of the day according to the official time of
the City. The time within which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day, and if
the last day is a Sunday, a legal holiday or a day on which the offices
of the City are closed, that day shall be excluded.
(8) Whenever a specific time is used in this Code, it shall mean the
prevailing time in effect in the State of Maine during any day in any
year.
(9) Whenever the word "person" is used in any section of this Code
prescribing a penalty or fine as applied to partnerships or
§ 1-16 SACO CITY CODE § 1-17
1:6
§ 1-18. Enforcement actions and civil penalties. [Amended
11-18-2002]
associations, the word shall include the partners or members
thereof, and such word as applied to corporations shall include the
officers, agents or employees thereof who are responsible for any
violation of said section.
(10) "Preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after,
respectively.
(11) Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future,
past and present where applicable, unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise.
(12)Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common
and approved usage of the language, but technical words and
phrases and others that have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to
such meaning.
(13)"Writing" and "written" mean any representation of words, letters
or figures, whether by printing or otherwise, capable of
comprehension by ordinary visual means.
B. Divisions of the Code.
(1) "Chapter" shall mean one of the major divisions of the Code and
divided by subject matter.
(2) "Section" shall mean a major subdivision of a chapter.
(3) "Subsection" shall mean a subdivision of a section.
C. References include amendments. Any reference in this Code to an
ordinance or provision of this Code shall mean such ordinance or
provision as it may now exist or as hereafter amended. Any references
in this Code to chapters, articles, divisions or sections shall be to
chapters, articles, divisions and sections of this Code, unless otherwise
specified.
D. Catch lines of sections. The catch lines of the sections appearing in this
Code are only intended as guide words or phrases to indicate the
contents of the sections and shall not be deemed to be a part of or affect
the application or substance of such sections unless expressly so
provided.
A. The violation of any Code provision contained herein, or any Code
provision subsequently adopted hereunder, or any violation of
uncodified ordinances, including the Zoning Ordinance and the
Subdivision Regulations, shall constitute a civil offense against the City
of Saco punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 per day, per
violation, and such civil offense may be prosecuted by the City pursuant
§ 1-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:7
§ 1-19. Seal.
The design hereby annexed shall be the device of the City Seal,1 and the
inscription shall be as follows:
DOMINE DIRIGE NOS CITY OF SACO, ME. 1867
(Translation: "The Lord Guides Us")
to Maine Rule of Civil Procedure 80H, or any other applicable lawful
proceeding under Maine law. Each day that any cited violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense, amenable to a separate
complaint or as additional violations in any pending actions or
proceedings.
B. Any such civil offense may be prosecuted on behalf of the City by its
City Attorney or its Code Enforcement Officer. Certain actions, under
applicable codes, may be initiated by the City's Electrical Inspector, its
Plumbing Inspector, its Health Officer or its Police Department.
C. If an act is prohibited by this Code, it shall also be a civil offense against
the City for any party, including a third party, to cause, allow, aid,
permit, assist, conceal or suffer the underlying civil offense or violation.
D. The City official prosecuting the civil offense shall be deemed to have
authority to settle and resolve such offense before any court hearing,
but no such settlement may be entered into until it is reviewed and
approved by the City Administrator.
E. All fines paid as a result of any enforcement action hereunder shall
inure to the City's General Fund.
F. To the extent any Code provision hereunder has its own enforcement or
penalty provisions set forth within that Code section, that Code section
shall be subject to the terms and conditions of this Code provision.
G. Notwithstanding the preceding, the City may opt to bring an
enforcement action under any alternative enforcement procedure
permitted under Maine law or this Code. If there is a conflict between
this section and any other enforcement provision of the Code, this
provision shall control.
1. Editor's Note: A copy of the City Seal is on file in the City Clerk's office.
§ 1-18 SACO CITY CODE § 1-19
1:8
Chapter 4
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Education — See Charter, Art. IV.
Financial procedures — See Charter, Art. VI.
Elections — See Charter, Art. VII, and Ch. 11.
Funds — See Ch. 15.
Personnel — See Ch. 34.
Purchasing — See Ch. 38.
Sale of City-owned real property — See Ch. 81,
Art. I.
General Assistance Program — See Ch. 112.
Traffic Safety Committee — See Ch. 211, Art.
V.
Traffic Division — See Ch. 211, Art. VI.
§ 1-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-19
1:9

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 4-1. Establishment and distribution.
The Administrator is hereby authorized to submit to the City Council, for
approval, such administrative regulations, consistent with the City Charter
and City ordinances, to provide for the adequate functioning of all
departments. All regulations so issued shall comprise the Administrative
Code, which shall be distributed to all members of the City Council, to all
department heads and to such others as the Administrator may determine
to be necessary or desirable and shall be available in the office of the City
Clerk for public inspection.
§ 4-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-1
1:11

ARTICLE II
Mayor and City Council2
§ 4-2. Powers and duties of City Council.
§ 4-3. Vacancies on appointed boards.
Any vacancy occurring in the unexpired term of any member appointed
to any board or commission shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor
and/or City Council with confirmation by a majority of the full Council.
The appointment shall be for the balance of the unexpired term, except as
otherwise provided by the City Charter or other provisions of this Code.
§ 4-4. Investigations by City Council.
A. Warrants. All warrants for disbursements of money shall be signed by a
majority of the Warrant Committee.
B. Compensation of elected or appointed officials. The City Council, by
order, shall fix the salaries of officials elected or appointed by the City
Council and City Administrator. This includes the salary of the City
Administrator for his/her services as such and for all other services
rendered by him/her. Unless otherwise provided in the City Charter, all
members of the boards and commissions shall serve without
compensation.
A. Vote required to authorize investigation. A vote of four Councilors is
required to authorize an investigation pursuant to Sections 9.03 and
9.04 of the City Charter. In the event of a three-to-three tie vote, the
Mayor shall cast the deciding vote.
B. Scope of investigation.
(1) The Council may request a full investigation, which request
includes the collection of any and all evidence tending to prove the
matter being contested which does not violate the rights of the
party being investigated under the laws of the State of Maine or the
United States of America. A general statement by the Council
requesting a full investigation shall authorize the Mayor or the City
Administrator to request all pertinent evidence, compel testimony
and issue subpoenas. The Council may request specific evidence as
part of a full investigation.
(2) Alternatively, the Council may request a limited investigation,
specifying particular information which it seeks. In the event of
such limited authorization, only such information, documents and
testimony as requested by the Council shall be obtained.
2. Editor's Note: See also Art. II of the Charter.
§ 4-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-4
1:13
(3) All requests and subpoenas authorized by the Council and issued
by the Mayor or City Administrator shall have the full force and
effect of law.
(4) In the event that the Mayor or City Administrator is the subject of
any such investigation, the Deputy Mayor, any four Councilors or
the City Solicitor is authorized to sign subpoenas.
C. Admissibility of evidence. In any public hearing resulting from such
investigation, the admissibility of evidence shall be determined
according to the Maine Rules of Evidence.
D. Public access. All Council action requesting investigation and any
public hearing resulting from investigation shall be at open meetings,
posted 48 hours or more in advance of the meeting.
§ 4-4 SACO CITY CODE § 4-4
1:14
ARTICLE III
Administrator3
§ 4-5. Appointment; term of office.
There shall be a City Administrator who shall be appointed by the Mayor
and confirmed by the City Council to serve at the pleasure of the Council for
a term of up to three years.
§ 4-6. Powers and duties.
A. The City Administrator shall perform such duties as are specified in
Article III of the City Charter. The Administrator shall also have
complete executive direction of the administrative service of the City.
The Administrator shall establish and maintain a personnel evaluation
system of the department heads.
B. All necessary legal documents shall be signed by the City Administrator,
except as otherwise ordered by the City Council.
3. Editor's Note: See also Art. III of the Charter.
§ 4-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-6
1:15

ARTICLE IV
Officials and Department Heads
§ 4-7. Funds.
Every City official shall keep an account of all money which may, by virtue of
his/her office, come into his/her hands from whatever source, stating from
whom received and on what account the same was paid. He/she shall pay
such moneys to the City Treasurer at such periods as the City Treasurer
may require.
§ 4-8. Preservation of public records.
Each department head shall be held responsible for the preservation of
all public records under his/her jurisdiction and shall provide a system of
filing and indexing the same. No public records, reports, correspondence or
public data relating to the business of any department shall be destroyed
or removed permanently from the files without the knowledge and approval
of the City Administrator and under due process of law. Each department
head shall retain a copy of all communications issued by him/her or his/her
department.
§ 4-9. City property.
Each City official who has public property responsibility shall forthwith
make, keep up and maintain a list of all such property and deposit this
list and amendments thereto over his/her signature with the Treasurer.
When any official terminates his/her duties, he/she shall check his/her
property list with his/her successor in office or with the City Administrator,
if the latter so elects, and obtain a release from property liability prior
to receiving his/her final salary payment due. Each official shall promptly
reimburse the City for the fair and reasonable value of any property for
which he/she is responsible and for which he/she is unable to account, if
such loss is due to his/her carelessness or negligence. The amount of such
reimbursement shall be determined by the City Council.
§ 4-10. Suits for or against the City.
A. Every City officer having knowledge of any fact concerning any claim or
suit for or against the City shall report such fact forthwith to the City
Solicitor.
B. It shall be the duty of every employee of the City to report at once, to
his/her department head, facts which may come to his/her notice
concerning any accident for which the City may be liable; and the heads
of the several departments, agencies and officers of the City shall
instruct all their employees to report such facts and information as
aforesaid. The department head shall report these facts to the City
Administrator.
§ 4-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-10
1:17
§ 4-11. Powers and duties of department heads.
The heads of departments shall:
C. No member of the City Council shall act as attorney, agent or
representative of any person or corporation in making, prosecuting or
presenting before the City Council or any City department or agency or
office any claim or demand against the City.
A. Perform all duties required by their office by the City Charter, by
ordinance or by any other laws, and it shall be the duty of the
department head to perform such duties not in conflict therewith as
may be assigned by the City Administrator.
B. Be held immediately responsible to the City Administrator for effective
administration of their departments and duties, unless otherwise
stipulated in the City Charter.
C. Keep abreast with the latest practices and developments in their
particular field and inaugurate, with the approval of the City
Administrator, any new practice that appears to be of benefit to the
service and to the public.
D. Submit reports of the activities of their departments annually and when
requested by the City Administrator.
E. Establish and maintain a system of records and reports in sufficient
detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of
departmental activities and to form a basis for the reports required by
the City Administrator.
F. Have the power to delegate to members of the departments or divisions
coming under their jurisdiction any duties and responsibilities as seem
advisable, together with proportionate authority for their fulfillment,
but in no case may they delegate their overall responsibility or any of
their accountability.
G. Have the authority to appoint and remove, subject to the personnel
regulations4 and the authority of the City Administrator, all persons
under their employ.
H. Be responsible for the proper custody and maintenance of all City
property used in their departments.
I. Be appointed by the City Administrator and confirmed by the City
Council and serve for an indefinite term at the pleasure of the City
Administrator.
J. Establish and maintain a system of performance evaluation for all of the
personnel within the department.
4. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 34, Personnel.
§ 4-10 SACO CITY CODE § 4-11
1:18
ARTICLE V
Departments and Divisions5
§ 4-12. Division of administrative service. [Amended 10-7-2002;
1-22-2013]
The administrative service of the City shall be divided under the City
Administrator into the following Departments:
Department Division Department Head
Aministration City Administration City Administrator
Purchasing Agent
Personnel Management
Street Lights
Hydrants
City Building
Engineering
Planning
Community
Development
Legal
Economic Development
Assessing Assessing Assessor
Building Inspection and
Code Enforcement
Building Inspector Building Inspector
Health Inspector
Plumbing Inspector
Electrical Inspector
City Clerk City Clerk City Clerk
Welfare
Board of Registration
Finance Accounting Finance Director
Treasury
Tax Collection
Fire All Fire Stations Fire Chief
Ambulance
Civil Emergency
Preparedness
Director of Civil
Emergency
Preparedness
5. Editor's Note: See also Art. V of the Charter.
§ 4-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-12
1:19
Department Division Department Head
Parks and Recreation Parks Director of Parks and
Recreation Recreation
Trees
Senior Citizens
Police Police Department Police Chief
Public Works Streets and Highways Director of Public Works
Sewers and Drains
Camp Ellis Pier
Snowfighting
Water Resource
Recovery Division
All treatment plants Director of Water
Resource Recovery
Division
§ 4-13. Department of Administration.
A. Establishment. There shall be a Department of Administration, the head
of which shall be the Administrator.
B. City Planning and Community Development Offices. There may be
offices which shall not have department status but shall be in the City
Administrator's Office, the heads of which shall be the Planning
Director, the Economic Development Director and the Community
Development Director, respectively, who shall be appointed by the City
Administrator.
(1) Planning Office.
(a) The City Planning Office shall work with the City Administrator
in all matters that are within the scope of urban revitalization,
community development, facilities planning or open space
preservation. The City Planning Office shall supply the City
Administrator and other departments with statistical and
graphic information pertinent to future facilities.
(b) The City Planning Office shall ask, advise and supply
information to the Planning Board in matters dealing with land
subdivision and development, amendments to its rules and
regulations, the updating and revision of the City's
Comprehensive Plan, amendments to the City Zoning
Ordinance and any other matter in which the Board seeks its
aid or advice.
(2) The Community Development Office shall develop all programs
concerning urban revitalization, facilities planning, community
development and urban revitalization and make applications, with
Council approval, to federal and state agencies for funds to
§ 4-12 SACO CITY CODE § 4-13
1:20
§ 4-14. Department of Finance.
implement these programs. Administration of these funds shall be
by the City Administrator. The Community Development Director
shall provide staff support to the Community Development Advisory
Board. The Community Development Director shall be the
supervisor of all staff of the Office.
(3) Economic Development Office. The Economic Development Office
shall encourage, promote, establish, solicit and provide for
industrial development, expansion and growth within the City of
Saco, within the Saco Industrial Park, so called, and on lands
hereafter acquired by the City for industrial uses and purposes and
on other lands within the City which may be privately owned but
which are particularly adaptable to industrial uses. The Economic
Development Director shall:
(a) Encourage and promote the development and expansion of
existing industrial and commercial uses within the City.
(b) Gather, correlate and preserve statistics, surveys and other
data relating to land classification and uses, buildings, labor
statistics and other matters that will enable the Economic
Development Office to carry out its function and purposes.
(c) Perform such other functions as may be required for economic
development and improvement, as required by the City
Administrator. He shall provide an annual report to the City
Administrator as to the current status and potential growth of
economic development in the City.
(d) Prepare an annual operating budget for each fiscal year for the
Office of Economic Development and submit that budget to the
City Administrator for inclusion in the City operating budget
not less than three months prior to the commencement of such
fiscal year.
A. Establishment. There shall be a Department of Finance, the head of
which shall be the Finance Director. The Finance Director shall be
appointed by the City Administrator, with final confirmation of the City
Council.
B. Duties. The Department of Finance shall be responsible, under the City
Administrator, for financial planning, budget reporting and control. The
Department shall also, under the administrative direction of the City
Administrator, supervise the lease, rental or use and the maintenance of
all City property not used by other departments of the City.
C. Divisions of the Department of Finance. This Department shall be
divided into the following divisions:
§ 4-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-14
1:21
(1) Division of Purchasing and Accounting. The head of this Division
shall be the Finance Director, who shall be responsible for the
proper preaudit and recording of all financial transactions. The
Finance Director shall keep informed and maintain records as to
the sources of supply for all classes of purchases, price trends or
other related matters and shall perform such additional duties as
prescribed by the City Council.
(2) Treasury Division. The head of this Division shall be the City
Treasurer, whose duties shall be prescribed by the Finance
Director. The Treasurer may appoint a Deputy Treasurer to assist in
his/her duties, subject to confirmation by the City Administrator.
(3) Division of Tax Collection. There shall be a Division of Tax
Collection in the Office of Finance. The head of this Division shall
be the Tax Collector, who shall be appointed by the City
Administrator on the recommendation of the Finance Director and
confirmed by the City Council. The Collector is not an agent of the
City. He/she is a public officer, owning to the public and not the
City. His/her authority comes from the statutes, and he/she cannot
be controlled by the City in the execution of his/her authority. The
City cannot, by vote, increase, diminish or vary the duties imposed
on the Collector by statute. The Tax Collector is responsible for the
sound fiscal management of his/her Department. The Tax Collector
shall compute, issue and collect all excise fees on motor vehicles
owned and operated by the residents of Saco and turn these fees
over to the Treasurer at least monthly. [Amended 6-5-2000]
D. Insurance. The Director of Finance shall audit and provide for the safe
storage of all policies of insurance placed on City property.
E. Economic Development Fund.
(1) There is established a nonlapsing fund, known as the "Economic
Development Fund," which shall be used to provide for industrial
development, expansion and growth within the City of Saco, as
specified in Subsection E(4).
(2) Unless contrary to the terms of the loan or grant, all income
received by the City through the repayment of public loan or grant
funds identified in Subsection E(3) shall be deposited to the
Economic Development Fund. All income received through the
sale, lease or option of property at the Saco Industrial Park shall be
deposited to the Economic Development Fund.
(3) The following public loan or grant programs fall within the scope of
this Subsection E:
(a) Federal urban development action grants.
(b) Federal grants from the Economic Development
Administration.
§ 4-14 SACO CITY CODE § 4-14
1:22
(4) The City Council may make allocations from the Economic
Development Fund only to accomplish the following purposes:
[Amended 5-22-2017]
(a) To further develop and expand the existing Industrial Park.
(b) To develop new industrial parks within the City of Saco.
(c) To develop new office parks or distribution parks.
(d) To accept fiscal transfers into the Fund from the City's various
Development (TIF) District Funds.
(e) To allow fiscal transfers from the Fund to the City's General
Fund and third parties related to the operations of the City's
Economic Development Department, Economic Development
Commission, and such other municipal expenses as may be
allowed under the terms of the development plans of the City's
various development districts.
(f) To allow fiscal transfers from the Fund to the City's General
Fund to fund any local match for grants or participatory
funding for economic development projects.
(g) To allow fiscal transfers from the Fund to the City's General
Fund to fund any approved annual or other funding to the
following:
[1] Saco Main Street, Inc.
[2] Southern Maine Planning and Development Corporation.
[3] The Biddeford Saco Area Economic Development
Corporation.
[4] The Biddeford Saco Area Chamber of Commerce and
Industry.
[5] Other organizations as the City Council may designate
from time to time that assist in the City's economic
development efforts.
(h) To allow fiscal transfers from the Fund for the purposes of
making economic development grants as approved under the
City's Development Districts and Tax Increment Financing
Guidelines (adopted by the City Council on June 16, 1997,
readopted by the City Council without amendments on August
1, 2005, and as amended April 3, 2017).
(5) The Director of Finance shall maintain records and prepare reports
concerning the Economic Development Fund.
(6) The Economic Development Advisory Board may make
recommendations to the City Council regarding allocations from
§ 4-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-14
1:23
§ 4-15. City Clerk's Department.
the Economic Development Fund. The Economic Development
Director may request, in his/her annual budget request or at
subsequent times, allocations from the Economic Development
Fund.
A. Establishment. There shall be a City Clerk's Department, the head of
which shall be the City Clerk, who shall be appointed by the City
Administrator with approval from the City Council. The City
Administrator shall appoint a Deputy City Clerk, to act as his/her agent,
and as many assistant clerks as necessary, within a budget approved by
Council.
B. Duties. The City Clerk shall:
(1) Serve as Clerk to the Council and perform all duties for the Council
as it may require. He/she shall authenticate, by his/her signature,
and be responsible for the filing, indexing and safekeeping of all
proceedings of the Council, which shall be open to public
inspection.
(2) Make all arrangements for elections and keep and maintain
election records and have custody of all property used in
connection with elections.
(3) Issue to every person appointed to any office by the City Council or
by the City Administrator a certificate of such appointment and
administer oath of such office.
(4) Publish all legal notices, unless otherwise provided.
(5) File and preserve all contracts, security bonds, oaths of office and
other documents not required to be filed elsewhere.
(6) Issue all licenses and permits authorized by the municipal officers
or the Council and collect the fee required thereof as provided by
state law or City ordinance.
(7) Notify the Chief of Police on or within one week after the expiration
date of each license or permit when a new license or permit to take
effect on such expiration date has not been applied for, except
when the City Clerk knows that no new license or permit is
required.
(8) Obtain and maintain all statistics relating to births, marriages and
deaths, as required by law.
(9) Be custodian of the City Seal.
(10) Perform all duties and exercise all power incumbent upon or vested
in City clerks, generally, which are not inconsistent with the City
Charter.
§ 4-14 SACO CITY CODE § 4-15
1:24
(11) Maintain in his/her office a public information service, to furnish
information concerning the City government, relative to the public
service.
(a) All requests for information shall be complied with promptly
and courteously, provided that the required information is
available in the office of the City Clerk. Otherwise, the City
Clerk shall refer an individual applicant to the proper agency
of the City for such information as is required, and such agency
shall supply the same as quickly as reasonably possible,
consistent with the extent or type of information requested.
(b) Nothing herein shall be construed to require the City Clerk to
supply or to request any other department to supply the type of
information which either state law or the public interest
requires to be kept confidential, nor shall any information be
prepared or supplied when the cost of so doing would result in
increased expense to the City; provided, however, that the
estimated cost shall be supplied at the expense of the
applicant, subject to final adjustment on the basis of actual
cost, or at an agreed-upon charge paid by the applicant, in
advance, to the City Clerk or the department undertaking such
extra expense.
(12) Account for all public money received by him/her, in such manner
as the Director of Finance may prescribe.
(13) Notify promptly all department heads of Council actions of concern
to them.
(14) Issue all state licenses and collect the fees required of him/her to so
issue and maintain records of the same.6
C. Division of Welfare.
(1) There shall be a Division of Public Welfare in the Office of the City
Clerk, the head of which shall be the Director of Welfare, who shall
be appointed by the City Administrator upon the recommendation
of the City Clerk.
(2) Duties of the Director of Welfare. The Director of Welfare shall be
the General Assistance Administrator under Chapter 112, General
Assistance Program, and shall:
(a) Determine the eligibility of each applicant for receipt of
general assistance benefits. He/she must consider all
applicants, set up interviews and certify or deny the applicant,
according to uniform standards.
6. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(15), regarding the City Clerk's duty to compute, issue
and collect excise fees on motor vehicles, was repealed 6-5-2000. See now § 4-14C(3).
§ 4-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-15
1:25
§ 4-16. Police Department.
(b) Distribute vouchers under general assistance benefits, giving
assistance for fuel, rent, food, medicine and light bills in an
emergency, as he/she deems appropriate and according to
uniform standards. He/she must make out reports for general
assistance, pursuant to all applicable laws and regulations.
(c) Refer citizens needing assistance from other than the City to
the proper federal, state or private agencies.
(d) Exercise all powers and perform all the duties confirmed or
imposed by the state law upon overseers of the poor.
(e) Be responsible for the sound fiscal management of his/her
Department.
A. Establishment. [Amended 5-3-2004]
(1) There shall be a Police Department, the head of which shall be the
Police Chief. The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the City
Administrator and confirmed by the City Council. There shall also
be a Canine Control Officer, who shall be directly responsible to the
Chief. [Amended 10-3-2005]
(2) The number of regular police officers shall be determined by the
City Council, and each police officer shall be appointed by the City
Administrator after hearing recommendations from the Police
Chief. Special police officers shall have all the powers vested in the
regular City police officers. The special police officers shall,
however, serve only when and as specifically required by the Police
Chief whenever called upon, as the City Administrator may
determine. No special police officer shall be on duty as a special
policeman police officer at any time or place without being ordered
to do so by the Police Chief.
(3) The Police Chief may, in his or her judgment, provide additional
services for the convenience and safety of the public that are not
otherwise required by law, ordinance or statute. These services
may include providing officers to maintain order at public or
private establishments (known as an “outside assignment”);
directing traffic for utility work occurring within or along the public
ways (“outside assignment”); or providing noncriminal
fingerprinting services for individuals required to provide
fingerprints for employment or other reasons. The Council will
establish these types of fees after a public hearing.
B. Duties of the Police Chief. The Police Chief shall be the commanding
officer of the police force.
(1) The Chief shall:
§ 4-15 SACO CITY CODE § 4-16
1:26
(a) Be responsible for the enforcement of law and order.
(b) Direct the police work of the City.
(c) Arrange for the attendance of one or more police officers at
every fire, to preserve order and to prevent theft and
destruction of property, at the request of the Fire Chief.
(d) Cause the streets, ways and lands of the City to be inspected
regularly and cause the removal of all nuisances, obstructions
or impediments therein, causing offenders to be prosecuted
when necessary to abate such nuisances.
(e) Cause to be observed and reported immediately to the Director
of Public Works all defects and repairs required in streets and
sidewalks. [Amended 10-7-2002]
(f) Receive and deliver all notices and papers to members of the
City Council and to the City Administrator and officers
appointed by either, when requested by the City Clerk or the
City Administrator, and make due return thereof.
(g) Be responsible for the maintenance and care of all property
used by the Police Department.
(h) Investigate or cause to be investigated the cause and
circumstances of any accident for which the City may be liable,
instruct all police officers to report to him/her such accidents
and notify the City Administrator promptly of all such
accidents. Whenever the attention of any police officer shall, in
any manner, have been called to any accident for which the
City may be liable, it shall be the duty of such police officer
forthwith to communicate such facts and information as he/she
may have to the Police Chief.
(i) Investigate promptly all applicants for any license or permit
when application requires certification by the Police Chief and
either deliver promptly to the City Clerk a certificate approving
such license or permit or promptly advise, in writing, the City
Clerk of his/her refusal to so certify.
(j) Be responsible for the sound fiscal management of his/her
Department.
(2) The Chief of Police is authorized to represent the City in District
Court in the prosecution of alleged violations of those ordinances
which the Police Department is empowered to enforce, if he is duly
certified in accordance with 25 M.R.S.A. § 2803, Subsection 3A.7
The Chief of Police may designate any officer under his command to
7. Editor's Note: Said section was repealed by Chapter 521 of the Laws of 1989. See now 25
M.R.S.A. § 2803-A.
§ 4-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-16
1:27
§ 4-17. Fire Department.
perform this prosecutorial function, if that officer is certified under
25 M.R.S.A. § 2803, Subsection 3A.
C. Canine Control Officer. The Police Chief shall, with the approval of the
City Administrator, designate one or more persons to be titled "Canine
Control Officer," whose duties shall be to enforce state and local laws
regarding dogs.
D. Harbor Master. It shall be the duty of the Harbor Master to enforce the
rules and regulations enacted by the City Council or the State of Maine
for the keeping of convenient channels for the passage of vessels in the
harbors and waterways located in the City of Saco and the supervision
of the boundary lines of such portions of the harbors as assigned for
anchorage by the City Council; and to enforce the laws of the State of
Maine and Coast Guard regulating the operation of motor vessels.8
[Amended 10-3-2005]
A. Establishment. There shall be a Fire Department, the head of which
shall be the Fire Chief. The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the City
Administrator and confirmed by the City Council.
B. Appointments. The number of regular fire fighters on the force shall be
determined by the City Council. Each fire fighter shall be appointed by
the City Administrator upon hearing the recommendations of the Fire
Chief. Call fire fighters shall have all the powers vested in the regular
City firemen, but call fire fighters shall serve only when and as
specifically required by the Fire Chief and shall function only under the
direction of the Fire Chief. Call fire fighters shall assist the Fire Chief
whenever called upon, as the City Administrator may determine. No call
fire fighter shall be on duty as a special fireman at any time or place
without being ordered to do so by the Fire Chief.
C. Duties of the Fire Chief. The Fire Chief is charged with fire prevention
and extinguishment of fires, the protection of life and property against
fire and the removal of fire hazards. The Fire Chief shall be responsible
for the care and maintenance of all property used by the Fire
Department. He shall inspect promptly all premises for which a license
or permit is applied which requires certification by the Fire Chief and
either deliver promptly to the City Clerk a certificate approving the
license or permit applied for or promptly advise the City Clerk of his
refusal to so certify. The Fire Chief shall also be held responsible for the
enforcement of all state laws and local ordinances which are firerelated.
He/she shall administer all tests to prospective employees and
shall recommend to the City Administrator the appointment of those
deemed most qualified. The Fire Chief shall be responsible for the
sound fiscal management of the Department.
8. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 118, Harbor and Waterfront.
§ 4-16 SACO CITY CODE § 4-18
1:28
§ 4-18. Department of Building Inspection and Code Enforcement.
§ 4-19. Department of Public Works.
A. Establishment. There shall be a Department of Building Inspection and
Code Enforcement, the head of which shall be the Building Inspector.
The Building Inspector shall be appointed by the City Administrator,
with Council confirmation. The Building Inspector shall be assisted by a
Plumbing and Electrical Inspector, who will also be appointed by the
City Administrator. In addition, these Inspectors will coordinate their
work with the Fire Chief to assure that all safety regulations are being
complied with.
B. Duties of the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector shall:
(1) Be responsible for the issuing of permits to build, alter, move or
erect all buildings, signs or structures, to install equipment or to
occupy. The Building Inspector shall also be responsible for the
overseeing of all duties performed by the Plumbing and Electrical
Inspector. The Building Inspector shall inspect existing buildings to
ensure their continuing safety. He/she shall perform related duties
at the direction of the City Administrator.
(2) Be responsible for the sound fiscal management of the Department.
C. Duties of the Electrical Inspector. The Electrical Inspector shall be
responsible for the issuing of all electrical permits and shall report to
the Building Inspector and be under his/her direction.
D. Duties of the Plumbing Inspector. The Plumbing Inspector shall be
responsible for the issuing of all plumbing permits and shall report to
the Building Inspector and be under his/her direction.
E. The above Inspectors shall also be responsible for the enforcing of
building, zoning or other related ordinances and shall enforce these
ordinances by notifying violators, in writing, that violations must be
corrected. If the violation continues past the time prescribed by state or
local law, the Inspector shall take the necessary action to enforce
compliance with the law.
A. Establishment. There shall be a Department of Public Works. The head
of this Department shall be the Director of Public Works, who shall be
appointed by the City Administrator with confirmation from the City
Council. The number of employees shall be determined by the City
Council and each employee shall be appointed by the City
Administrator, after hearing recommendations of the Director.
B. Duties of the Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works
shall:
(1) Be responsible for the administration and professional work in the
supervision of the City's public works and collection systems
§ 4-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-19
1:29
§ 4-20. Water Resource Recovery Division.10 [Added 1-22-2013]
operation, except treatment plants. [Amended 10-7-2002;
1-22-2013]
(2) Be responsible for directing all phases of municipal public works,
except treatment plants, including landfills, sewers and drains,
streets, motor vehicle maintenance and garbage and refuse
collection and disposal, transfer station and recycling collection
and disposal and snowplowing and removal. [Amended
10-7-2002; 1-22-2013]
(3) Be responsible for aggressively seeking all funds from any sources
owed to this Department.
(4) Be responsible for researching and implementation of
improvements to the operation of the Department in his/her
charge.
(5) Be responsible for the formulation of policies and coordinate
activities in accordance with general policies established by the
City Council and City Administrator.
(6) Be responsible for the supervision over unskilled, semiskilled,
skilled and supervisory maintenance and construction employees.
(7) 9Be responsible for the sound fiscal management of his/her
Department.
A. Establishment. There shall be a Water Resource Recovery Division. The
head of this department shall be the Director of the Water Resource
Recovery Division, who shall be appointed by the City Administrator
with confirmation from the City Council. The number of employees shall
be determined by the City Council, and each employee shall be
appointed by the City Administrator, after hearing recommendations of
the Director.
B. Duties of the Director of the Water Resource Recovery Division. The
Director of the Water Resource Recovery Division shall:
(1) Be responsible for the administration, operation and maintenance
of sewage treatment and pumping stations located in the City of
Saco.
(2) Exercise direct authority over all plant functions and personnel in
accordance with approved policies and procedures.
9. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(7), regarding the inspection of plants, added
10-7-2002, and Subsection B(8), regarding the development of efficient plans and
procedures, added 10-7-2002, were repealed and former Subsection B(9) was redesignated
Subsection B(7) on 1-22-2013.
10.Editor's Note: Former § 4-20, Department of Wastewater Treatment Plants, was repealed
10-7-2002.
§ 4-19 SACO CITY CODE § 4-20
1:30
§ 4-21. Department of Parks and Recreation.
§ 4-22. Department of Emergency Management. 11 [Amended
1-8-2001]
(3) Inspect plants regularly, analyze and evaluate operation and
maintenance functions and initiate or recommend new or improved
practices.
(4) Develop plans and procedures to ensure efficient plant operations.
(5) Recommend plant improvements and additions, while coordinating
data and proposing the review or approval of operation reports and
budget requests.
(6) Control expenditures of budgeted funds and request approval for
major expenditures, if required.
(7) Recommend the specifications for major equipment and material
purchases and organize and direct activities or plant personnel,
including training programs.
(8) Be responsible for the sound fiscal management of his/her
department.
A. Establishment. This Department shall be divided into the following two
Divisions:
(1) The Division of Parks, the head of which shall be the Director of
Parks and Recreation, who shall be responsible for the
maintenance of the City's park system and recreation facilities. He/
she must also act as the City's Tree Warden, supervising the care of
the shade trees.
(2) The Division of Recreation, the head of which shall be the Director
of Parks and Recreation, who shall be responsible for the
administrative work in planning and directing the municipal
recreation program. He/she must be responsible for the planning
and implementing of recreation programs so that they are suitable
to the needs and interests of the City of Saco.
B. The Director of Parks and Recreation shall be responsible for the sound
fiscal management of this Department.
A. Establishment. There shall be a Department of Emergency
Management, the head of which shall be appointed by the City
Administrator with the approval of the City Council.
B. Duties. The Director of Emergency Management shall:
11.Editor's Note: See also Art. VI, Emergency Management, of this chapter.
§ 4-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-22
1:31
§ 4-23. Department of Assessing.
§ 4-24. Legal Division.
(1) Be responsible for the supervision of the Civil Emergency
Management program within the City and the City's cooperative
action with the York County Emergency Management Agency and
emergency management units of adjacent cities and the
Emergency Management Office for the State of Maine.
(2) Appoint members, who shall serve without pay, and coordinate the
organization, training, public education staff and the emergency
operation of Emergency Management.
(3) Develop the local capabilities for effective action in response to
natural or man-made disaster.
A. Establishment. There shall be a Department of Assessing, the head of
which shall be the Assessor, who shall be appointed by the City
Administrator and confirmed by the City Council.
B. Duties.
(1) The Assessor's qualifications and authority come from state
statutes and cannot be controlled by the City. The City cannot, by
vote, increase, diminish or vary the duties imposed on the Assessor
by statutes.
(2) The Assessor is responsible for the sound fiscal management of the
Department and shall exercise all powers and perform all duties
confirmed or imposed by state laws upon assessors.
A. There shall be a City Solicitor who shall be appointed by the City
Administrator and confirmed by the City Council. The City Solicitor
shall serve at the will of both the Mayor and the City Council. The City
Solicitor shall serve as chief legal advisor to the Mayor and the City
Council, the City Administrator and all City departments, boards,
agencies, committees and commissions. The City Solicitor shall
represent the City in all legal proceedings and shall perform any other
duties prescribed by ordinance and law. The City Council shall have the
right to employ or retain special attorneys, if it deems it to be in the
best interests of the City.12
B. Duties. The City Solicitor shall:
(1) Draft all instruments which may be required of him/her by any
ordinance or by the Mayor, City Council, City Administrator or any
other City official and which, by law, custom or agreement, are to
be drawn at the expense of the City.
12.Editor's Note: Said section was amended November 1996, per ballot, and is effective
7-1-1997.
§ 4-22 SACO CITY CODE § 4-24
1:32
§ 4-25. Division of Public Health.
(2) Prosecute or defend, as the case may be, all suits in which the City
may be a party in interest; and shall do all and every professional
act incident to the office which may be required of him/her by the
City government or by any joint or special committee thereof or any
order or ordinance of the City Council.
(3) Serve as chief legal advisor to the Mayor and the City Council, the
City Administrator and all City department heads, boards,
agencies, committees and commissions.
(4) Render professional advice to the overseers of the poor or other
officers of the City government who may require his/her opinion on
any subject touching the duties of their respective offices.
(5) Account for and pay over to the City Treasurer all moneys received
by him/her for costs in any prosecution or defense wherein the City
is or may be interested.
(6) Perform such additional duties as may be presented by the City
Council. Nothing herein shall preclude the City Council from hiring
alternate counsel as it may choose.
C. Compensation. He/she shall receive for his/her services such
compensation as the City Council may determine.
D. Annual report. The City Solicitor shall annually, before the close of the
municipal year, make a report, in writing, to the City Council
concerning the unfinished business in his/her Department.
A. Establishment. There shall be a Division of Public Health, the head of
which shall be a person appointed by the City Administrator, as
provided under Article V of the City Charter. Subject to budget
limitations, the Health Administrator shall have one or more health
assistants. There shall also be one or more Plumbing Inspectors,
appointed by the City Administrator, to be under the direction of the
Building Inspector, but who will be used on loan by the Division of
Public Health when deemed necessary by the Health Administrator.
B. Duties of the Health Administrator. The Health Administrator shall have
charge and control of all functions involved in protecting and
preserving the public health, with the exception of supervising contract
administration for health services, which shall be the responsibility of
the City Administrator or his/her appointed delegate. The Health
Administrator shall have all powers provided by state law or City
ordinance relative thereto. Among other powers, the Health
Administrator shall exercise the function of:
(1) Communicable disease control, which shall include the power of
quarantine and detention and the adoption of such other measures
§ 4-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-25
1:33
as will prevent the spreading or aid in the prevention of
communicable diseases.
(2) Sanitation, which shall include inspection of the preparation,
manufacture, storage and sale of all articles and commodities
intended for human consumption and the regulation of all matters
pertaining to the sanitary condition affecting the public health.
(3) Nursing, which shall consist of the inspection of the operation of all
private or public infant, preschool and school hygiene programs,
and their direct operation, if and when so authorized by ordinance.
(4) The prompt inspection of any premises for which a license has been
applied and which requires certification by the health officer. The
Health Administrator shall deliver to the City Clerk promptly a
certificate to the effect that the health laws are complied with and
the proper sanitary conditions exist or promptly advise, in writing,
the City Clerk of his/her refusal to so certify.
C. Complaints. The Health Administrator shall receive and investigate all
complaints made by any of the inhabitants of Saco concerning
nuisances dangerous to life and health which are known or believed by
him/her to exist and, personally or by appointed agents, inspect and
examine the same. All owners and occupants shall permit such sanitary
examination. The Health Administrator shall have the power and duty
to order the suppression and removal of nuisances and conditions
detrimental to life and health which exist within the limits of the City.
D. Plumbing Inspector. The Plumbing Inspector or Inspectors shall
perform all such duties as may be required by state law and by
ordinances of the City.
§ 4-25 SACO CITY CODE § 4-25
1:34
ARTICLE VI
Emergency Management
§ 4-26. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the
"Emergency Management Regulations of the City of Saco."
§ 4-27. Intent and purpose. [Amended 1-8-2001]
§ 4-28. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ATTACK — A direct or indirect assault against the City, its government, its
environs or the nation by the forces of a hostile nation or the agents thereof,
including assault by bombing, radiological, chemical or biological warfare
or sabotage.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Office of Emergency Management for the
City of Saco as described in this article. The City Administrator appoints the
position and the Council approves.[Amended 1-8-2001]
DEPUTY DIRECTOR — The Deputy Director of the Office of Emergency
Management for the City of Saco; reports to the Director of the Office of
Emergency Management for the City of Saco and, in the Director's absence,
reports to the City Administrator. The City Administrator appoints this
position.[Added 1-8-2001]
DISASTER — Includes, but is not limited to, actual or threatened enemy/
terrorist attack, sabotage, extraordinary fire, flood, storm, epidemic,
radiological, hazardous incident or other impending or actual calamity
endangering or threatening to endanger life, health or property or
constituted government.[Amended 1-8-2001]
A. It is the intent and purpose of this article to establish an office that will
ensure the complete and efficient utilization of all Saco facilities to
prepare for and respond to disasters, natural or man-made, enemy
attack or other disasters as defined herein.
B. The Office of Emergency Management will be the coordinating agency
for all activity in connection with emergency planning. It will be the
instrument through which the community officials may exercise the
authority and discharge the responsibilities vested in them in Title
37-B, M.R.S.A. § 781-834.
C. This article will not relieve any City department of its normal
responsibilities or authority given to it in the City Charter or by local
ordinance, nor will it adversely affect the work of any volunteer agency
organized for relief in disaster emergencies.
§ 4-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-28
1:35
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT — In its broad meaning, shall mean to carry
out the basic government functions of maintaining the public peace, health
and safety during an emergency. This shall include plans and preparations
for protection from and relief, recovery and rehabilitation from the effects
of a natural or a man-made disaster on the community. It shall also include
such activity in connection with an enemy attack as defined herein. It shall
not, however, include the activity that is the primary responsibility of the
military forces of the United States.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE RESOURCES — The employees, equipment and
facilities of all City departments, boards, institutions and commissions, and,
in addition, it shall include all volunteer personnel, equipment and facilities
contributed by or obtained from volunteer persons or agencies.
EMERGENCY VOLUNTEER — Any person duly registered, identified or
assigned to participate in the emergency management activity.
REGULATIONS — Includes plans, programs and other emergency
procedures deemed essential to emergency management in preserving life
and property.[Amended 1-8-2001]
VOLUNTEER — Contributing a service, equipment or facilities to the City's
Emergency Management effort, without expectation of
compensation.[Amended 1-8-2001]
§ 4-29. Organization and appointments. [Amended 1-8-2001]
A. The City Administrator is hereby authorized and directed to create an
organization for emergency management, utilizing, to the fullest extent,
the existing agencies within the community. The City Administrator, as
head of the municipal government, shall be responsible for the
organization, administration and operation of emergency forces.
B. The organization shall consist of the following:
(1) An Office of Emergency Management within the executive
department of the City government and under the direction of the
City Administrator. There shall be an executive head of the Office of
Emergency Management, who shall be known as the "Director of
Emergency Management," and such assistants and other
employees as are deemed necessary for the proper functioning of
the organization.
(2) The employees, equipment and facilities of all City departments,
boards, institutes and commissions, who or which shall participate
in the emergency management activity. Duties assigned to the City
department shall be the same or similar to the normal duties of the
department.
(3) Volunteer persons and agencies offering services to and accepted
by the City.
§ 4-28 SACO CITY CODE § 4-29
1:36
§ 4-30. Emergency powers and duties. [Amended 1-8-2001]
C. The City Administrator shall appoint a Director of the Office of
Emergency Management, who shall be a person well versed and trained
in planning operations involving the activities of many different
agencies which will operate to protect the public health, safety and
welfare in the event of danger from disaster or enemy action as defined
in this article.
D. The City Administrator shall designate and appoint a person or persons
to assume the emergency duties of the Director in the event of his/her
absence or inability to act. This designation shall be compatible with
the provisions of Section 2.06 of the City Charter. The intent is that
there will always be a representative of the City Council in charge of the
City.
A. The Mayor.
(1) The Mayor or designee may exercise the emergency power and
authorize the City mobilization necessary to fulfill their general
powers and duties defined in Section 2.07 of the City Charter. The
judgment of the Mayor shall be the sole criteria necessary to invoke
emergency powers provided in the City Charter, the Code and other
appropriate authorities.
(2) During the time that disaster threatens or when the City has been
struck by disaster within the definition of this article, the Mayor or
his designee may promulgate such regulations as deemed
necessary to protect life and property and preserve critical
resources. Such regulations may include, but shall not be limited
to, the following:
(a) Regulations prohibiting or restricting the movement of
vehicles in order to facilitate the work of emergency
management forces or to facilitate the mass movement of
persons from critical areas within the City.
(b) Regulations pertaining to the movement of persons from areas
deemed to be hazardous or vulnerable to disaster.
(c) Such other regulations necessary to preserve public peace,
health and safety.
(3) Regulations promulgated in accordance with the authority above
will be given widespread circulation by proclamations published
and uttered by newspaper and radio. These regulations will have
the force of ordinance when duly filed with the City Clerk, and
violations will be subject to the penalties provided in § 4-33B of this
article.
(4) The Mayor or his designee shall order emergency management
forces to the aid of other communities when required in accordance
§ 4-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-30
1:37
with the statutes of the state, and the Mayor or his designee may
request the state or political subdivision of the state to send aid
to the City if any emergencies are beyond the control of the local
emergency management forces.
(5) The Mayor or his designee may obtain vital supplies, equipment
and other properties that are needed for the protection of health,
life and property of the people and bind the City for the fair market
value thereof.
(6) The Mayor or his designee may require emergency services of any
City officer or employee. If regular City forces are determined
inadequate, the Mayor or his designee may require the services of
such other personnel as are available, including citizen volunteers.
All duly authorized persons rendering emergency services shall be
entitled to the privileges and immunities as are provided by state
law, the City Charter and ordinances for regular City employees
and other registered and identified emergency management and
disaster workers and, upon demand, may receive appropriate
compensation for their emergency employment.
(7) The Mayor or his designee shall cause to be prepared the Basic
Plan as referred to in this article and shall exercise ordinary powers
as Mayor or his designee; also, all the special powers conferred
upon him/her by any statute and any other lawful authority.
B. Emergency Management Director: The Emergency Management
Director shall be responsible to the City Administrator in regard to all
phases of the emergency management activity. Under the supervision of
the City Administrator, the Director shall be responsible for the
planning and coordination of the emergency management activity in
the City. Under the supervision of the City Administrator, the Director
shall maintain liaison with county, state and federal authorities and the
authorities of other nearby political subdivisions as to ensure the most
effective operation of the Emergency Management Plan. Duties shall
include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Coordinating the recruitment of volunteer personnel and agencies
to augment the personnel and facilities of the City for emergency
management.
(2) Developing and coordinating plans for the immediate use of all of
the facilities, equipment, manpower and other resources of the City
for the purpose of minimizing or preventing damage to persons and
property and protecting and restoring to usefulness government
services and public utilities necessary for the public health, safety
and welfare.
(3) Negotiating and concluding agreements with owners or persons in
control of buildings or other property for the use of such buildings
or other property for emergency management purposes and
designating suitable buildings as public shelters.
§ 4-30 SACO CITY CODE § 4-30
1:38
§ 4-31. Emergency Management Basic Plan. [Amended 1-8-2001]
(4) Through public informational programs, educating the civilian
population as to actions necessary and required for the protection
of their persons and property in case of disaster or enemy attack,
as defined herein, either impending or present.
(5) Coordinating public awareness programs to ensure the efficient
operation of the emergency management forces and to familiarize
residents with emergency management regulations, procedures
and operations.
(6) Coordinating the activities of all public and private agencies
engaged in any emergency management activity.
(7) Assuming such authority and coordinating such activity as the City
Administrator may direct to promote and execute the Emergency
Management Plan.
A. A comprehensive Emergency Management Basic Plan shall be adopted
and maintained, by resolution of the City Council, upon the
recommendation of the Mayor. In the preparation of this plan as it
pertains to the City organization, it is the intent that the services,
equipment, facilities and personnel of all existing departments and
agencies shall be utilized to the fullest extent. When approved, it shall
be the duty of all municipal departments and agencies to perform the
functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan
in a current state of readiness at all times. The Basic Plan shall be
considered supplementary to this article and have the effect of law
whenever a disaster, as defined in this article, has been proclaimed.
B. The Mayor or designee shall prescribe in the Basic Plan those positions
within the disaster organization in addition to lines of successions. In
each instance, the responsible person will designate and keep on file
with the Mayor and City Administrator a current list of three persons as
successors to his/her position. The list will be in order of succession and
will, as nearly as possible, designate persons best capable of carrying
out all assigned duties and functions.
C. Each department head assigned responsibility in the Basic Plan shall be
responsible for carrying out all duties and functions assigned therein.
Duties shall include the organization and training of assigned
employees and volunteers. Each department head shall formulate the
operational plan. When approved, the operational plan shall be an
annex to and a part of the Basic Plan.
D. Amendments to the Basic Plan shall be submitted to the Mayor or
designee and, if approved, such amendments shall take effect 30 days
from the date of approval. In the event that an amendment is pending at
the time that a disaster is proclaimed under provisions of this article,
§ 4-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-31
1:39
§ 4-32. Liability.
§ 4-33. Violations and penalties.
the amendment will be considered approved immediately and will
remain effective unless specifically revoked.
E. When a required competency or skill for a disaster function is not
available within the City government, the Mayor or designee is
authorized to seek assistance from persons outside of government. The
assignment of duties, when of a supervisory nature, shall also grant
authority for the persons so assigned to carry out such duties prior to,
during and after the occurrence of a disaster. Such services from
persons outside of government may be accepted by the City on a
volunteer basis. Such citizens shall be enrolled as emergency
volunteers in cooperation with heads of City departments affected.
F. Some of the duties ascribed in this section will ordinarily be handled as
a matter of routine by the Emergency Management Director, but the
responsibility and authority stem from and remain with the Mayor or
designee.
A. This article is an exercise by the City of Saco of its governmental
functions for the protection of the public peace, health and safety, and
neither the City nor agents and representatives of the City or any
individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or
trustee or any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out,
complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or
regulation promulgated pursuant to the provision of this article, shall
be liable for any damage sustained to persons or property as the result
of such activity.
B. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who
voluntarily and without compensation grants the City the rights to
inspect, designate and use the whole or part or parts of such real estate
or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual,
impending or practice disaster or an enemy attack shall not be civilly
liable for the death of or injury to any persons on or about such real
estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or
for loss of or damage to the property of such person.
A. It shall be unlawful for any persons to violate any of the provisions of
this article or of the regulations or plans issued pursuant to the
authority contained herein or to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any
member of the Emergency Management Organization, as herein
defined, in the enforcement of the provisions of this article or any
regulation or plan issued thereunder.
B. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article or
any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of $100, plus the costs of
§ 4-31 SACO CITY CODE § 4-33
1:40
prosecution, or imprisonment in the York County Jail for a period of
not more than 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, in the
discretion of the court.
§ 4-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-33
1:41

ARTICLE VII
Boards, Commissions and Committees
§ 4-34. Planning Board.
A. Organization.
(1) A City Planning Board is hereby created, which Board shall consist
of seven members who shall be appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by the City Council, none of whom shall hold the elective
office of Mayor, Councilor or School Board member.
(2) A quorum, for the purpose of voting, shall consist of four members,
and a simple majority of members present and voting shall be
sufficient for passage of a motion. In case of a tie vote, the motion
fails.
(3) The City Planning Board shall meet with the City Council at least
twice each year to report on problems, progress and needs, to
make recommendations to the Council and to be assigned whatever
advisory tasks the Council may request.
(4) Membership of the Planning Board shall be subject to the following
requirements:
(a) Only residents of the City may serve on the Board.
(b) There shall be no more than two members on the Board who
are residents of the same ward. In the event that a member
moves during his/her term and his/her move results in more
than two members living in the same ward, the member who
has moved shall forfeit his/her seat on the Board.
(c) No more than two members of the Board shall have the same
full-time occupation.
(5) Any question of whether a member shall be disqualified from voting
or shall abstain from voting on a particular issue before the Board
shall be decided by a majority vote of the members present except
the member who is the subject of the vote, who shall not vote on the
question of his/her disqualification or abstention.
B. Terms of office; vacancies; procedure.
(1) Terms. The terms of membership shall be three years. An
appointment to fill a vacancy during an unexpired term shall be for
the remainder of the unexpired term. Board members serving as
full members at the time of the effective date of this section shall
serve for the remainder of their current term. Alternate members
serving at the time of the effective date of this section shall be
eligible for appointment for membership under this section; any
alternate member appointed as a member shall be deemed to begin
serving his/her first term upon appointment. In the event of an
§ 4-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-34
1:43
appointment for the remainder of an unexpired term, the partial
term shall be considered a first term if the time to be served is two
years or more, but shall not be considered a first term under this
subsection if the portion of the term to be served is less than two
years.
(2) Vacancies. Vacancies on the Board shall be created under any of the
following circumstances:
(a) A member submits his/her resignation, in writing, to the
Chairperson of the Planning Board or to the Mayor.
(b) A member's residence is no longer within the City or a member
moves to a ward which already has two Planning Board
members, in which instance the Chairperson shall so notify the
Mayor in writing.
(c) A member fails to attend three or more consecutive regular
monthly meetings of the Board without being excused by the
Chairperson, in which instance the Chairperson shall so notify
the Mayor in writing.
(d) A member fails to attend 75% of all meetings, including
workshops, special meetings and regular meetings, within the
four most recent consecutive months, in which instance the
Chairperson shall so notify the Mayor in writing.
(e) The term of a member expires.
(3) Procedure. Upon the occurrence of any of the above circumstances,
the City Council shall declare the seat vacant, and the Mayor shall
appoint a new member with the approval of the City Council.
C. Powers and duties. The Board shall have the power and be required to:
(1) Prepare any amendments to the Comprehensive Plan and/or
prepare a new Comprehensive Plan approved by a majority vote
after a public hearing. The Board shall refer any amendments to
the Comprehensive Plan or the new Comprehensive Plan to the City
Council for approval.
(2) Prepare and adopt and thereafter amend subdivision regulations
approved by a majority vote of the Board after a public hearing.
(3) Review subdivisions within the City as required by state law, local
ordinances and Planning Board regulations.
(4) Review site plans, planned unit developments and other land use
proposals as authorized by state statutes, City ordinances and
Planning Board regulations. The Board may delegate, through
written procedures, all or part of the review function to the City
Planner and may refer applications to special committees,
commissions and technical experts for review and comment.
§ 4-34 SACO CITY CODE § 4-34
1:44
§ 4-35. Economic Development Commission. [Amended 1-18-2011;
11-18-2013; 12-17-201813
(5) Prepare and recommend, after approval by a majority vote
following a public hearing, for adoption by the City Council a
Zoning Plan and Map and amendments thereto which shall be
pursuant to and consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
(6) Meet in regular session not less than once a month, adopt rules for
transaction of business and keep a public record of its resolutions
and determinations. At its first meeting in January of every year, the
Board shall elect a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson. The Board
shall file its rules for procedure with the City Clerk and shall amend
these by majority vote, as needed.
(7) Participate in and review programs or plans required by state and
federal law or regulation.
(8) Review applications for conditional uses, as required by the City of
Saco Zoning Regulations.
(9) Perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by
ordinance or by resolution of the City Council for the assistance of
the Council or other City agencies or officers.
D. Authorization. The Planning Board is not required, but is authorized at
its discretion, to:
(1) Undertake studies and make recommendations on matters of land
development, energy and water conservation, transportation, solid
waste disposal, location of municipal and school facilities,
affordable housing, urban beautification and design improvements,
historic and scenic preservations and agricultural preservation.
(2) Prepare and present to the municipal officers recommended
building, plumbing, fire, electrical, housing and related codes and
enforcement procedures and construction specifications for streets
and related public improvements.
(3) Participate in a regional planning program with regional planning
agencies, municipalities, state and federal agencies.
E. Record of membership. The City Clerk and Chairperson of the Planning
Board shall keep an accurate record of membership which shall be
available to the Board, the City Council and the public at all times.
A. Purpose and responsibilities.
(1) The Economic Development Commission is established to support
the City of Saco's economic and community development efforts
and to advise the City Council, staff and community on strategies,
13.Editor’s Note: This amendment provided an effective date of 1-17-2019.
§ 4-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-35
1:45
programs and policies, funding sources, and various actions that
the City should undertake to promote and enhance the City of
Saco; to assist City staff to actively pursue, within the goals and
guidelines of City Council, commercial and industrial business
development/investment for relocation into the City of Saco in
order to achieve a balanced tax base; to assist City staff in working
with the business community in the retention and expansion of
the businesses already within the City; and to promote the City
in various manners as an excellent place to live, work and do
business.
(2) The objectives of the Economic Development Commission shall be
to:
(a) Encourage and promote desirable economic development
within the City consistent with other ordinances and policies,
so as to keep an equitable and diverse tax base.
(b) Undertake and support activities aimed at enhancing the
economic well-being of the community by the promotion of a
sustainable economy which will retain and create quality
employment opportunities and a broadened tax base for the
City and its residents.
(c) Negotiate to purchase, enter into options to purchase, and
purchase lands lying within the City for current and
prospective industrial uses, with City Council's approval.
(d) Negotiate and enter into lease and rental transactions of
industrial sites and improvements owned by the City, with City
Council's approval.
(e) Conduct preliminary review of business development site plans
and building designs and make recommendations to the
Planning Board.
(f) Develop guidelines and recommendations in such areas related
to economic development including but not limited to business
retention, business attraction, workforce development, the
development of infrastructure necessary to support economic
growth, redevelopment, and business development.
(g) Assist City Council with implementation of the goals and
strategies of the Comprehensive Plan.
(h) Provide advisory guidance to Economic Development staff for
matters pertaining to economic development including but not
limited to the annual budget process, policy development,
strategic planning, tax increment financing and land use.
(i) (Reserved).
§ 4-35 SACO CITY CODE § 4-35
1:46
(j) Act as a liaison and advocate for businesses in the licensing
and permitting processes.
(k) Work with other public and private entities and staff to
promote the economic well being of the community and
perform such other functions as may be appropriate to achieve
such goals.
(l) Participate in regional economic development efforts.
B. Commission membership and terms of office.
(1) Voting members. The Commission consists of seven voting
members who shall be appointed by the Mayor, with Council
confirmation, for terms of five years. Commission members shall be
residents of the City of Saco and shall be selected for their business
knowledge and interest in economic development issues.
(2) Nonvoting members. The Commission shall consist of six nonvoting
members. These members will consist of the executive directors or
their designees of the Biddeford Saco Area Economic Development
Commission, Saco Main Street, and the Chamber of Commerce; the
headmaster of Thornton Academy or their designee; a Council
liaison; and the City Administrator or their designee.
C. Organization.
(1) A quorum consists of four voting members. The Commission may
act by a majority vote of those present and voting, but at least three
affirmative votes shall be necessary to take any action under
Subsection C(2).
(2) The Commission shall annually elect a Chairperson. They shall hold
regular meetings as they shall determine. Special meetings may be
called by the Chairman after notice to each member at least
seventy-two hours in advance of such meeting.
(3) Minutes of all meetings shall be recorded by City Staff and upon
approval of the Commission shall be made available to the public.
(4) The Commission shall prepare an operating budget for each fiscal
year and shall submit such budget to the City Administrator, for
inclusion in the City operating budget.
D. Vacancy in office.
(1) Vacancies in office occur when:
(a) A member submits his/her resignation.
(b) A member's official residence is no longer within the City.
(c) A member fails to attend three consecutive unexcused
meetings of the Commission.
§ 4-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-35
1:47
§ 4-36. Board of Assessment Review.
(d) Upon the expiration of the term of a member.
(2) In the event that a vacancy does occur, the Mayor shall appoint a
replacement for the unexpired term, subject to confirmation by the
City Council. A member whose term has expired may continue to
serve until the vacancy is filled.
E. Confidentiality of negotiations. It is hereby determined that premature
disclosure of information used in or generated by negotiations
undertaken pursuant to Subsection A(2)(c), (d), and (j) would prejudice
the competitive and bargaining positions of the Commission and the
City. Therefore, the Commission (all members and involved staff) may
conduct those negotiations in accordance with M.R.S.A. Title 1, Chapter
13, Subchapter 1, § 405(6).
A. Adoption. Pursuant to 30 M.R.S.A. § 5351, Subsection 2,14 and the City
Charter, a Board of Assessment Review is hereby adopted.
B. Composition. The Board of Assessment Review shall consist of five
members. A quorum, for the purpose of voting, shall consist of three
members eligible to vote, and a simple majority shall be sufficient for
passage of a motion.
C. Appointment of members. The Members of the Board of Assessment
Review shall, subject to the confirmation by the Council, be appointed
by the Mayor.
D. Terms of office of members.
(1) The terms of the appointive members shall be five years.
(2) Vacancies. Vacancies on the Board shall be created under any of the
following circumstances:
(a) A member submits his/her resignation, in writing, to the Mayor
and City Council.
(b) A member's official residence is no longer within the City.
E. Compensation. The members of the Board of Assessment Review shall
receive such compensation as determined and approved by the Council.
F. Duty to review tax appeals. It shall be the duty of the Board of
Assessment Review to review appeals duly filed in writing by taxpayers
regarding any tax assessment made by the Tax Assessor, such review to
commence within 60 days from the date the appeal is filed.
G. Authority to review tax assessments. Any member or members of the
Board of Assessment Review shall have the authority to initiate an
14.Editor's Note: Said section was repealed by Chapter 737 of the Laws of 1987. See now 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 2552.
§ 4-35 SACO CITY CODE § 4-36
1:48
§ 4-37. Conservation Commission.
appeal, in writing, for any tax assessment made by the Tax Assessor
which he/she and/or they severally deem to merit review.
H. Political activities of members restricted. The members of the Board of
Assessment Review shall not indulge in City political activity, as defined
and understood under the City Charter.
A. Intent. The intent of this section is to create a Conservation Commission
under 30 M.R.S.A. § 3851, Parks and Conservation Commissions.15 The
Commission shall act as advisory body to the City Council and any other
municipal bodies requesting its services.
B. Name. A Commission to be called the "Saco Conservation Commission"
is hereby established for the City of Saco.
C. Membership of Commission; terms of office. The Commission shall be
composed of 11 regular and four associate members, to be appointed by
the Mayor and approved by the Council. All shall be residents of the
City of Saco. There shall be no more than three regular members on the
Commission who are residents of the same ward. No more than two
members of a similar profession shall serve on the Commission at one
time. No member shall hold any elective office or other appointive
position in the City, county, state or federal government, except that
member(s) may be appointed to ad hoc or other special committees for
a specified period of time. Members shall be appointed for a term of
three years, except that the new appointments of three members shall
be for terms of one year and one member for a term of two years.
[Amended 9-16-2002; 5-17-2004]
D. Vacancies. Vacancies on the Commission shall be created under the
following circumstances:
(1) When a member submits his/her resignation, in writing, to the
Mayor, who shall declare that the member's seat is vacant.
(2) When a member's official residence is no longer in the City, the
Secretary of the Commission shall notify, in writing, the Mayor and
the City Council, who shall declare that seat vacant.
(3) Upon expiration of the term of a member.
(4) When a member is asked to resign by the Commission Chairman
because he/she missed three consecutive meetings without his/her
absence approved by the Conservation Commission.
E. Election of officers; rules; quorum.
(1) The Commission shall annually elect its own Chairman and
Secretary and have power to adopt rules of procedure and
15.Editor's Note: See 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3261 et seq.
§ 4-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-37
1:49
prescribe regulations for the conduct of all business within its
jurisdiction. Six regular members shall constitute a quorum.
Associate members shall not vote, unless the Chairman appoints
them to act in place of a regular member who is absent or is
excused from voting because of a conflict of interest, in order to
achieve a quorum. If less than a quorum is present, the meeting
shall be adjourned. [Amended 9-16-2002]
(2) The Conservation Commission may, at its discretion, by majority
vote, appoint for a term of one year up to 30 nonvoting affiliate
members to staff special committees. Said committees shall
include, but not be limited to, the Trail Committee, Recreation
Committee, Open Space Inventory Committee, Regulatory Study
Committee, Land Use Committee, etc. [Added 12-18-1995]
F. Authority.
(1) The Commission shall conduct research, in conjunction with the
Planning Board, into local land area usage at the request of the
Planning Board, follow any plan of development adopted by the
Planning Board and make recommendations to preserve and
enhance the natural resources of the City.
(2) In addition to its responsibility for the stewardship of the City's
natural resources, the Conservation Commission shall provide the
Planning Board with technical assistance, operating as an advisory
body to the Board, with the following functions. The Commission
shall:
(a) Review and provide comments to the Planning Board on
development applications as to their potential impacts, either
positive or negative, on the natural environment.
(b) Assist the Planning Board in the preparation and periodic
updating of the Comprehensive Plan, particularly in the data
collection, mapping and interpretation of natural features.
(c) Advise the Planning Board on other relevant issues pertaining
to the natural resources of the City.
(d) Perform monitoring services.
(3) The Commission may seek to coordinate activities of conservation
bodies organized for similar purposes.
(4) The Commission may advertise, prepare, print and distribute
books, maps, charts, plans and pamphlets deemed necessary,
subject to approval of funds by the City Council.
(5) The Commission shall keep an index of all open areas, publicly or
privately owned, within the City, including springs, open
marshland, swamps and other wetlands, for the purpose of
§ 4-37 SACO CITY CODE § 4-37
1:50
§ 4-38. (Reserved)16
§ 4-39. Coastal Waters Commission.
obtaining information pertinent to proper utilization, protection
and development or use of such areas.
(6) The Commission may recommend to the City Council, any
municipal board or any board of the State of Maine a program for
the better utilization, protection, development or use of such areas,
including conservation easements. It may recommend acquisition
of land in the name of the City for the purposes set forth in this
section with the approval of the City Council.
(7) The Commission shall be notified at least 30 days prior to
implementation of any action, plans or planning operations by any
body politic or public agency of the State of Maine in any open
areas.
(8) The Commission may receive gifts in the name of the City for any
purpose set forth in this section and shall administer the same for
such purposes subject to the terms of the gifts.
(9) The Commission shall keep records of all its meetings and activities
and submit copies of its agendas.
(10) The Commission shall make an annual report to the Council, which
shall be published as part of the City of Saco's Annual Report.
G. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
OPEN AREAS — Includes but is not limited to the preservation or
restriction of the use of which would maintain or enhance the
conservation of natural or scenic resources, protect natural streams
or water supplies, promote conservation of swamps, wetlands, beaches
or tidal marshes, forests, wildlife preserves, nature reservations,
sanctuaries. In the case where an open area may already be under the
control of another environmental protection agency of the City, state
or federal government, including the Saco River Corridor and the Saco
Parks and Recreation Commission, the Conservation Commission shall
operate in these areas under the guidelines set up by the other body.
A. Duties of the Coastal Waters Commission.
(1) Establishing policy. The Saco Coastal Waters Commission exists for
the general purpose of studying and evaluating public usage of and
boating access to coastal waters under the jurisdiction of the City
of Saco, planning for its future use, advising the City Council on
policy matters and proposing to the City Council regulations
16.Editor's Note: Former § 4-38, Community Activities Committee, was repealed 12-20-2004.
§ 4-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-39
1:51
concerning the Saco River and the City's coastal waters. The
proposed regulations and policies shall be consistent with federal
and state law.
(2) Further duties. In addition, the Commission shall review and
cooperate in maintenance and care of City-owned waterfront
facilities with the Harbor Master and Public Works Department and
plan harbor improvements in conjunction with the City, state and
federal authorities. The Commission shall sit as a Board of Appeals
to hear an appeal from any person aggrieved by any decision, act or
failure to act of the Harbor Master. The Commission shall regularly
inform the City Council and other boards, committees,
commissions or officials of the City, as is appropriate, of its
activities.
B. Organization.
(1) The Coastal Waters Commission shall consist of seven members,
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council. Each
Commissioner shall be a resident of the City and shall serve
without compensation. [Amended 9-16-2002]
(2) Neither a municipal officer nor his/her spouse may be a member of
the Commission.
(3) Any question of whether a particular issue involves a conflict of
interest sufficient to disqualify a member from voting thereon shall
be decided by a majority vote of the members, except the member
who is being challenged.
(4) Commissioners may be removed by the City Council for cause, after
notice and hearing. A Commissioner shall forfeit his/her
membership on the Commission if he/she fails to attend three
consecutive regular meetings of the Commission without being
excused by the Commission. The Chairman of the Commission shall
notify the Mayor of the forfeiture of office by a Commissioner.
(5) The term of office of a member shall be three years. [Amended
9-16-2002; 5-15-2007; 5-20-2013]
C. Procedure.
(1) A Chairman and a Secretary shall be elected by the Board in April
of each year.
(2) The Chairman or City Administrator shall call meetings of the
Commission as required. The Chairman shall also call meetings of
the Commission when requested to do so by a majority of the
members or by the Mayor. The Commission shall meet at least
twice per year, semiannually, to conduct official business. A quorum
of the Commission necessary to conduct an official Commission
meeting shall consist of at least four members. The Chairman shall
§ 4-39 SACO CITY CODE § 4-39
1:52
preside at all meetings of the Commission and shall be the official
spokesman of the Commission. [Amended 5-15-2006]
(3) The Secretary shall maintain a permanent record of all Commission
meetings and all correspondence of the Commission. The Secretary
shall be responsible for maintaining those records which are
required as a part of the various proceedings which may be brought
before the Commission. All records to be maintained or prepared
by the Secretary are deemed public and shall be filed in the
Municipal Clerk's office and may be inspected at reasonable times.
The City Administrator may assign secretarial help to do minutes
and other clerical work of the Commission.
(4) The Commission shall adopt rules of procedure, which shall be
recorded by the Secretary, for any matter relating to the conduct of
any hearing, provided that any rule may be waived by the
Commission upon good cause shown.
D. Procedure for appeals from decision of the Harbor Master.
(1) Jurisdiction. The Coastal Waters Commission shall hear any appeal
by any person affected directly or indirectly by any decision, order,
rule, act or failure to act of the Harbor Master. In deciding any
appeal, the Commission shall hear and approve, approve with
modifications or conditions or disapprove the decision, order, rule,
act or failure to act of the Harbor Master from which the appeal is
made. The Commission's decision shall be made within 30 days of
the filing of the appeal.
(2) Evidence. The Commission may receive any oral or documentary
evidence but shall provide, as a matter of policy, for the exclusion of
irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence. Every party
shall have the right to present his/her case or defense by oral or
documentary evidence, to submit rebuttal evidence and to conduct
such cross-examination as may be required for a full and true
disclosure of the facts.
(3) Record of proceedings. The transcript of testimony, if any, and
exhibits, together with all papers and requests filed in the
proceeding, shall constitute the record. All decisions shall become
part of the record and shall include a statement of findings and
conclusions, as well as the reasons and/or basis therefor. Notice of
any decision shall be mailed or hand-delivered to the petitioner, his/
her representative or agent, agency or office, the City
Administrator, City Clerk, Mayor and City Council within seven
days of the Commission's decision.
(4) Appeal. An appeal may be taken from any act or decision of the
Coastal Waters Commission by appeal to the City Council.
E. Interlocal cooperation. The municipal officers of the City of Saco
recognize the aesthetic beauty and environmentally sensitive condition
§ 4-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-39
1:53
§ 4-39.1. Parks and Recreation Advisory Board. [Added 12-15-2003]
of the Saco River, its harbors and the coastal waters of Saco Bay
and fully recognize the City's obligation to the citizens of Saco and
future generations to protect such a natural resource. The City Council
further recognizes that the City of Biddeford also has an obligation
to its citizens to protect these natural resources and, in the spirit of
cooperation, hereby authorizes that the Coastal Waters Commission of
Saco join with a similar Commission created by the City of Biddeford to
address and incorporate community needs and wishes. The Commission
shall have no police powers nor authority to create regulations or
ordinances or to commit funds, but shall exist for the general purpose
enumerated in Subsection A(1), Establishment of policy.
A. Purpose and responsibilities.
(1) The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board is established with the
purpose of planning a Citywide parks and recreation program and
to advise and assist the Parks and Recreation Director in initiating
and maintaining this program.
(2) The responsibilities of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
include:
(a) Overall responsibility to promote, enhance and protect
recreational opportunities in Saco in order to maintain and
further develop the quality of life.
(b) Serving as an advisor to the Parks and Recreation Director and
as a forum for the discussion of new and creative programs,
including needs and requirements of present and future
activities, programs, and projects.
B. Membership and terms. The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall
consist of 11 members, all being residents of the City of Saco. Members
shall be appointed by the Mayor, with Council confirmation, for a term
of three years beginning July 1 initially with four members being
appointed for one year, four members appointed for two years and three
members being appointed for three years. An appointment to fill a
vacancy during an unexpired term shall be for the remainder of the
unexpired term. [Amended 5-16-2005]
C. Vacancy on the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board. Vacancies on the
Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall be created under any of the
following circumstances:
(1) Letter of resignation to the Chair of the Parks and Recreation
Advisory Board or to the Mayor.
(2) The expiration of the term of a member.
(3) The residency requirement is not met.
§ 4-39 SACO CITY CODE § 4-39.1
1:54
§ 4-39.2. Shoreline Commission. [Added 4-6-1998; amended
5-21-201217]
(4) Failure to attend three or more consecutive regular monthly
meetings of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board.
D. Officers, rules and quorum.
(1) The members of the Board shall elect a Chairman for a one-year
term. Election of officers shall take place at the regularly scheduled
meeting in July.
(2) A majority of the Board members shall constitute a quorum for the
conducting of business. The Board may adopt such rules and
regulations as it deems proper and necessary for the carrying out
of its duties and functions.
E. Meetings.
(1) The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board will meet monthly on a
date and place agreed on by the Parks and Recreation Advisory
Board with all meetings open to the public.
(2) Special meetings may be called by the Chair or by the Parks and
Recreation Director, with the approval of the Chair.
A. Powers and duties.
(1) The Saco Shoreline Commission exists for the general purpose of
studying the continuing effects of erosion on Saco's shorefront, as
well as evaluating public usage of the beaches and other public
infrastructure within a coastal zone under the jurisdiction of the
City of Saco and advising the City Council on policy matters
relating to coastal erosion and use.
(2) The Commission shall review and advise the City on issues relating
to the Saco shoreline, including but not limited to maintenance and
the care of City-owned waterfront facilities. In addition, the
Commission shall advise on all dredging issues related to the
mouth of the Saco River.
(3) The Commission shall participate in planning efforts and review
plans affecting the shoreline as required by City, state or federal
rules or regulations.
(4) The Commission shall make recommendations to the City Council
regarding the implementation or amendment of the Camp Ellis
Beach Erosion Study Committee Report of October 1997.
17.Editor's Note: This legislation redesignated the text of former Ch. 45, Shoreline
Commission, as this section.
§ 4-39.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-39.2
1:55
(5) The Commission shall participate in local, regional or state coastal
planning efforts.
(6) The Commission shall perform other such advisory duties as are
assigned to it by ordinance or by the City Council
(7) The Commission shall regularly inform the City Council and other
boards, committees, commissions or officials of the City, as is
appropriate, of its activities.
B. Organization and membership; conflicts and removal; terms.
(1) Shoreline Commission shall consist of nine members, appointed by
the Mayor and confirmed by the Council. Each Commissioner shall
be a resident of the City and shall serve without compensation.
(2) Neither a municipal officer nor his/her spouse may be a member of
the Commission.
(3) Any question of whether a particular issue involves a conflict of
interest sufficient to disqualify a member from voting thereon shall
be decided by a majority vote of the members, except the member
who is being challenged.
(4) Commissioners may be removed by the City Council for cause, after
notice and hearing. A Commissioner shall forfeit his/her
membership on the Commission if he/she fails to attend three
consecutive regular meetings of the Commission without being
excused by the Commission. The Chairman of the Commission shall
notify the Mayor of the forfeiture of office by a Commissioner.
(5) The term of office of a member shall be three years, except the
initial appointments, which shall be as follows: three members for
three-year terms; three members for two-year terms; and three
members for one-year terms.
C. Officers; administrative procedures.
(1) A Chair, Vice Chair and Secretary shall be elected by the
Commission annually.
(2) The Commission shall meet at least monthly, except that the
Chairperson or City Administrator may call special meetings of the
Commission as required. The Chairman shall also call meetings of
the Commission when requested to do so by a majority of the
members or by the Mayor. A quorum of the Commission necessary
to conduct an official Commission meeting shall consist of at least
five members. The Chairman shall preside at all meetings of the
Commission and shall be the official spokesman of the Commission.
A simple majority of members present and voting shall be sufficient
for passage of a motion.
§ 4-39.2 SACO CITY CODE § 4-39.2
1:56
(3) The Secretary shall maintain a permanent record of all Commission
meetings and all correspondence of the Commission. The Secretary
shall be responsible for maintaining those records which are
required as a part of the various proceedings which may be brought
before the Commission. All records to be maintained or prepared
by the Secretary are deemed public and shall be filed in the
Planning Office and may be inspected at reasonable times.
(4) The Commission shall adopt rules of procedure, which shall be
recorded by the Secretary, for any matter relating to the conduct of
any hearing, provided that any rule may be waived by the
Commission upon good cause shown.
(5) The Commission shall provide public notice of Commission
meetings by posting agendas at City Hall at least 24 hours in
advance of a meeting. All meetings shall be open to the public. The
Commission may hold hearings at its discretion, upon published
notice in a newspaper of general circulation at least seven days
prior to the hearing.
D. Interlocal cooperation. The municipal officers of the City of Saco
recognize the aesthetic beauty and environmental sensitivity of the
ocean front and fully recognize the City's obligation to the citizens of
Saco and future generations to protect such a natural resource. The
City Council further recognizes that Saco's beach front, as part of the
Saco Bay system, is integrally connected with beach systems in Old
Orchard Beach and Scarborough and that these towns have an
obligation to their citizens to protect these natural resources and, in the
spirit of cooperation, hereby authorizes that the Saco Shoreline
Commission join with similar commissions, committees, organizations
or individuals established by the Towns of Old Orchard Beach and
Scarborough to address and incorporate community needs and wishes.
The Commission shall have no police powers nor authority to create
regulations or ordinances or to commit funds but shall exist for the
general purpose enumerated in § 45-1, Powers and duties.
E. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
SHORELINE — That portion of Saco's waterfront affected by daily
tides, excluding the portions of the shoreline within the Saco River or
between the jetties at the mouth of the Saco River.
§ 4-39.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-39.2
1:57

ARTICLE VIII
Policies and Procedures
§ 4-40. Loaning or selling City property or equipment. [Amended
7-23-2007]
Current provisions on loaning or selling City property or equipment are in
the Personal Property Disposition Policy on file in the City offices.
§ 4-41. Standard of conduct relative to municipal contracts.
No municipal officer, employee or agent shall solicit or accept any gratuity,
favor or anything of monetary value from any contractor or potential
contractor with the City relative to the procurement of any supplies,
equipment, construction and/or services with City, state and/or federal
funds. The offering and/or giving of any such matter of monetary value
by such a contractor or its agents to any City officer, employee or agent
is hereby prohibited. In addition to any penalties which may be provided
by law, any City officer, employee or agent who violates any provision of
this section shall be subject to appropriate disciplinary action, including,
in the case of an officer, removal from office; in the case of an employee,
suspension or discharge from employment; and, in the case of an agent,
termination of such agency.
§ 4-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-41
1:59
Chapter 11
ELECTIONS
§ 4-41 SACO CITY CODE § 4-41
1:60
ARTICLE I
Initiative and Referendum18
[Adopted 5-1-1995 as Ch. X of the 1994 Code]
§ 11-1. Authority of voters.
§ 11-2. Commencement of proceedings; petitioners' committee;
affidavit.
§ 11-3. Petition requirements.
A. Initiative. The qualified voters of the City shall have the power to
propose ordinances to the Council and, if the Council fails to adopt an
ordinance so proposed without any change in substance, to adopt or
reject it at a City election, provided that such power shall not extend to
the budget or any ordinance relating to appropriation of money, levy of
taxes or salaries of City officers or employees.
B. Referendum. The qualified voters of the City shall have the power to
require reconsideration by the Council of any adopted ordinance and, if
the Council fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to approve or
reject it at a City election, provided that such power shall not extend to
the budget or any emergency ordinance or ordinance relating to
appropriation of money or levy of taxes.
A. Any five qualified voters may commence initiative or referendum
proceedings by filing with the City Clerk an affidavit stating that they
will constitute the petitioners' committee and be responsible for
circulating the petition and filing it in proper form, stating their names
and addresses and specifying the address to which all notices to the
committee are to be sent and setting out in full the proposed initiative
ordinance or citing the ordinance sought to be reconsidered.
B. Promptly after the affidavit of the petitioners' committee is filed, the
Clerk shall issue the appropriate petition blanks to the petitioners'
committee.
A. Number of signatures. Initiative and referendum petitions must be
signed by qualified voters of the City equal in number to at least 10% of
the total number of votes cast at the last regular City election.
B. Form and content. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and
style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each
signature shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil and shall be
followed by the address of the person signing. Petitions shall contain or
have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the
ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered.
18.Editor's Note: See also Art. VII of the Charter.
§ 11-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-3
1:61
§ 11-4. Certification of petition; review.
C. Affidavit of circulator. Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it,
when filed, an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof, stating that
he/she personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures
thereon, that all of the signatures were affixed in his/her presence, that
he/she believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose
names they purport to be and that each signer had an opportunity
before signing to read the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought
to be reconsidered.
D. Time for filing referendum petitions. Referendum petitions must be
filed within 30 days after adoption by the Council of the ordinance
sought to be reconsidered.
A. Certificate of Clerk; amendment. Within 20 days after the petition is
filed, the City Clerk shall complete a certificate as to its sufficiency,
specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective,
and shall promptly sent a copy of the certificate to the petitioners'
committee by registered mail.
(1) A petition certified insufficient for lack of the required number of
valid signatures may be amended once if the petitioners' committee
files a notice of intention to amend it with the Clerk within two days
after receiving the copy of his/her certificate and files a
supplementary petition upon additional papers within 10 days after
receiving the copy of such certificate. Such supplementary petition
shall comply with the requirements of § 11-3B and C, and, within
five days after it is filed, the Clerk shall complete a certificate as to
the sufficiency of the petition, as amended, and promptly send a
copy of such certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered
mail as in the case of an original petition.
(2) If a petition or amended petition is certified sufficient or if a
petition or amended petition is certified insufficient and the
petitioners' committee does not elect to amend or request Council
review under Subsection B of this section within the time required,
the Clerk shall promptly present his/her certificate to the Council,
and the certificate shall then be a final determination as to the
sufficiency of the petition.
B. Council review. If a petition has been certified insufficient and the
petitioners' committee does not file a notice of intention to amend it or
if an amended petition has been certified insufficient, the committee
may, within two days after receiving the copy of such certificate, file a
request that it be reviewed by the Council. The Council shall review the
certificate at its next meeting following the filing of such request and
approve or disapprove it, and the Council's determination shall then be
a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition.
§ 11-3 SACO CITY CODE § 11-4
1:62
§ 11-5. Referendum petitions; effect on ordinance.
When a referendum petition is filed with the City Clerk, the ordinance
sought to be reconsidered shall be suspended from taking effect. Such
suspension shall terminate when:
§ 11-6. Action on petitions.
§ 11-7. Results of election.
C. Court review; new petition. A final determination as to the sufficiency of
a petition shall be subject to court review. A final determination of
insufficiency, even if sustained upon court review, shall not prejudice
the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.
A. There is a final determination of insufficiency of the petition;
B. The petitioners' committee withdraws the petition;
C. The Council repeals the ordinance; or
D. Thirty days have elapsed after a vote of the City on the ordinance.
A. Action by Council. When an initiative or referendum petition has been
finally determined sufficient, the Council shall promptly consider the
proposed initiative ordinance in the manner provided within 30 days or
reconsider the referred ordinance by voting its repeal. If the Council
fails to adopt a proposed initiative ordinance without any change in
substance within 60 days or fails to repeal the referred ordinance
within 30 days after the date the petition was finally determined
sufficient, it shall submit the proposed or referred ordinance to the
voters of the City.
B. Submission to voters. The vote of the City on a proposed or referred
ordinance shall be held not less than 30 days and not later than one
year from the date of the final Council vote thereon. If no regular City
election is to be held within the period prescribed in this subsection, the
Council shall provide for a special election; otherwise, the vote shall be
held at the same time as such regular election, except that the Council
may, in its discretion, provide for a special election at an earlier date
within the prescribed period. Copies of the proposed or referred
ordinance shall be made available at the polls.
C. Withdrawal of petitions. An initiative or referendum petition may be
withdrawn at any time prior to the 15th day preceding the day
scheduled for a vote of the City by filing with the City Clerk a request
for withdrawal signed by at least four members of the petitioners'
committee. Upon the filing of such request, the petition shall have no
further force or effect, and all proceedings thereon shall be terminated.
A. Initiative. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed
initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon
§ 11-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-7
1:63
certification of the election results and shall be treated, in all respects,
in the same manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by the
Council. If conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, the
one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to
the extent of such conflict.
B. Referendum. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a referred
ordinance vote against it, it shall be considered repealed upon
certification of the election results.
C. Council initiative. The City Council may submit, on its own initiative, a
proposition for the enactment, repeal or amendment of any ordinance,
order or resolve to be voted upon at any municipal election, and should
such proposition receive a majority of the votes cast thereon at said
election, such ordinance, order or resolve shall be enacted, repealed or
amended accordingly.
§ 11-7 SACO CITY CODE § 11-7
1:64
ARTICLE II
Wards
[Adopted 5-1-1995 as Ch. XI of the 1994 Code]
§ 11-8. Establishment.
The following seven wards are hereby established for the purpose of
electing from each ward an equal number of municipal officers, as provided
by the Charter for the City of Saco.
§ 11-9. Boundary lines. [Amended 5-5-2003; 7-20-2015]
The boundary lines of the seven wards reference the tax maps as of April 1,
2014, and shall be as follows:19
Ward 1: Starting at the intersection of the Buxton town line and the Old
Buxton Road, then southeast on the Old Buxton Road along Map 123,
Lots 27, 30 and 29 and Lord Road, to the intersection with Buxton Road,
southeast on the Buxton Road crossing the Maine Turnpike and continuing
on North Street to Garfield Street, southwest on Garfield Street down to
Map 67, Lot 12-2 then northwest following the dividing line between Lots
12-2 and 11, 12-1 and 11-1 and 11-2, continue along the back lot line of
Lots 2-27, 2-26 and 2-24, then follow the dividing line northeasterly along
the back of Lots 2-22 to 2-12, then southeasterly along the dividing line
between Lots 2-12 and 2-10, then northeasterly across Aspen Drive to the
dividing line between Lots 2-8 and 2-6, then northwesterly to the dividing
line of Lot 2-28 then northeasterly along the dividing line to Lot 18-1, then
southwesterly to the dividing line between recreation lot 2-43 and 3-1 then
westerly on that line to Shadagee Road, crossing Shadagee Road to the
Maine Turnpike, southwest on Maine Turnpike to the Saco River, following
the Saco River in a westerly direction (upstream) to the Buxton town line,
northeast along the Buxton town line to the point of beginning.
Ward 2: Starting at the intersection of the boundaries of Saco, Buxton
and Scarborough, southeast along the Scarborough town line to the Maine
Turnpike, southwest along the Maine Turnpike to Flag Pond Road,
northwesterly on Flag Pond Road (all lots on the north side) to Jenkins
Road, southerly on Jenkins Road (all lots on the northwesterly side) to
Buxton Road, northwesterly on Buxton Road to its intersection with Old
Buxton Road, northwestly on Old Buxton Road (all lots on the north side)
to the Buxton town line, north along the Buxton town line to the point of
beginning.
Ward 3: Starting at the intersection at the Maine Turnpike with the
Scarborough town line, southeast along the Scarborough town line to the
Old Orchard Beach town line, southwesterly along the Old Orchard Beach
town line to the Goosefare Brook, then in an easterly direction following
the Goosefare Brook to the Boston and Maine Railroad, southwest on the
19.Editor's Note: See also the Ward Boundary Map, which is included as an attachment to
this chapter.
§ 11-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-9
1:65
Boston and Maine Railroad to southernmost corner of Map 27 Lot 36 and
following lot line of Lot 36 to the easterly most corner of Map 27 Lot 37
to Cumberland Avenue, then northeast on Cumberland Avenue to Lillian
Avenue, northwest on Lillian to the end of street, the to the most southerly
corner of Map 34 Lot 142-1, then along dividing line of Map 33 Lot 3 and
Map 34 Lot 142-1, continue to the westerly most corner of Map 34 Lot 142-2
then northeast along dividing line to corner of Map 33 Lot 3 and Lot 2, then
northwesterly along dividing line to Main Street, southwest on Main Street
to Fairfield Street, northwest on Fairfield to Union Street, southwest on
Union Street to Clark Street, northwest on Clark Street to Northwood Lane,
northeast on Northwood Lane, continuing in that direction and following
the dividing line between Map 39, Lots 146 and 146-1 to the Thornton
Academy property line (Map 40, Lot 29), then following that property's
boundary lines northwesterly, to the westernmost point of Map 40 Lot 29
then northeasterly to the dividing line between Map 40, Lots 26 and 30,
then northwesterly to the Industrial Park Rail Spur, then northeast along
the Industrial Park Rail Spur and Old Eastern right-of-way to Interstate 195,
northwest on 1-195 to the Maine Turnpike, southwesterly along the Maine
Turnpike to North Street, north on North Street to Jenkins Road, continue
northerly on Jenkins Road to Flag Pond Road, easterly on Flag Pond Road to
Route One, then northerly on Route One to the Scarborough town line and
the point of beginning.
Ward 4: Starting at the intersection of the Boston and Maine Railroad and
the Old Orchard Beach town line which is the Goosefare Brook, then in
an easterly direction following the Goosefare Brook to the Atlantic Ocean,
southerly along the Atlantic Ocean to the Saco River, following the Saco
River (upstream) in a westerly direction to the Map 26 Lot 3 then northerly
on the dividing line of Lots 3 and 5 and 3 and 4 to Beach Street, cross Beach
Street to the dividing line of Map 26 Lots 95 and 94-1 and following this
line northerly to the dividing line between Map 26, Lots 90 and 89, follow
that line to Glenwood Avenue, then northeasterly along the center line of
Glenwood Avenue to the Boston and Maine Railroad, and northeast along
the railroad to the Goosefare Brook and point of beginning. And including
the islands in the Atlantic Ocean.
Ward 5: Starting at a southernmost point where the western edge of the
Shadagee Road right-of-way intersects with the Maine Turnpike right-ofway
crossing Shadagee Road to the dividing line of Map 83, Lots 7 and
8, then easterly along that property line to the Recreation Lot, Map 83,
Lot 10-60, continuing along this line to the corner of Map 67 Lot 2-32,
continue along the dividing line northeasterly to the corner of Lots 2-28
and 2-4 then southwesterly on the dividing line to the corner of Lots 2-6
and 2-8, then southeasterly on the dividing line of Lots 2-6 and 2-8 to then
southwesterly along Hemlock Drive to the corner of Lots 2-10 and 2-12 then
northwesterly along the dividing line of Lots 2-10 and 2-12 then northwest
to the back lot dividing line of Lot 2-29, then southwesterly on the dividing
line to the westernmost point of Lot 2-24, then southeasterly along back lot
dividing line of Lots 2-24, 2-26, 2-27, then continuing along dividing line
between Lots 11-2, 11-1 and 12-1 and Lot 11 and 12-2 to Garfield Street,
§ 11-9 SACO CITY CODE § 11-9
1:66
northeast on Garfield Street to North Street, southeast along North Street
to the intersection with the Boston and Maine Rail Spur, southwest along
the Boston and Maine Rail Spur to Bradley Street, southeast on Bradley
Street to Spring Street, southwest on Spring Street to Lincoln Street then
along the dividing line between Map 38 Lot 228 and 229 and 230-1 to the
Saco River, then in a westerly direction along the Saco River to the Maine
Turnpike, northeast along the Turnpike to the point of beginning at the
Shadagee Road right-of-way.
Ward 6: The area starting at the intersection of King and Main Streets,
then northeasterly to the western most corner of Map 33 Lot 2-1 then
southeasterly along the dividing line to the corner of Map 33 Lot 3, Map 33
Lot 2 and Map 34 Lot 142-2 then southwesterly to the western most corner
of Map 34 Lot 142-2 then southeasterly to the southernmost corner of
Map 34 Lot 142-1 then southwesterly to Lillian Avenue, then southeasterly
along Lillian Avenue to Cumberland Avenue, then southwesterly along
Cumberland to the easternmost point of Map 27 Lot 37 thence along the
dividing line of Map 27 Lots 37 and 36 to the Boston and Maine Railroad,
then northeasterly along the Boston and Main Railroad to Glenwood
Avenue, then southwesterly along Glenwood Avenue to the westerly corner
of Map 26 Lot 89, then southeasterly along the dividing of Map 26 Lot
89 and 90 to the sideline of Map 26 Lot 95, then southwesterly along the
sideline of Map 26 Lot 95 to Beach Street, thence southwesterly along the
eastern sideline of Map 26 Lot 4 then southwesterly along the westerly
sideline of Map 26 Lot 3 to the Saco River, then northwesterly along the
Saco River to a point at the southernmost point of Main Street on Saco
Island then following a counterclockwise course around Saco Island along
the Saco River to Main Street at the northerly side of Saco Island northeast
on Main Street to North Street, northwest on North Street to Union Street,
northeast on Union Street to Fairfield Street, southeast on Fairfield Street
to Main Street to the point of beginning.
Ward 7: Starting at the intersection of the Maine Turnpike and Interstate
195, southeast along Interstate 195 to the Old Eastern Railroad bed,
southwest along the Old Eastern Railroad bed and the Industrial Park Rail
Spur to the dividing line between Map 40, Lot 26, and Map 40, Lot 30,
southeast along that line to the west boundary of Map 40, Lot 29, southwest
along the southeast boundary line, to the dividing line of Map 39, Lots
146-1 and 146, southwest along that line to Northwood Lane, southwest on
Northwood Lane to Clark Street, southeast on Clark Street to Union Street,
southwest on Union Street to North Street, southeast on North Street to
Main Street, southwest on Main Street to the Saco River at the northerly
side of the Saco Island then following a clockwise course along the Saco
River around the outside of Saco Island to the southernmost point on Main
Street thence following the course of the Saco River, around the remainder
of Saco Island, to Spring Street then northeasterly along Spring Street
to Bradley Street, northwest on Bradley Street to the Boston and Maine
Railroad Spur, northeast along the railroad spur to North Street, northwest
along North Street to northernmost point of Map 84 Lot 3 to the Maine
§ 11-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-9
1:67
Turnpike and northeast on the Maine Turnpike to the point of beginning at
Interstate 1-195.
§ 11-9 SACO CITY CODE § 11-9
1:68
Chapter 15
FUNDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative Code — See Ch. 4. Purchasing — See Ch. 38.
§ 11-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-9
1:69

ARTICLE I
City of Saco Trust Funds
§ 15-1. Scope; Board of Trustees. [Amended 10-5-200920]
The several trust funds known as the "Sweetser Provident Fund," "Sweetser
Baxter Sabbath School Fund," "Sweetser School Fund," "Sweetser School
Library Fund," "Sweetser Missionary Fund" and "Sweetser Park Fund" and
all trust funds for the benefit of Wardwell Home, now held by the City of
Saco as trustee, together with all legacies, devises and gifts of funds or
property which the City of Saco may hereafter receive into its custody as
trustee, excepting such legacies, devises or gifts of funds or property which
the City may receive for the benefit of the Lucia Kimball Deering Hospital
Fund, are hereby placed in the care, custody and administration of the
citizens of the City, who shall constitute a Board of Trustees for the care and
administration of these funds and other property and the income thereof
and so be designated as the Board of Trustees for the care, custody and
administration of trust funds held by the City of Saco as trustee.
§ 15-2. Membership and term. [Amended 10-5-2009]
The Board of Trustees shall consist of three members, all being citizens
of the City of Saco. Members shall be appointed by the Mayor with City
Council confirmation, for a term of six years, beginning initially with one
member being appointed for six years, one member being appointed for four
years, and one member being appointed for two years.
§ 15-3. Qualifications; bond.
Before assuming the duties of office, each member of the Board of Trustees
shall be qualified by taking an oath before the City Clerk that he/she will
faithfully perform the duties of this office and shall file a bond with a surety
company authorized to do business in the State of Maine as surety in the
sum of $10,000, conditioned for the faithful performance of such duties. The
premium to be paid to the surety company for the bond shall be paid by the
City.
§ 15-4. Meetings; compensation. [Amended 5-15-2000; 10-5-2009]
The Board of Trustees shall hold regular meetings of the Board on a semi
annual basis on a date of the Board's choosing, or meetings can occur on
an as-needed basis. The Trustees shall receive a compensation that shall be
established by the Council after a public hearing and shall be entitled to be
paid actual and necessary expenditures incurred in behalf of the Board.
§ 15-5. Vacancies. [Amended 10-5-2009]
Vacancies on the Board of Trustees, however occurring, shall be filled
by mayoral appointment and confirmation of the City Council. A member
20.Editor's Note: This ordinance also amended the title of Art. I.
§ 15-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-5
1:71
appointed to fill a vacancy on the Board of Trustees shall hold office for the
unexpired term of the retiring member.
§ 15-6. Officers; rules.
The Board of Trustees may organize by the election of such officers as it
may deem proper and shall determine such rules as it may deem wise for
the conduct of its business and which are not inconsistent with law.
§ 15-7. Records and reports; audit.
The Board of Trustees shall keep a record of its proceedings, including its
financial transactions, and at the end of the City fiscal year shall prepare a
statement of the trust funds and other property held by the City of Saco as
trustee as enumerated in § 15-1, the income thereof and the entire financial
transaction, which shall be delivered to the Finance Director and also shall
be published in each annual report of the City of Saco. The City shall pay
for and have conducted an audit of the Board's records. The audit shall be
included as part of the City's annual audit.
§ 15-8. Investments.
The Board of Trustees shall invest all trust funds held by the City of Saco as
trustee, as enumerated in § 15-1, in such securities as the savings banks of
Maine are authorized to invest in, excepting that the Board is authorized to
receive and hold such securities and other property as the representatives
of any estate or any donor may deliver to the City as trustee, other than
legacies, devises or gifts of funds or property for the benefit of Kimball
Hospital or for hospital purposes, and to reinvest the whole or part thereof
as the Board may deem wise.
§ 15-9. Additional powers and duties.
A. Notwithstanding the provisions of any of the preceding sections, the
Board of Trustees is authorized to:
(1) Treat any two or more of the trust funds as a single fund, solely for
the purpose of investment.
(2) After deduction of management expenses, prorate any interest
earned or capital gains realized among the various trust funds.
(3) Designate, in writing, a trust company or agency, having its
principal office within the state, for the purpose of investment, and
the Board of Trustees may consent to the investment of such funds
in a common trust fund maintained by that trust company or bank
for investment, as directed by the Board of Trustees, in accordance
with the provision of 9 M.R.S.A. § 51, the law governing savings
banks investments. [Amended 10-5-2009]
B. The Board of Trustees may enter into a custodian and agency
agreement with a trust company, bank, or agency as provided in
§ 15-5 SACO CITY CODE § 15-9
1:72
Subsection A(3) above, and contract for investment advice for the
standard fee for this service. The City Council shall establish a rate,
after a public hearing, for the cost of the services of the bank as
custodian and investment adviser. Any other expenses resulting from
these services or other expenses incurred for transfer, sale, exchange
or handling of these funds will be deducted from the income as
management expenses. [Amended 5-15-2000; 10-5-2009]
§ 15-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-9
1:73

ARTICLE II
Lucia Kimball Deering Hospital Fund
§ 15-10. Board of Trustees.
The City of Saco, by special election held on the second Monday of
September 1917, as authorized by Chapter 95 of the Private and Special
Laws of the State of Maine of the year 1917, having voted to accept the
legacies and bequests of Lucia Kimball Deering as provided in the last will
and testament of said Lucia Kimball Deering, dated November 19, 1915,
said legacies and bequests, devises and gifts, which the City of Saco, Maine,
is or may be authorized to accept, under the provisions of said Chapter 95
of the Private and Special Laws of the State of Maine of the year 1917, are
hereby placed in the care, custody and under the administration of seven
citizens of the City of Saco, who shall constitute a Board of Trustees for
the care, custody and administration of these funds and the income thereof
and to be designated as the "Board of Trustees for the care, custody and
administration of the legacies and bequests provided for under the terms of
the will of Lucia Kimball Deering" and all other legacies, bequests, devises
or gifts to the said City of Saco for hospital purposes.
§ 15-11. Membership and term. [Amended 10-5-2009]
The Board of Trustees shall consist of seven members, all being citizens of
the City of Saco. Members shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the City
Council confirmation, for a term of six years, beginning as each current
member in 2009, on file with the City Clerk, concludes their lifetime term,
initially with two members being appointed for six years, two members
being appointed for four years, and three members being appointed for two
years. Vacancies that occur in the Board of Trustees by death, resignation or
removal from the City of Saco or by failure to qualify as provided in § 15-12
shall be filled in the same manner.
§ 15-12. Qualifications; bond.
Each member of the Board of Trustees, before assuming the duties of this
office, shall be qualified by taking an oath before the City Clerk of the
City of Saco that he/she will faithfully perform the duties of this office. The
Board shall file a joint bond with such sureties and in such sums as the City
Council may deem just and proper.
§ 15-13. Compensation. [Amended 5-15-2000]
Each member of the Board shall serve with compensation that shall be
established by the City Council, after a public hearing, from income from
the fund. If the income does not equal the amount necessary to pay such
members, then the pay will be proportioned according to the income, and,
in addition, each member shall be entitled to be paid for his/her actual cash
expenditures incurred in behalf of the Board.
§ 15-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-14
1:75
§ 15-14. Meetings; officers; compensation and bond of Treasurer.
[Amended 10-5-2009]
The Board of Trustees shall hold meetings at such times and place as the
Board shall determine and, at the first meeting thereof after the election
and qualification of the entire Board of Trustees, shall elect a President,
Secretary and Treasurer from its own members. The Treasurer shall give to
the Board a bond as Treasurer, in such sum and with such sureties as the
Board shall deem just and proper. The compensation of the Treasurer shall
be 1/8 of 1% of the gross amount of the fund and of the income thereof,
annually, to be paid from the fund.
§ 15-15. Rules and orders.
The Board of Trustees shall make such rules and orders as it may deem wise
for the conduct of its official business and which are not inconsistent with
law or this article.
§ 15-16. Records.
The Board shall keep a true and perfect record of its proceedings, including
its financial statements and operations, which at all times shall be open to
the inspection of the Committee on Finance of the City Council.
§ 15-17. Investments.
The Board shall invest all funds in its custody and the income thereof only
in such securities as the savings banks of Maine are authorized to invest in,
and is authorized to receive into its custody and hold such securities and
other property as the representatives of any other estate or any donor may
hereafter deliver to said City of Saco for hospital purposes and to reinvest
such parts of the same as the Board shall deem wise in like manner.
§ 15-18. Yearly statement.
The Board shall prepare, at the end of each calendar year, a true and
perfect statement of the funds and other property in its custody and the
income thereof and its entire financial doings and transactions, the same
to be included and published in the annual report of the City of Saco next
published after the filing of the report with the City Council. Upon the filing
of the statement or report of the Board of Trustees to the City Council,
it shall be the duty of the Committee on Finance of the City Council to
immediately examine and check up the securities and other property in
the care and custody of the Board of Trustees, subject, however, to all the
provisions of this article.
§ 15-14 SACO CITY CODE § 15-18
1:76
ARTICLE III
Arrest Forfeiture Funds
§ 15-19. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to authorize the City of Saco Police Department
to accept funds, grants or personal property to be used for law enforcement
purposes.
§ 15-20. Authorization to accept funds or gifts.
The City of Saco Police Department is authorized to accept, from the United
States Government or any of its agencies, the State of Maine or any of its
agencies, the County of York or any of its agencies or any other private
or public entity, funds, grants or personal property derived from property
forfeitures following lawful arrests. The City of Saco Police Department is
further authorized to accept funds designated for law enforcement purposes
from governmental entities or private sources.
§ 15-21. Special nonlapsing fund.
All funds received according to § 15-20 above shall be placed in a special
nonlapsing fund that shall be used for law enforcement activities within
the City of Saco or in cooperation with other law enforcement agencies.
All funds derived from property forfeitures resulting from arrests within
the City of Saco or in cooperation with other law enforcement agencies
shall also be placed in this fund and used for law enforcement purposes.
The total amount of money deposited into the special nonlapsing fund
shall not exceed $25,000 per fiscal year; any funds received in excess of
$25,000 per year shall be placed in the City of Saco General Fund, unless
a private donor specifies otherwise as a condition of the gift or grant or
this ceiling is superseded by state or federal law, in which cases the wish
of the donor or the superseding state or federal law shall control. This fund
shall supplement and not supplant the annual Police Department budget
appropriations. The City Council may augment this fund at its discretion.
§ 15-22. Applicability of purchasing regulations.
A. Expenditures from the special nonlapsing fund shall be made according
to Chapter 38, Purchasing, of this Code, except in the following two
circumstances, when expenditures shall be exempt from the
requirements of the purchasing regulations:
(1) Cases where the law enforcement activity being funded would be
rendered ineffective by the application of the purchasing
regulations; or
(2) Cases where public knowledge of the law enforcement activity
being funded could reasonably be foreseen to result in risk to the
health or safety of a member of the Police Department or the
public.
§ 15-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-22
1:77
§ 15-23. Reports.
At least once a year, within 90 days of the end of the fiscal year, the Police
Chief shall provide a written report stating the sources and amount of
income to the fund; the date, amount and purpose of all expenditures from
the fund; and the balance forward.
B. In situations set forth in Subsection A(1) and (2) above, the Police Chief
or Deputy Chief shall be authorized to expend the necessary funds with
the approval of the City Administrator, who shall determine whether or
not the expenditure shall be subject to the purchasing regulations
according to the standards of this section. A written statement
describing the expenditure shall be presented to the Council at the next
regularly scheduled Council meeting.
§ 15-22 SACO CITY CODE § 15-23
1:78
ARTICLE IV
Unassigned Fund Balance Policy
[Amended 10-3-2011]
§ 15-24. Definition and classification.
§ 15-25. Findings.
The City's unassigned fund balance represents those funds held in reserve
to cover unexpected expenditure needs and emergencies, revenue shortfalls
and seasonal cash flow variations. The City Council has determined that
maintenance of an adequate fund balance is essential to the financial health
and security of the City of Saco.
A. "Fund balance" is a term used to describe the net assets of
governmental funds. It is calculated as the difference between the
assets and liabilities reported in a governmental fund.
B. Governmental fund balance is reported in five classifications that
comprise a hierarchy based primarily on the extent to which the City is
bound to honor constraints on the specific purposes for which amounts
in those funds can be spent. The five classifications of fund balance for
the general fund are defined as follows.
(1) Nonspendable: resources which cannot be spent because they are
either a) not in spendable form or b) legally or contractually
required to be maintained intact.
(2) Restricted: resources with constraints placed on the use of
resources which are either a) externally imposed by creditors (such
as through debt covenants), grantors, contributors, or laws or
regulations of other governments; or b) imposed by law through
constitutional provisions or enabling legislation.
(3) Committed: resources which are subject to limitations the
government imposes upon itself at its highest level of
decisionmaking, and that remain binding unless removed in the
same manner.
(4) Assigned: resources neither restricted nor committed for which a
government has a stated intended use as established by the City
Council, or body or official to which the City Council has delegated
the authority to assign amounts for specific purposes.
(5) Unassigned: resources which cannot be properly classified in one
of the other four categories. The general fund should be the only
fund that reports a positive unassigned fund balance amount.
C. The committed, assigned, and unassigned classifications are often
referred to, in the aggregate, as the unrestricted fund balance.
§ 15-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-26
1:79
§ 15-26. Objective.
It is the policy objective of the City that the audited unassigned fund
balance should be a maximum of 10% of the following year's general fund
budget as adopted by the Saco City Council. The minimum unassigned fund
balance should be set at one month's budgeted expenditures or 8.33% of
the annual budget.
§ 15-27. Shortfalls.
It is the goal of the City that unassigned fund balance identified in the City's
audited financial statements shall be raised by the City Council in the next
three budget cycles. The minimum revenue requirement shall be the funds
needed to bring the unassigned fund balance above the 8.33% established
in § 15-26.
§ 15-28. Surplus.
Any surplus in the unassigned fund balance identified in the City's audited
financial statements that exceeds the 10% maximum target shall be made
available for Council appropriation. In making said allocation of funds, the
City Council shall give priority to the following activities:
§ 15-29. Administration.
Upon acceptance of the City's annual audit by the City Council, the City
Administrator shall determine the status of the unassigned fund balance
relative to the policy established in § 15-26. At the second City Council
meeting in January, the City Administrator shall present his/her evaluation
of the current unassigned fund balance and make his/her recommendations
regarding the action necessary to either make up any shortfall or
appropriate any excesses. The City Council shall act on the City
Administrator's recommendations no later than the first City Council
meeting in February.
§ 15-30. Emergency actions permitted.
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, the City Council may vote at
any time to use unassigned fund balance funds to respond to emergency
funding needs.
A. Economic development projects, such as industrial park land
acquisition, establishment of economic development loan fund
programs or the development of infrastructure improvements
associated with industrial park priorities.
B. Replacement of aging capital equipment that carries unusually high
costs and has a utility life of eight years or more.
C. Specifically targeted infrastructure projects or other capital
expenditures required by the City.
§ 15-26 SACO CITY CODE § 15-30
1:80
Chapter 34
PERSONNEL
[Former Ch. 34, Personnel, adopted 11-18-1996, as amended, was
removed from the Code at the request of the City. The City will have
a personnel policy on file with the City offices.]
Chapter 38
PURCHASING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative Code — See Ch. 4. Funds — See Ch. 15.
Chapter 45
(RESERVED)
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 106. Harbor river and waterfront — See Ch. 118.
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 53
ADULT BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Entertainment — See Ch. 93.
§ 53-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT BUSINESS — Any business otherwise permitted as a retail business
or service establishment, a substantial or significant portion of which
consists of selling, renting, leasing, exhibiting, displaying or otherwise
dealing in materials or devices of any kind which appeal to prurient
interests and which depict or describe specified sexual activities. If more
than 30% of the active display area of a facility is devoted to materials or
devices which depict or describe specified sexual activities or videotapes
rated X or NC-17 or classified as suitable only for adults or persons 18 years
of age or older or which are displayed in a portion of a facility only open to
persons older than 18 years of age, it will be deemed to be a significant or
substantial portion of the business.
§ 15-30 PURCHASING § 53-1
38:81
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
§ 53-2. Viewing booths or facilities.
No adult business shall be permitted to operate any viewing booths or
viewing facilities.
§ 53-3. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine
of not less than $50 per viewing booth or viewing facility. Each day that a
violation exists shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 57
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency telephone system — See Ch. 90.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 102.
Noise — See Ch. 149.
§ 57-1. Purpose. [Amended 5-3-2004; 12-20-2004]
The number of burglar alarms in use within the City has increased greatly
over the past few years. Along with this increase there has been an increase
in false alarms and associated problems, which have impacted the Police
Department's ability to respond to emergencies. This chapter recognizes
the need for regulation of the use of alarms to minimize false alarms and
to compensate for the inappropriate use of municipal resources in response
to false alarms, and to clarify the rights and responsibilities of the property
owner and of the City of Saco.
§ 57-2. Definitions. [Amended 5-3-2004; 12-20-2004]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM SYSTEM — Any mechanism, equipment or device designed for
the detection of an unauthorized entry upon any property, or signifying
any other type of emergency response, other than to a motor vehicle or
vessel, and which emits an audible, visual, electronic or other signal when
activated.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, fellatio or sodomy.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions,
buttocks or female breasts.
C.
§ 53-1 SACO CITY CODE § 57-2
57:82
ALARM USER — Any person whose property is protected by an alarm
system.
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm signal which is not in response to an actual or
attempted unauthorized entry upon property, or other emergency requiring
an immediate police response, including any signal emitted by a negligently
activated alarm system or by an alarm system deliberately activated when
an immediate police response is not required, or by a malfunctioning alarm
system. In the event an alarm is activated as a result of a natural or
unnatural event beyond the property owner's control (i.e., disruption of the
electrical service due to storm, motor vehicle accident, and the like), no fee
shall be imposed, at the discretion of the Chief of Police.
§ 57-3. Permit required. [Added 5-3-2004;21 amended 12-20-2004]
No system shall be permitted which automatically transmits a signal or
alarm directly to the Police Department telephone lines.
§ 57-4. False alarm fees; collection; appeals.
Any alarm user whose alarm system produces a false alarm is subject to the
schedule of fees in this section.
§ 57-5. Grace period.
All new systems will have a one-month grace period from the false alarm
provisions of § 57-4.
A. The City shall charge a fee, that shall be established by the City Council
after a public hearing,22 for each false alarm to which the Police
Department responds; provided, however, that there shall be no charge
for the first false alarm and provided, further, that the fee shall be
established by the City Council at a public hearing for the sixth and all
additional false alarms to which the Police Department responds. For
the purposes of this section, the number of false alarms shall be based
upon the calendar year and shall be calculated annually.
B. The City also reserves the right to collect false alarm fees as otherwise
permitted by law.
C. Within the ten-day period after a demand for payment of a fee assessed
under this section, the person from whom the fee is demanded may
appeal the imposition of the false alarm fee to the Chief of Police, who
may abate or reduce the fee upon good cause shown. The decision of
the Chief of Police shall be final.
21.Editor's Note: This amendment also repealed former § 57-3, Monitoring fee, as amended.
22.Editor's Note: Copies of the current fee schedule are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 57-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § 57-5
57:83
Chapter 60
AMBULANCE SERVICE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency telephone system — See Ch. 90.
Mutual fire aid pacts — See Ch. 102, Art. IV.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 211.
§ 60-1. Garaging of ambulance.
The City of Saco ambulance shall be garaged at the Central Fire Station of
the City of Saco.
§ 60-2. Fee schedule. 23 [Amended 4-16-1996; 6-19-2000; 3-5-2001;
4-23-2007]
Fees shall be determined by Council after a public hearing, except for
ambulance fees which will be adjusted annually according to the Medicare
New England Fee Schedule, specifically, Maine locality 03, York and
Cumberland Counties.
§ 60-3. Service outside city.
The ambulance will not service residents of other cities or towns outside
the City limits unless that City or town has a mutual aid pact with Saco and
provided that it shall have a comprehensive ambulance service.24
§ 60-4. Collection and deposit of fees.
All fees will be collected by the Finance Department and deposited in the
Ambulance Fund account on a weekly basis.
§ 60-5. Ambulance Fund.
Effective January 1, 1994, an Ambulance Fund shall be established to
perpetuate the purchase of City ambulances and to provide adequate funds
for the continued service, operations, staffing, training, capital equipment
and contractual services, as well as the ongoing maintenance of ambulance
equipment and vehicles. The fees collected shall be deposited by the
Finance Department into a fund as aforementioned. As ambulances are
purchased, any additional funds in that account shall remain for the
purchase or replacement of equipment necessary for the operation of the
municipal ambulance or the municipal ambulance service as determined
from time to time by the City Council. The process of accumulating funds
shall continue as described above.
23.Editor's Note: Copies of the current fee schedule are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
24.Editor's Note: See also See Ch. 102, Fire Prevention, Art. IV, Mutual Fire Aid Pacts.
§ 57-5 SACO CITY CODE § 60-5
57:84
Chapter 64
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 149.
§ 60-5 ALARM SYSTEMS § 60-5
57:85

ARTICLE I
Keeping of Animals
§ 64-1. Animals not to be kept in offensive manner.
All animals shall be kept in such places, regardless of zoning restrictions,
and in such manner as not to be offensive to neighboring residents or the
public. Pens and yards shall be kept deodorized by dried earth or other
effective absorbent.
§ 64-2. Compliance with orders of Health Officer.
No person having the care of any domestic fowl, swine, cows or other
animals shall keep the same within the limits of the City contrary to the
order of the Health Officer.
§ 64-3. Horses prohibited on beaches [Amended 9-4-2018]
Between April 1 and September 30, no person shall ride or drive any horse
upon the public beaches of the City or upon any beach to which the public
has access, nor shall the owner of the horse permit it to be so ridden.
§ 64-4. Violations and penalties.
Any persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to
a penalty of not less than $10 nor more than $50 for each offense.
§ 64-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 64-4
57:87

ARTICLE II
Dogs
§ 64-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AT LARGE — Off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the
owner or a member of his immediate family by either leash, cord, chain or
otherwise.
DOG — Includes both male and female dogs.
KENNEL — One pack or collection of dogs kept under one ownership on
a single premises for breeding, hunting, show, training, field trails and
exhibition purposes or maintained as a business for the buying and selling
of dogs or for any form of boarding of dogs.
OWNER — Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning,
keeping or harboring a dog or any person having custody and control of a
dog.
§ 64-6. Licenses; late fee.
§ 64-7. Cleanup required.
It shall be a violation of this article for any person who owns, possesses or
controls a dog to fail to remove and dispose of any feces left by his/her dog
on any sidewalk, street or publicly owned property.
§ 64-8. Running at large. [Amended 9-4-2012]
A. License, record and tag requirements shall be as prescribed by the
Maine Revised Statutes.
B. Late registration; officer's fee. The City Council will establish, after a
public hearing, the officer's fee, so called, for the late registration of
dogs, provided in 7 M.R.S.A. § 3702.25 [Amended 4-7-2003]
A. A dog, while on any public way or place, shall be under restraint, within
the meaning of this article, if it is controlled by leash or voice control
beside a competent person and obedient to that person's commands or
on or within a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets or within
the property limits of its owner or keeper.
B. The following restrictions apply to dogs on beaches: [Amended
9-4-2018]
(1) All dogs should be leashed and under control of their owners at all
times from April 1 through September 30 on beaches where piping
25.Editor's Note: Said section was repealed by Chapter 383 of the Laws of 1987. See now 7
M.R.S.A. § 3943.
§ 64-5 ALARM SYSTEMS § 64-8
57:89
§ 64-9. Bitch in heat.
§ 64-10. Impoundment.
§ 64-11. Fees.
plovers or least terns are present or have traditionally nested.
Dogs should be prohibited on these beaches from April 1 through
September 30 if, based on observations and experience, dog
owners fail to keep pets leashed and under control.
A. Confinement required. The owner of any bitch in heat shall keep the
same confined or on a leash at all times and shall not permit such dog to
be at large within the City or on any premises other than those of the
owner. Every bitch found running at large in violation hereof is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and shall be impounded, and the
owner, keeper or person harboring such bitch shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor.
B. Spaying required. All female dogs capable of bearing young shall be
spayed unless kept in an enclosure and used for breeding purposes.
A. Unlicensed dogs. Unlicensed dogs or dogs whose owner is unknown
which are running at large shall be taken and impounded in the shelter
designated by the City as the City Animal Shelter and confined in a
humane manner for a period of not less than 14 days and may
thereafter be disposed of in a humane manner if not claimed by their
owners.
B. Transfer of title. The City or its duly authorized agent may transfer title
of all animals held by it at its City Animal Shelter after the legal
detention period has expired and the animal has not been claimed by its
owner.
A. Any animal impounded hereunder may be reclaimed, as herein
provided, upon payment by the owner of the following fees: [Amended
4-7-2003]
(1) Impoundment fee. The impoundment fee shall be established by the
City Council after a public hearing. If the owner refuses to pay, a
summons shall be issued for abandoning an animal.
(2) Boarding fee. Boarding fee per day shall be established by the City
Council after a public hearing for each impounded animal.
B. Payment. Fees provided herein are to be paid to the City Clerk, who will
issue receipts in duplicate. A copy of the receipt will be delivered to the
Dog Officer, who will then release the dog to the owner. During hours
when the City Clerk is not on duty, the Saco Police Department will
accept payments for the City Clerk.
§ 64-8 SACO CITY CODE § 64-11
57:90
§ 64-12. Number of dogs limited.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to keep or harbor within the
City more than three dogs over four months old on January 1 in or about the
premises, house, barn or any other building or in or about all buildings on
any one premises occupied by any one family, and the keeping or harboring
of dogs as aforesaid is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
§ 64-13. Barking or howling dogs.
No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog which, by loud, frequent or
habitual barking, howling or yelping, shall disturb the peace of any person
or persons.
§ 64-14. Dangerous dogs.
A "dangerous dog" is hereby defined to be a dog which shall cause
reasonable fear of bodily injury to any person by attacking or threatening
to attack such person. Any such dog is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
The owner of any dangerous dog shall keep the same confined in a secure
enclosure or on a chain or leash controlled by the owner or his agent at all
times and shall not permit such dog to be at large within the City.
§ 64-15. Disposition of dogs which have bitten persons.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person keeping or harboring any dog,
when notified that such dog has bitten any person or has so injured any
person as to cause abrasion of the skin, to sell or give away such dog or to
permit or allow such dog to be taken beyond the limits of the City, except
under the care of a licensed veterinarian.
C. It will be the responsibility of the City Clerk to maintain accurate
records of all fees, violations and other pertinent information.
D. All fees collected under this section will be deposited in the City of Saco
general fund.
A. License fee. The payment of a license or licenses on dogs shall not be
construed to allow the keeping of more than three dogs, as aforesaid,
on any one premises.
B. Scope of limitation. This limitation shall not apply to the following, but a
kennel license shall be required: to maintain or keep a pack or
collection of dogs under one ownership in a single premises for
breeding, hunting, show, training, field trails or exhibition purposes or
maintained as a business for the buying and selling of dogs or for any
form of boarding of dogs.
A. Confinement. It shall be the duty of such owner or keeper, upon
receiving notice of the character aforesaid, to immediately place such
dog under confinement for a period of at least 14 days.
§ 64-11 ALARM SYSTEMS § 64-15
57:91
§ 64-16. Rabies.
Upon positive diagnosis of rabies in any dog within the City, the Mayor
shall proclaim and invoke a Citywide quarantine for a period of 30 days,
and, upon the invoking of such quarantine, no animal shall be taken into
the streets or be permitted to be on the streets during such period of
quarantine.
§ 64-17. Killing of dangerous dogs.
If any dangerous, fierce or vicious dog cannot be safely taken up and
impounded, such dog may be slain by any police officer or duly authorized
Animal Control Officer. In all cases where any dog which has bitten a person
or caused an abrasion of the skin of any person is slain by any police officer,
whether by order of the court or otherwise, and a period of less than 15 days
has elapsed since the day on which such dog bit any person or caused an
abrasion of the skin on any person, it shall be the duty of the police officer
B. Observation of dogs bitten. Any dog which shall have been bitten by
another dog having or suspected of having rabies shall be immediately
impounded for observation as provided in this section.
C. Destruction prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the owner or person
keeping or harboring any dog, when notified that such dog has bitten
any person or has so injured any person as to cause abrasion of the skin,
to destroy such animal without permission of the City of Saco Health
Officer.
A. Treatment required. During such period of rabies quarantine as herein
described, every animal bitten by an animal adjudged to be rabid shall
be forthwith destroyed or, at the owner's expense and option, shall be
treated for rabies infection by a licensed veterinarian or held 30 days
under quarantine by the owner in the same manner as other animals
are quarantined.
B. Extension of quarantine. In the event that there are additional positive
cases of rabies occurring during the period of quarantine, such period
of quarantine may be extended by the Mayor for an additional six
months from the time of the last positive report. The carcass of any
dead animal exposed to rabies shall, upon demand, be surrendered to
the Health Officer. The Health Officer shall direct the disposition of any
animal found to be infected with rabies.
C. Surrender of animal required. No person shall fail or refuse to
surrender any animal for quarantine or destruction as required herein
when demand is made therefor by the Health Officer.
D. Out-of-state dogs. All out-of-state dogs shall display rabies tags. If not
immunized, the owner shall take the same to a veterinarian for
immunization.
§ 64-15 SACO CITY CODE § 64-17
57:92
slaying such dog to forthwith deliver the carcass and brain to the Chief of
Police, who shall forward the carcass intact to the Health Officer.
§ 64-18. Violations and penalties.
A. Whoever keeps a dog contrary to the provisions of this article or
whoever violates any of the provisions of this article shall be punished
by a fine of not less than $20 nor more than $100 or not more than 30
days' imprisonment, or both, the fine to be recovered to the use of the
City of Saco by complaint before the District Court. In addition to the
fine or imprisonment, the Court may order such owner or keeper to
either kill the dog or have it confined.
B. In addition to the fine or imprisonment herein provided, if, after
hearing, the Court is satisfied that the nuisance found constitutes a
dangerous condition which, in its judgment, should not be allowed to
continue, the Court may order the dog or dogs destroyed, muzzled,
confined to the owner's premises or impounded by the Dog Officer of
the City of Saco for a period prescribed by the Court and at the expense
of the owner and grant such further relief as it shall deem just and
proper.
§ 64-17 ALARM SYSTEMS § 64-18
57:93

ARTICLE III
Kennels
§ 64-19. Licenses; certification of adequate facilities.
The City Clerk shall, in issuing kennel licenses, obtain a written certification
from the Dog Officer that the facilities and enclosures to be used in
maintaining the proposed kennel are adequate as prescribed by law.
§ 64-20. Substandard kennels.
Should the Dog Officer find a kennel licensed by the City to have facilities
and/or conditions existing that do not meet the prescribed standards for the
licensing or maintaining of a kennel, he shall certify such fact to the City
Clerk, in writing, and said Clerk shall thereupon cause notice to be served
on the licensee or owner of the inadequacies or conditions and order the
same to be remedied within 10 days. Failure to comply with the order by the
expiration of the 10 days specified will operate to revoke the license, and
the owner will then be subject to prosecution under the penalty provisions
of this article.
§ 64-21. Nuisance.
Operating or maintaining a kennel without a license and without adequate
facilities as prescribed by law is hereby declared a public nuisance, and
each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 64-19 ALARM SYSTEMS § 64-21
57:95

ARTICLE IV
Nondomestic Animals
§ 64-22. Findings.
The keeping of certain animals and fowl within close proximity of dwelling
houses in the urban area constitutes a threat to the public health, safety and
welfare of the community because of noise, noxious odors and unsanitary
conditions and the possibility of the spread of disease.
§ 64-23. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AT LARGE — Off the premises of the owner and not under the direct control
of the owner or keeper either by leash, cord, chain or otherwise.
NONDOMESTIC ANIMAL — Any type or species of animal or fowl other
than:
§ 64-24. Exemptions.
Section 64-25 does not apply to persons engaged in commercial breeding
or animal husbandry and who are otherwise subject to the performance
standards contained within Section 701 of the City of Saco Zoning
Ordinance nor to persons keeping nondomestic animals within that person's
dwelling unit as a family pet.
§ 64-25. Prohibited acts.
No person having charge of a nondomestic animal may permit such animal
to go at large in any street or public place or upon any private place or
upon any private property after being notified by the owner of such private
property to keep such animal off.
§ 64-26. Violations and penalties; nuisance.
A. Dogs.
B. Cats.
C. Birds, such as canaries or parakeets, which are kept indoors.
A. Any person who violates § 64-25 commits a civil violation for which a
forfeiture of not less than $50 nor more than $100 may be adjudged.
Each day of violation constitutes a separate violation. Each animal
found in violation constitutes a separate violation.
B. A violation of § 64-25 is declared to be a nuisance and is subject to
appropriate equitable relief, as well as the fine imposed by this section.
§ 64-22 ALARM SYSTEMS § 64-26
57:97
Chapter 69
BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER SKATES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 186. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 211.
§ 64-26 SACO CITY CODE § 64-26
57:98
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 5-1-1995 as Ch. VII, Sec. 7-14, of the 1994 Code; amended
in its entirety 8-4-2008]
§ 69-1. Rules for operation.
A. Due care. Every person operating a bicycle upon a bikeway shall:
(1) Give an audible signal when passing a bicycle rider or a pedestrian
proceeding in the same direction.
(2) Obey all traffic signals and signs.
(3) Follow the rules of the road as established under M.R.S.A. Title
29-A, as amended.
(4) Hands on handlebars shall be required at all times, unless
signaling.
(5) Follow the rules and standards for operation established in
M.R.S.A. Title 29-A, Chapters 19 and Chapter 20 (Bicycle Safety
Education Act), as amended from time to time.
B. Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall ride single file on all
roadways.
C. Riding bicycles on sidewalks. Riding bicycles is permitted on the
sidewalks, unless otherwise prohibited. Whenever riding upon a
sidewalk, every person operating a bicycle upon a sidewalk shall yield
the right-of-way to any pedestrian.
D. Business district. No person shall ride a bicycle, coaster, roller skates,
skateboard, sled, toboggan or any other toy vehicle on the sidewalk in a
business district. A "business district," for the purposes of this article, is
defined as any area containing primarily commercial-type uses, which
generate heavy pedestrian traffic during the business hours. This area
will specifically be those portions of Main Street and Elm Street from
their intersection south to the Biddeford city line and any public way or
sidewalk within 150 feet of this section of Main Street.
E. Trick riding prohibited. No person shall engage in trick riding of a
bicycle upon any public way.
F. Parking. Bicycles parked on streets shall be against the curb in areas
where vehicle parking is permitted. Bicycles parked on sidewalks shall
be for their support or next to buildings or at the curb and in a manner
which affords the least obstruction of pedestrian traffic and maximum
amount of support.
G. Interference with pedestrians prohibited. No person shall ride or propel
a bicycle upon a public street in such a manner as to interfere with any
pedestrian thereon.
§ 69-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 69-1
57:99
§ 69-2. Bicycle equipment.
§ 69-3. Bicycle disposal.
§ 69-4. Violations and penalties.
H. Municipal parking lots. No person shall ride a coaster, roller skates,
skateboard, sled, toboggan or any other toy vehicle in a municipal
parking lot. Bicycles shall not be ridden on the train platform, steps or
rails in the Saco Island municipal lot.
A. Lamps. No person may operate a bicycle upon a bikeway during hours
of darkness without adequate and required lighting devices, including
lamps and reflectors.
B. Brakes. No person may operate a bicycle upon a bikeway without
adequate and required braking equipment.
A. The City Police Department may dispose of used, discarded and/or
abandoned bicycles as permitted under 25 M.R.S.A. § 3503-B, as
amended from time to time.
B. As part of its disposal of bicycles, the Police Department may also
provide bicycles without fees or charge to any municipally run or
established "bike-share" program. The Department may also dispose of
bikes by and through a bike-share program that is run, controlled or
administered on the City's behalf by a separate not-for-profit
corporation.
A. Adults. If a person is an adult, he/she may be issued a citation for court
by the officer. The subject party's bicycle or skateboard may be
impounded and held until the court enters its judgment.
B. Minors. If the person is a minor, the bicycle or skateboard may be
impounded for five days (first offense), 10 days (second offense) or 30
days (any other offense). Any person charged with a violation of this
article may request a hearing with the Chief of Police or, in his or her
absence, the Deputy Chief. Such hearing will be on the next working
day.
C. Safety classes. The Chief of Police may require any person who commits
any bicycle or skateboard offense to attend a special class on bicycle or
skateboard safety.
§ 69-1 SACO CITY CODE § 69-4
57:100
ARTICLE II
In-Line Skating
[Adopted 6-5-1995; amended in its entirety 8-4-2008]
§ 69-5. Applicability of bicycle regulations.
In-line skaters shall abide by the following applicable bicycle regulations as
promulgated in Article I of this chapter: § 69-1A through H.
§ 69-6. Responsibility of skaters.
When in-line skating upon a public way, skaters shall cease all striding
efforts when approaching or being approached by a moving vehicle, bicycle
or pedestrian and remain as close to the edge of the way as possible to allow
for safe passing.
§ 69-7. Responsibility of motorists.
Motorists, when approaching in-line skaters from behind, shall, when
necessary, make their presence known, by use of their audible signaling
device, in such a manner as to avoid startling the skater and pass with due
care.
§ 69-8. Business district.
In-line skating is prohibited on Main Street between the intersection of
Beach Street and the Scarborough line. This ban shall be in effect Monday
through Friday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. and Saturday
between 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon. Sundays and holidays shall be excluded.
§ 69-5 ALARM SYSTEMS § 69-8
57:101
Chapter 71
BLASTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Earth removal — See Ch. 230, Land Use and
Zoning
§ 71-1. Purpose; statutory authority; enforcement.
A. Blasting is an activity essential to the economic viability of Saco.
Unregulated blasting and/or irresponsible blasting may cause undue
damage to the people, property and environment of the City.
B. This chapter establishes specific standards for blasting operations,
notice requirements, instrument monitoring requirements of blasting
operations, a permit process for blasting and other associated
standards and requirements.
C. It is intended to minimize the effects of airblast overpressure, ground
vibration, dust, and noise associated with blasting which may be
detrimental to the enjoyment of life, property and the conduct of
business for those individuals affected.
D. It is also intended to provide standards that will prevent permanent
damage to the geologic, hydrogeologic and wildlife resources and
ecological balance in the region outside the immediate blast area. The
chapter is intended to protect the quality of life and the homes of
residents, neighborhoods, property, groundwater, wildlife resources,
scenic beauty and/or businesses, all lying outside the approved work
area and potentially affected by the blasting.
E. It is intended to be effectively and efficiently administered without
causing undue financial and administrative hardship to blasting
operators.
F. It is intended to provide standards and requirements in conjunction
with the City of Saco Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 230) if earth removal
standards are to be utilized in the mineral extraction process.
Note: See § 230-702, Earth removal.
G. This chapter is enacted pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001, Ordinance
power, as well as the City's Home Rule authority under the Maine
Constitution, and shall be administered by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
§ 69-8 SACO CITY CODE § 71-2
57:102
§ 71-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AIRBLAST — An airborne shock wave resulting from detonation of
explosives. Airblast may be caused by burden movement or the release of
expanding gas into the air. Airblast may or may not be audible.
APPLICANT — The owner or other individual, corporation or other business
entity who or which applies for the legal right to conduct blasting at real
property which it has the legal right to use.
BLAST SITE — The area where explosive material is handled during the
loading of drilled blastholes, including the perimeter formed by the loaded
blastholes and 50 feet in all directions from loaded blastholes [see 38
M.R.S.A. § 490-W(5)].
BLAST SIZE —
BLASTER — An applicant who has been awarded a permit to conduct
blasting.
BLASTING — The use of explosives to break up or otherwise aid in the
extraction or removal of rock or other consolidated material.
BLASTING OPERATIONS — All processes conducted in association with site
or other preparation for blasting, and the detonation of explosives.
DECIBEL — The unit of sound pressure commonly used to measure airblast
from explosives. The decibel scale is logarithmic.
EXPLOSIVES — Any substance, chemical compound or mechanical mixture
that is used for the purpose of producing an explosion to fragment rock
for mining, quarrying, excavation and construction. Initiating devices
(detonators, detonating cords, etc.) are also included under this definition.
EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRY — Any operation engaged in the removal of more
than 20 cubic yards, in a twelve-month period, of topsoil, sand, gravel,
clay, rock, peat or other like material from its natural location and for
transportation off lot within any twelve-month period, except as may be
exempted within the extractive industry performance standards in this
chapter.
FLYROCK — Rock that is propelled through the air or along the ground,
which leaves the secured blast area as a result of the detonation of
explosives.
GROUND VIBRATIONS — Shaking of the ground caused by blasting.
Ground vibrations are to be measured along three principal axes (x, y, z);
A. Small blast: trench blast or under 50 cubic yards of rock removed.
B. Medium blast: removal of 50 to 300 cubic yards of rock material.
C. Large blast: removal of over 300 cubic yards of rock material.
§ 71-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § 71-2
57:103
namely, transverse, vertical, and longitudinal, all of which are subject to the
performance standards herein.
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the earth's surface often between
saturated soil and rock that supplies wells and streams.
HERTZ — A term used, in the case of blasting, to express the frequency of
ground vibrations and airblast. One hertz is one cycle per second.
PARTICLE VELOCITY — A measure of ground vibration in the case of
blasting. Particle velocity describes the velocity at which a particle of
ground vibrates when excited by a seismic wave. It is measured in inches
per second.
QUARRY — The property designated in the application and permit where
rock is excavated in an extractive industry operation.
SECURED BLAST AREA — The area that may be affected by flyrock, dust,
or fumes from an explosion that may cause personal injuries, damages to
property, or losses in the process. The minimum distance for personnel is
500 feet. Safe distances will be determined based on conditions for each
blast by the blasting foreman or designee.
SEISMOGRAPH — An instrument that measures and has the capability
to provide a permanent record of hertz and decibel readings concerning
ground vibrations caused by blasting.
§ 71-3. Blasting permit required; effect on other regulations.
§ 71-4. Permit requirements.
A. No blasting within the City of Saco shall be allowed unless a permit has
been obtained from the Code Enforcement Department, except as
otherwise exempted per this chapter.
B. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to any other applicable
ordinances, regulations and statutes; and where different standards are
contained therein, the more restrictive standards shall apply.
C. This chapter does not replace or negate federal and/or state
requirements pertaining to explosives.
A. Blasting permit required.
(1) The following shall require a permit:
(a) Site plan/subdivisions. If the Planning Board determines that a
project involves or may require blasting, it shall expressly state
and set out in its conditions of approval for such project that
the applicant/developer secure from the Code Enforcement
Officer a proper blasting permit in advanced of blasting, and as
required herein.
(b) General construction. For any specific construction project,
whether reviewed or not reviewed by the Planning Board as
§ 71-2 SACO CITY CODE § 71-4
57:104
part of site plan or subdivision, that is found to need blasting
at any time, the owner/developer, or responsible general
contractor, shall secure a blasting permit, as described herein,
from the Code Enforcement Officer prior to any blasting.
(c) Extractive industry and gravel pits. Any party who operates a
gravel pit or who otherwise engages in extractive industry or
earth removal operations, all as described in the City's Zoning
Ordinance (Chapter 230), shall secure from the Code
Enforcement Officer a blasting permit, as described herein,
prior to any blasting.
(d) All other blasting locations. Any other person or party,
regardless of prior review, and regardless of purposes, that
may need to conduct blasting shall be required to obtain a
blasting permit, as described herein, from the Code
Enforcement Department.
(2) No person or party may conduct any blasting within the boundaries
of the City of Saco without first having obtained review and
approval from the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. Notice required. All proposed blasting activities in Saco shall require
notice of blasting to be given to the Code Enforcement Department, in
writing, at least 10 business days prior to the proposed start of blasting.
This notice is in addition to and not in lieu of the fourteen-day review
notice detailed in Subsection C below. Notice of the blasting shall be
made public in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the area
at least 10 days before such blasting is scheduled to take place.
C. Blasting application information. All applications for permits to conduct
blasting shall contain the following information, referred to as the
"blast plan." All blast plan applications shall be submitted at least 14
calendar days prior to the proposed start of any drilling or blasting
operation:
(1) Applicant: the applicant's name, address, daytime telephone
number, fax number, and e-mail address.
(2) Owner's name, address, daytime telephone number, fax number,
and e-mail address.
(3) Blasting contractor: the blasting contractor's name, address,
daytime telephone number, fax number, and e-mail address (if other
than the blaster). Contractor shall submit written evidence of
license(s) held, experience and qualifications of the individual who
will be responsible for loading and firing each shot.
(4) General contractor: the general contractor's name, address,
daytime telephone number, fax number, and e-mail address.
§ 71-4 ALARM SYSTEMS § 71-4
57:105
(5) Work site: the street address and Tax Assessor's map and lot
number for the proposed blasting activity. If the blast plan is for a
property shown on a plan reviewed by the Planning Board, the blast
area for which the permit is requested shall be included on the
plan.
(6) Information about the blast plan to include the following:
(a) Purpose of blast: a brief description of the work for which the
blasting activity is requested.
(b) Volume of material: the estimated number of cubic yards
(measured in place) of material to be loosened or fragmented
by blasting.
(c) Number of blasts: the estimated number of blasts required to
loosen or fragment the specified amount of material.
(d) Blast period: the planned starting and ending dates of the
blasting activity.
(e) Site diagram: a sketch or diagram showing the property where
blasting will be conducted, including: the location of adjacent
structures and distance to those structures; description and
location of blasting signs.
(f) Description of test blast drill pattern.
(g) Explosives to be used during both wet and dry conditions.
(h) Description of matting that will be used to prevent flyrock.
(i) Type, number, and planned locations of seismograph, and any
other instrumentation proposed for use to monitor vibrations
and airblast overpressures.
(j) Description of proposed transport and storage of explosives.
(k) Description of safety procedures, security measures, and
warning procedures to be employed before, during and after
the blast period.
(l) Signature of blasting contractor testifying to the accuracy of
the blast plan.
D. Insurance. Prior to commencing blasting operations, evidence of
liability insurance shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Office in
a minimum amount of $1,000,000 combined single limit per
occurrence.
E. Public hearing. A public hearing is not required prior to the issuance of
a blasting permit by the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 71-4 SACO CITY CODE § 71-4
57:106
F. Fees. Fees for blasting permits shall be as determined, and amended
from time to time, by City Council order.
G. Permit duration.
(1) Permits shall be valid for a period of 90 days. No blasting after 90
days shall occur except as permitted herein.
(2) Lapse and extension. Any party that does not complete its blasting
within the ninety-day time period may apply to the Code
Enforcement Officer for a reasonable extension, not to exceed 60
days. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have full discretion as to
the length and condition of any extension. If the ninety-day period
lapses prior to a request for extension, the Code Enforcement
Officer may require that the party reapply for a new blasting
permit.
(3) Reserved.
H. Notice and pre-blast survey.
(1) The following notification and pre-blast survey requirements shall
be required for all blasting permits prior to commencing blasting:
Small blast
(feet)
Medium blast
(feet)
Large blast
(feet)
Notice required 500 700 900
Pre-blast
survey to be
offered
100 300 500
(2) The blasting contractor will hire an independent qualified
seismologist, blasting consultant or engineer to perform pre-blast
surveys on all structures in the areas outlined in Subsection H(1)
above, contingent upon property owner agreement. The
independent seismologist or blasting consultant shall not be an
employee of the contractor, subcontractor, explosives
manufacturer, or explosives distributor.
(3) Pre-blast survey offer notice: Prior to commencement of the preblast
surveys, the blasting contractor shall provide the following
documentation to the Code Enforcement Department:
(a) A list of property owners to be contacted (in accordance with
the distances listed in the table, above).
(b) Verification that the subject property owners were notified of
the pre-blast survey work.
(c) A copy of the pre-blast survey offer notice.
§ 71-4 ALARM SYSTEMS § 71-4
57:107
§ 71-5. Performance standards.
All blasters shall comply with the following performance standards:
(d) Whether each offer to conduct a pre-blast survey was either
accepted, rejected, or there was no response. The contractor
shall retain a copy of each pre-blast survey offer notice for
their records until the development project receives a final
certificate of occupancy or is otherwise deemed complete by
the City. Nothing herein shall be construed to discourage
repeated efforts by the blasting contractor to contact eligible
property owners via phone, hand delivery, or other method in
addition to provision of the required offer notice letter.
(4) Pre-blast survey documentation. All pre-blast surveys shall include
documentation of interior subgrade and above-grade accessible
unobscured walls, ceilings, floors, roof and visible exterior as
viewed from the grade level. Where significant cracks or damage
exist, or for more complex structural defects, photographs or video
shall be taken. A high-quality digital video or videotape survey with
appropriate audio description of the locations, conditions, and
defects may substitute for a written pre-blast survey. Where
necessary, notes and sketches may also be used as part of a video
pre-blast survey in order to highlight or elaborate on certain
aspects of the video documentation.
(5) Pre-blast survey conditions report. All pre-blast surveys shall
include an existing conditions report for each property. The
conditions report may be presented as narrative, photographs,
video or a combination thereof. Conditions reports shall summarize
the condition of each building and define areas of concern,
including deteriorated structures or utilities, structures housing
sensitive equipment, and/or manufacturing processes that are
sensitive to vibrations.
(6) Verification that all pre-blast surveys and conditions reports have
been completed shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement
Department at least two weeks prior to commencing any drilling
and/or blasting operations.
A. Hours of detonation.
(1) Earth removal operation. As stipulated by the Planning Board in
conjunction with § 230-702.
(2) All other blasting. Hours of detonation are limited to between
sunrise and sunset but no earlier than 8:00 a.m. and no later than
8:00 p.m., Monday through Friday inclusive.
(3) Emergency situations. Blasting of any type may occur at any time in
situations deemed to be emergencies by the Code Enforcement
Department, after consultation with other City staff as may be
§ 71-4 SACO CITY CODE § 71-5
57:108
determined to be necessary by Code Enforcement personnel.
Emergency situations may include, but are not limited to, blasting
to install utilities damaged by weather events or blasting to correct
a misfire of explosives in an otherwise permitted blast event.
B. Water quality protection. Water is a precious resource and the applicant
must take measures to assure that the quality of the groundwater is
protected. Prior to the initial blast, the applicant must conduct water
quality tests on all non-applicant-owned wells within distances outlined
in § 71-4H above. Water quality testing must also be done post-blast if
requested by the property owner because of evidence of a substantive
change in water quality. Turbidity in wells tested shall be no greater
than that which existed prior to the blasting as established in the preblast
survey.
C. Ground vibration.
(1) Peak particle velocity. Peak particle velocity limits (inches per
second) not to be exceeded at any time, and in any one of the three
principal directions at a structure location:
(a) Production quarry.
Distance from Blast
(feet)
Maximum Peak Particle
Velocity
(inches/second)
Less than 300 1.25
300 to less than 500 0.94
500 to less than 5,000 0.75
5,000 or more 0.54
(b) Other.
[1] Up to 30 hertz: 0.5 inch per second.
[2] Thirty to 40 hertz: 1.0 inch per second.
[3] More than 40 hertz: 2.0 inches per second.
(2) Measurement. Ground vibration shall be measured as particle
velocity. Particle velocity shall be recorded in three mutually
perpendicular directions (x, y, z). The maximum allowable peak
particle velocity shall apply to each of the three measurements.
(3) Seismographic record. A seismographic record for all blasts shall
be retained by the applicant and provided to the Code Enforcement
Department or the Planning Board, if requested. The applicant is
responsible for such record and for providing proper
instrumentation as specified in this chapter. Personnel conducting
such monitoring shall be properly trained in the operation of the
equipment being used.
§ 71-5 ALARM SYSTEMS § 71-5
57:109
§ 71-6. Notices.
§ 71-7. Inspection, monitoring, and recordkeeping.
D. Airblast overpressure. Level not to be exceeded at any time: 133 peak
dB (linear) two hertz high-pass system.
E. Instrumentation. All seismographs used for compliance with this
chapter shall meet the following minimum specifications:
(1) Seismic frequency range: two Hz to 200 Hz (±three± Hz).
(2) Acoustic frequency range: two Hz to 200 Hz (±one± dB).
(3) Velocity range: 0.02 inch to 4.0 inches per second.
(4) Sound range: 110 dB to 140 dB linear.
(5) Transducers: three mutually perpendicular axes.
(6) Recording: provide time-history of waveform.
(7) Calibration: laboratory-calibrated as often as necessary, but at least
once every 12 months or according to manufacturer's
recommendations, whichever is less.
(8) Measurements. The requirements established herein shall be
measured at the closest building(s) on abutting properties as
determined by the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board.
F. Other permits. The applicant must also comply with all standards and
conditions contained in other permits issued for such projects and local,
state and federal statutes and regulations.
A. Required notification of blasting. The following notice requirements for
any blast requiring a blasting permit shall be adhered to by the blaster.
(1) Initial notice. The following initial notice of blasting shall be
required:
(a) Notice to abutters/all blasting. The blaster must send by firstclass
mail an advisory notice to all property owners within the
distances outlined in § 71-4H(1) of the secured blasting area.
Notification shall be mailed no later than five calendar days
prior to the initiation of blasting. A certificate of mailing shall
be submitted to the Code Enforcement Department as
verification that said mailings were done. Said notice must
include the description of the blasting signals to be utilized
during the operation. The blaster of either an earth removal
operation or other project must provide notice to a property
owner who has made a written request to the blaster.
A. Entry and testing. The Code Enforcement Officer or his authorized
representative may enter the secured blasting area or adjacent area to
§ 71-5 SACO CITY CODE § 71-7
57:110
§ 71-8. Compliance schedule.
§ 71-9. Exceptions for undue hardship.
conduct tests and observe any authorized blasting operations and may
order that additional ground vibration and airblast overpressure
measurements using approved instrumentation be made by persons
responsible for blasting operations to ensure that the limits specified in
this chapter are not exceeded, if excess readings are indicated.
B. Additional monitoring. The blaster shall maintain a record of each blast.
All records shall be retained at least three years following cessation of
the blasting operation, and shall be available for inspection by the Code
Enforcement Officer and shall contain the following minimum data for
traceability purposes:
(1) Name and contact information of responsible party: the name and
contact information of the person(s) responsible for the blasting
operation.
(2) Location, date, time, number and pattern/spacing of blast holes,
total charge weight, charge weight per delay, date and time of each
blast.
(3) Blaster: the name(s) of blaster in charge.
(4) Weather: the weather conditions (including such factors as wind
direction, cloud cover, etc.).
(5) Data: seismograph and airblast readings, including date, time, and
location of instrument.
(6) Notice: name, addresses, date and time of all persons who were
notified prior to every blast.
A. Applicability. Upon adoption of this chapter, all existing and new
blasting operations are subject to the terms herein, and must obtain a
permit to conduct any further blasting.
B. Review. A complete review of all activities under this chapter shall be
undertaken by the Code Enforcement Department 12 months after
adoption of this chapter to determine if the levels are adequate and
reasonable to achieve the purpose for which this chapter is intended.
The results of this review shall be reported to the City Administrator,
which will report to the City Council with recommendations of the
review.
A. Application. Applications for a permit for exception from the
performance standards designated in this chapter may, on the basis of
hardship, be made to the Code Enforcement Department with notice to
the Mayor and City Council prior to blasting. Blasting shall not proceed
until 24 hours has elapsed from the time notice was given to the Mayor
§ 71-7 ALARM SYSTEMS § 71-9
57:111
§ 71-10. Violations and penalties.
§ 71-11. Conflict.
Blasting in Saco shall be conducted in compliance with all pertinent section
of the City Code of Ordinances, and, except as superseded by the provision
of this article, the NFPA 1 Fire Prevention Code, and NFPA 495 Explosive
Materials Code as adopted by the State of Maine. In any particular instance
where these regulations are in conflict with any other rules, regulations
or ordinances of the City, the more restrictive regulation or provision shall
prevail.
§ 71-12. Appeal of denial of a blasting permit.
If the Code Enforcement Department has denied a blasting permit under
this article, the applicant may appeal the denial to the Zoning Board of
Appeals within 30 days of the decision by filing a written notice of appeal.
Chapter 73
and City Council. Any permit granted hereunder shall contain all
conditions upon which said permit has been granted and shall specify a
reasonable time that the permit shall be effective.
B. Standards. The Code Enforcement Officer may grant the exception as
applied for only if:
(1) Limited in scope: the activity or operation will be of a temporary
duration, i.e., a limited number of blasts at a specific site, and
cannot be done in a manner that would comply with this chapter;
(2) Reasonable alternative: no other reasonable alternative is available
to the applicants; and
(3) Safety: the applicants represent, and the Code Enforcement Officer
finds, that blasting as permitted will not violate recognized safety
standards.
C. Conditions. Upon the issuance of any exception permit, the Code
Enforcement Officer may limit the scope of the exception and prescribe
any reasonable conditions or requirements he deems necessary to
minimize adverse effects.
A. Penalties. The submission of false information required by this chapter,
or the violation of this chapter or the violation of any condition attached
to a permit granted under this chapter shall constitute a land use
violation for which an enforcement action may be commenced by the
City in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
B. Reporting. A copy of the violation report and consent agreement
reached between the City and the person or entity found in violation of
any portion of this chapter will be filed in the permit or license file.
§ 71-9 SACO CITY CODE § 71-12
57:112
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electrical standards — See Ch. 87.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 102.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 106.
Mobile homes — See Ch. 143.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 163.
Sewers — See Ch. 176.
§ 73-1. Title. [Amended 1-18-2000; 1-9-2012]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Building and Energy
Code."
§ 73-2. Administration and enforcement of Maine Uniform Building
and Energy Code. [Amended 1-18-2000; 5-3-2004; 1-9-2012]
Effective December 1, 2010, the City of Saco applies and enforces the
Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code ("M.U.B.E.C."), as required by 10
M.R.S.A. § 9724.
§ 73-3. Building permit required. [Added 1-9-2012]
All construction activity as regulated by the Maine Uniform Building and
Energy Code must first obtain a building permit from the City of Saco
before construction commences. The following activities shall be exempt
from these requirements:
A. Fences.
B. Sidewalks and driveways.
C. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar
finish work.
D. Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches in depth.
E. Swings and other playground equipment.
F. Window awnings supported by the exterior wall which do not project
more than 54 inches from the exterior wall and do not require an
additional support. This exemption does not include awnings used as
signs.26
26.Editor's Note: Former § 73-3.1, Adoption of International Building Code by reference;
amendments to standards, as amended, and § 73-3.2, Adoption of International Existing
Building Code by reference; amendments to standards, added 5-3-2004, which
immediately and respectively followed this section, were repealed 1-9-2012.
§ 71-12 ALARM SYSTEMS § 73-4
57:113
§ 73-4. Supervising official. [Amended 1-9-2012]
The Building Inspector of the City of Saco shall serve as the building
official as defined in 25 M.R.S.A. § 2371 and shall be responsible for issuing
building permits and certificates of occupancy. The Building Inspector shall
be responsible for inspecting all permitted construction for compliance with
all components of M.U.B.E.C., as such components may be revised from
time to time by the Technical Building Codes and Standards Advisory Board.
§ 73-5. Appeals.
§ 73-6. Violations and penalties.
The following provisions shall apply to violations of the laws and ordinances
set forth in this chapter, and all monetary penalties shall be civil penalties.
A. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Building Inspector with
regard to the enforcement of the Building and Energy Code may take
appeal to the Mayor and City Council. [Amended 1-9-2012]
B. An appeal may be taken within 30 days from the date of the decision
appealed by filing with the City Council, through its Clerk, a notice of
appeal specifying the grounds thereof, except that in the case of a
building or structure which, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, is
unsafe, dangerous and a threat to life safety, the Building Inspector
may, in his/her order, limit the time for such an appeal to seven days.
The Building Inspector shall forthwith transmit to the Mayor and City
Council all the papers upon which the action appealed from was taken.
A. The minimum penalty for starting construction or undertaking a land
use activity without a required permit shall be $100 and the maximum
penalty shall be $2,500.
B. The minimum penalty for a specific violation shall be $100 and the
maximum penalty shall be $2,500.
C. The violator may be ordered to correct or abate the violations. Where
the court finds that the violation was willful, the violator shall be
ordered to correct or abate the violation, unless the abatement or
correction will:
(1) Result in a threat or hazard to public health or safety;
(2) Result in substantial environmental damage; or
(3) Result in substantial injustice.
D. If the municipality is the prevailing party, it shall be awarded
reasonable attorney fees, expert witness fees and costs, unless the
court finds that special circumstances make the award of these fees and
costs unjust. If the defendant is the prevailing party, he/she may be
awarded reasonable attorney fees, expert witness fees and costs, as
provided by court rule.
§ 73-4 SACO CITY CODE § 73-6
57:114
§ 73-7. Schedule of Construction Fees.27 [Amended 10-16-2000]
Fees shall be determined by Council after a public hearing.
E. The maximum penalty may exceed $2,500 but shall not exceed $25,000
when it can be shown that there has been a previous conviction of the
same party, within the past two years, of the same law or ordinance.
F. All proceedings arising under the provisions of locally administered
laws and ordinances shall be brought in the name of the City of Saco,
and fines shall be paid to the City of Saco.
A. The minimum fee shall be established by the City Council after a public
hearing.
B. Dwellings.
(1) New buildings. Any building or structure or portion thereof
designed or used exclusively for residential purposes, including
additions, modular homes and mobile homes.
(2) Foundations for residences (full or partial).
(3) Residential alterations (up to $5,000).
(4) Residential alterations (each $1,000 or portion thereof above
$5,000).
C. Sheds up to 180 square feet (over 180 square feet considered a garage).
D. Commercial buildings, including multifamily residential (three or more
units), including additions but not alterations.
E. Foundations for commercial structures (full or part).
F. Commercial alterations (up to $5,000).
G. Commercial alterations (each $1,000 or portion thereof above $5,000).
H. Mobile signs, siding, chimneys and swimming pools (aboveground
sidewall of 30 inches or more or capacity of 1,200 gallons).
I. Permanent signs (freestanding, parallel or projecting).
J. In-ground swimming pools.
K. Garages (space is 10 feet by 20 feet or fraction thereof rounded
downward, i.e., 24 x 24 = 576 square feet ÷ 200 = 2.88 or 2).
L. Decks per square foot.
M. Moving a building.
27.Editor's Note: Copies of the current fee schedule are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 73-6 ALARM SYSTEMS § 73-7
57:115
Chapter 74
(RESERVED)
Chapter 78
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 78-1. Grant of franchise. [Amended 7-20-2015]
N. Commercial parking lots (space is nine feet by 18 feet).
O. Propane tank placement of 250 gallons or more.
P. Underground fuel storage tanks (500 gallons or more).
Q. Removal of underground fuel storage tanks (500 gallons or more).
R. Aboveground fuel storage tanks.
S. Occupancy permits (change in use).
T. Occupancy permits (when used in conjunction with new construction).
U. Removal of stop-work order.
V. Reinspection fee.
W. Zoning information, letter form.
X. Mobile home park annual fee.
Y. Demolition.
Z. Plumbing permits.
(1) Per fixture, no maximum.
(2) Reinspection fee, including septic system reinspections.
A. The City Council may contract, on such terms and conditions as are in
the best interests of the city, including the grant of a non-exclusive
franchise(s) for a period not to exceed 10 years, for the placing and
maintenance Cable System and appurtenances or parts thereof along
public ways, including contracts with operators of such systems which
receive the services of television signal transmission offered by any
public utilities using public ways for such transmission and subject to
the City cable television franchising process including, but not being
limited to, procedures mandated by the Maine Revised Statutes
Annotated, Title 30-A, Part 2, Subpart 4, Chapter 141, § 3008,
Subdivision 4A, as follows:
§ 73-7 SACO CITY CODE § 78-1
57:116
Chapter 80
CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 149. Victualers’ licenses — See Ch. 219.
§ 80-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the issuance of special
amusement permits for carnivals and circuses.
§ 80-2. License required; application; hearing.
(1) The holding of a public proceeding to ascertain special local needs
or interests before issuing a cable television franchise(s), and such
proceeding shall include a period for public comment on the needs
to be addressed in the franchising process and in a request for
proposals if any;
(2) The filing of franchise applications and related documents as public
records, with reasonable notice to the public that the records are
open to inspection during reasonable hours;
(3) A reasonable opportunity for public input before granting
franchises; and
(4) Subject to the limitations of federal law, the assessment of
reasonable fees or other lawful appropriation of funds to defray the
costs of public notice, advertising and other expenses incurred by
the municipality in acting upon applications.
B. Further to the implementation of cable television franchising, the City
Council, in its capacity as cable television franchise franchising
authority, shall have any and all rights and powers set forth in or
available pursuant to applicable federal, state and local law, including
but not limited to the federal Cable Communications Act of 1984 as
codified at 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq.
A. The City Council may grant licenses for exhibitions or performances of
traveling amusement shows or circuses upon payment of the required
fees by the person owning or operating such circus or show. The fee of
such license will be set from time to time and a schedule of such fee is
on file in the City Clerk’s office.
B. Application for such license shall be made to the City Clerk, and notice
of such application shall be published in a newspaper published in the
City at least seven days prior to a hearing on such application by the
Council. The applicant shall prepay for the cost of such notice.
§ 78-1 CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES § 80-3
80:117
§ 80-3. Location.
A license provided by this chapter shall be granted, by the City Council,
only for locations where the performance will not interfere with or obstruct
traffic on main highways.
§ 80-4. Proximity to built-up sections.
Circuses or traveling amusement shows shall be located at least 1,000 feet
from a compact or built-up section of residences. The Council may make
exceptions to the setback if the Council makes one of the following findings
that:
§ 80-5. Hours of operation.
The Council will determine the hours of operation at the time of approval.
§ 80-6. Sound.
Reasonable precautions will be taken to ensure that the sounds of the
performance will not carry unreasonably beyond the boundaries of the area
and will comply with the Standards of Article 8, § 801, Noise, of the Saco
Zoning Ordinance.
§ 80-7. Cleanup of grounds; performance guarantee.
§ 80-8. Establishment of fee.
A fee shall be established after a public hearing.
Chapter 81
A. Neighborhood is not disturbed by the event;
B. Duration and intensity of the event is not significant;
C. Owners of the site and the preponderance of the residences in the area
approve the request.
A. The person owning, operating or sponsoring a circus or show shall file a
performance guarantee with the City Clerk with the condition that the
grounds are to be properly cleaned and any damages properly repaired
to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director within 24 hours after the
circus or show closes.
B. A performance guarantee of $2,500 cash deposit shall be provided to
the City by the applicant. A performance bond is not acceptable. The
guarantee may be used by the City to perform the cleanup and repair
damage outlined under § 80-7A, if the applicant does not perform it.
Any funds not used for the purpose outlined under § 80-7A will be
returned within 45 days.
§ 80-3 SACO CITY CODE § 80-8
81:118
CITY PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 186.
§ 80-8 CITY PROPERTY § 80-8
81:119

ARTICLE I
Sale of City-Owned Real Property
[Adopted 11-18-1996]
§ 81-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY-OWNED PROPERTY — Includes land or buildings in which the City
possesses the fee interest, including any land or buildings which the City
legally acquires by foreclosure of tax or sewer liens.
§ 81-2. Procedure.
A. Initiation. All requests for the City to consider selling any City-owned
property, whether initiated by any City official or by a member of the
general public, shall be submitted to the City Administrator in writing
and shall specify the parcel by reference to its Tax Map and lot number.
If from the general public, the application shall include the name, postal
address and telephone number of the applicant and shall state the
purpose for which the land is proposed to be used (if the applicant is a
prospective purchaser).
B. Evaluation. The City Administrator shall refer such requests to the
Planning Board for evaluation and a report to the City Council.
(1) All City-owned property shall be evaluated with regard to its
present or potential usefulness to the City for streets, sewers and
drains, for public buildings, for economic development purposes,
for parks and natural areas or for other municipal and community
uses. Factors to be examined shall include land area, overall shape,
minimum dimensions, soil characteristics, slope, drainage,
potential for flooding, the presence of wetlands, its potential for
correcting neighborhood problems such as failing septic systems,
road frontage, character of surrounding properties, economic
development possibility, whether it is contiguous to other City land,
future usefulness to the overall traffic circulation needs of the City
and other features, as well as whether any easements should be
retained across the property if it is to be sold.
(2) The Planning Board shall seek written comments on each parcel by
the City Administrator, City Planner, Treatment Plant
Superintendent, Code Enforcement Officer, Assessor, Finance
Director, Public Works Director, Parks and Recreation Director, City
Solicitor, Economic Development Director, the Conservation
Commission and, if the property has commercial potential, the
Economic Development Commission.
§ 81-1 CITY PROPERTY § 81-2
81:121
(3) The Planning Board shall integrate all of the comments submitted
by the above-named City officials and shall prepare a written report
to the Mayor and Council with its own recommendations.
(4) The Council shall review the report submitted by the Planning
Board and any recommendation by the City Administrator and, at
that point, may decide to retain the property. If the Council decides
to retain a property, it may wish to consult with the City Attorney
about title. If the Council has an interest in selling a City-owned
property, it shall conduct a public hearing on the request to sell
before any decision is taken to sell City-owned property. Written
notification of the hearing shall be mailed, at least 10 days in
advance, to all property owners within 200 feet of the perimeter of
the subject parcel, and an advertisement shall be placed in a
newspaper of general circulation at least seven days before the
hearing.
C. Decision and offer for sale. If the Council decides to offer any Cityowned
property for sale, after following the above procedures the
Council shall determine the method of sale, whether by sealed bid,
sealed request for proposals, auction, by negotiation with the previous
owner or by contract with a real estate broker at predetermined prices
for such real estate and real estate interests. The City Council may
make a determination that City-owned business and industrial property
shall be sold by alternative means, such as by contract with a
commercial real estate broker, negotiated sale or the procedure
outlined for industrial park sales in Chapter 4, Administrative Code,
§ 4-35F(6). Regardless of the method of sale, notice shall be sent to all
abutters. [Amended 1-6-2003]
(1) In evaluating the proposals to purchase, regardless of the method
of sale, the City Council may consider factors such as annual
property tax generation, job creation, economic benefit, price,
environmental benefit or detriment, proposed land use, community
need or neighborhood benefits when awarding the sale. The
Council may set any reasonable conditions on future use of the
land, through deed restrictions, to ensure that the property will be
used in the best interests of the City.
(2) The City Council may also contribute City-owned property for
nonprofit community use or for economic development projects.
D. Proceeds. Proceeds from the sale of tax-acquired properties shall be
applied to the balance of the unpaid taxes and sewer user fees, interest
and lien fees for the property. Any additional funds received will be
deposited as directed by the Council. For properties not acquired
through foreclosure, the proceeds shall be directed to a capital project
account, the Economic Development Fund or the general fund, as
directed by the Council.
§ 81-2 SACO CITY CODE § 81-2
81:122
Chapter 82
CONSUMER FIREWORKS
§ 82-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to assure the comfort, convenience, safety,
health and welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Saco, to protect and
conserve its environment and resources by regulating the use and sale of
consumer fireworks.
§ 82-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following term shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in this section:
CONSUMER FIREWORKS —
§ 82-3. Prohibition.
No person shall use, possess with the intent to use, sell, possess with the
intent to sell or offer for sale consumer fireworks in the City of Saco;
provided, however, that this chapter does not apply to a person issued a
fireworks display permit by the City and/or State of Maine pursuant to 8
M.R.S.A. § 227-A, as may be amended from time to time.
§ 82-4. Violations and penalties.
The same meaning as the term set forth in 27 CFR 555.11, as may
be amended from time to time, but includes only products that are
tested and certified by a third party testing laboratory as conforming
with United States Consumer Product Safety Commission standards, in
accordance with 15 U.S.C. Chapter 47.
A.
Does not include the following products:
(1) Missile-type rockets, as defined by the State Fire Marshal by rule;
Helicopters and aerial spinners, as defined by the State Fire
Marshal by rule; and
(2)
Sky rockets and bottle rockets. For purposes of this subsection,
"sky rockets and bottle rockets" means cylindrical tubes containing
not more than 20 grams of chemical composition, as defined by
the State Fire Marshal by rule, with a wooden stick attached for
guidance and stability that rise into the air upon ignition and that
may produce a burst of color or sound at or near the height of
flight.
(3)
B.
A. Any person who uses consumer fireworks or possesses consumer
fireworks with the intent to use them in the City shall be punished by a
fine of not less than $200 and not more than $400 per violation plus
§ 81-2 CITY PROPERTY § 82-4
81:123
§ 82-5. Seizure and disposal.
The City may seize consumer fireworks that the City has probable cause to
believe are used, possessed or sold in violation of this chapter or in violation
of state law and shall forfeit the seized consumer fireworks to the State of
Maine for disposal.
Chapter 83
COST RECOVERY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 73.
§ 83-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words have the following meanings
unless the context indicates otherwise:
DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS — Any application seeking a change in the
use of developed or undeveloped land for residential, industrial or
commercial purposes, which application requires review, under any state or
municipal law, ordinance or regulation, by a reviewing agency, including:
attorney fees and costs. For second and subsequent offenses, a fine of
not less than $300 and not more than $600 per violation plus attorney
fees and costs shall be imposed.
B. Any person who sells consumer fireworks or possesses consumer
fireworks with the intent to sell them in the City shall be punished by a
fine of not less than $500 plus attorney fees and costs. For second and
subsequent offenses, a fine of not less than $1,000 per violation plus
attorney fees and costs shall be imposed.
C. Any person or party who authorizes, permits or does not take action to
prevent the property he/she/it owns, leasees or controls to be used for
the use or display of consumer fireworks shall be punished by a fine of
not less than $200 and not more than $400 plus attorney fees and costs.
For second and subsequent offenses, a fine of not less than $400 and
not more than $600 per violation plus attorney fees and costs shall be
imposed. [Added 10-21-2013]
A. Application for subdivision.
B. Application for conditional use.
C. Application for minor conditional use.
D. Application for site review.
§ 82-4 SACO CITY CODE § 83-1
83:124
RELATED EXPENSES — The costs to the City for staff review time,
including payroll and fringe benefit costs, copying charges, legal costs,
advertising and postage costs, and other costs incurred by the City as
a result of the review of development proposals and as a result of
administering this chapter.
REVIEWING AGENCY — A municipal board, commission or agency required
to consider and act on any developmental proposal and could include City
Council, the Planning Board, the Board of Appeals, the Code Enforcement
Officer, City Planner, and the Conservation Commission or any of them,
depending upon the type of application and requirements of state and local
law. For purposes of inspections, “reviewing agency” shall also include
inspectors designated by the City, including the staff of the Public Works,
Sewage Treatment, Planning, Code Enforcement Departments, or
contracted engineer, or their designees.
STAFF — Includes, but is not limited to, any employee or official of the
City and any independent contractor required to be retained for review
purposes.
§ 83-2. Purpose and applicability.
E. Application for minor site plan.
F. Application for variance.
G. Application for street acceptance.
H. Petition for Zoning Map amendment.
I. Petition for Zoning text amendment.
J. Petition for contract zoning.
K. Application for flood hazard building permit.
Inspection of subdivision, site plan, conditional use, or shoreland zoning
improvements.
L.
M. Application for shoreland zoning permit.
Application to the Board of Zoning Appeals for an administrative
appeal, including the appeal of a Planning Board decision on a
conditional use application.
N.
Applications to the Planning Board for site location permits under the
site location of Development Act.
O.
P. Application for planned development.
Q. Application for amendment of approved plan.
A. It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to equitably transfer the
related expenses of reviewing development proposals to the applicant,
whenever possible, in order to limit the impact on general tax revenues.
§ 83-1 COST RECOVERY § 83-2
83:125
§ 83-3. Fee for related expenses.
Fee to be adopted by the City Council after a public hearing.
§ 83-4. Project account.
§ 83-5. Staff review; accounting.
B. Fees shall be determined by the Council after a public hearing.
C. Applications initiated by City officials, boards, agencies or commissions
are exempt from the scope of this chapter. Exempt applicants, however,
shall pay for the cost of any engineering or legal review required by the
reviewing agency when those reviews are performed by contracted
firms rather than City employees.
A. At the time that the deposit imposed by this chapter is paid, an account
shall be established by the appropriate staff person. The deposit shall
be credited to such account, and the account shall be maintained
throughout the entire review process.
B. The account will be monitored on a periodic basis. If the account
balance is reduced to 25% of the initial deposit, a supplemental deposit
is due, which must be paid before any processing continues. An
applicant will be notified by appropriate staff when the balance of an
initial deposit is reduced to 25%. The applicant must pay the
supplemental deposit within 10 working days after the notice is mailed,
or review of the project will be discontinued.
C. The amount of the supplemental deposit is set at 50% of the initial
deposit, except that the appropriate staff person may set the deposit up
to 100% of the original fee if substantial additional charges are
anticipated. Several supplemental deposits may be necessary,
depending upon the complexity of an individual proposal. When all
charges have been made, and the applicant has paid all charges and
deficits, the project account shall be closed, and any remaining balance
shall be returned to the applicant. No land use permits of any kind shall
be issued, no signed subdivision plans shall be released or recorded,
and no building permits shall be issued for any project that’s permit fee
is governed by this chapter, unless all charges due under this chapter
have been paid.
A. Except for initial screening of an application to determine that all
required types of information are being submitted, no review of any
kind by any staff member may be undertaken for any development
proposal until the deposit, established in Appendix A,28 has been paid.
B. The appropriate reviewing agency, with the advice of staff, may
determine that review by non-City staff is required to address particular
28.Editor’s Note: Said appendix is on file in the City’s office.
§ 83-2 SACO CITY CODE § 83-5
83:126
Chapter 87
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 73.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 102.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 106.
Mobile homes — See Ch. 143.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 163.
§ 87-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Electrical Code."29
§ 87-2. Adoption of standards by reference. [Amended 8-4-2008;
3-5-2012]
issues. The applicant will be notified of the estimated costs of the
additional review by an outside contractor before that review is
undertaken. Such outside review does not include review by the City's
contract engineer, who is considered part of the City staff for purposes
of this chapter.
C. Staff involved in the review of development proposals or in the
administration of this chapter shall maintain weekly records of their
time expended upon specific applications. Hourly rates shall be
established by the Director of Finance. A debit based upon the time
expended and the applicable hourly rate shall be charged against the
project account, along with any other related expenses.
A. Reference is herewith made to the 2014 Edition of the National
Electrical Code, NFPA 70, as published by the National Fire Protection
Association, as amended, to become effective May 1, 2015, and said
code is hereby adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this
chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes as found
herein. Statutory authority to adopt this code is granted by 30-A
M.R.S.A., and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4171 and shall cover original
installations, alterations and additions, both residential and commercial
and shall be in effect for the entire City of Saco. At least seven days
prior to the public hearing, the purpose of which is to consider changes
to this chapter, notice shall be given by regular mail, electronic mail or
facsimile to all electricians who have obtained an electrical permit
within the six-month period preceding the public hearing date.
[Amended 4-6-2015]
29.Editor's Note: Former § 87-1.1, Definitions, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 3-5-2012.
§ 83-5 COST RECOVERY § 87-2
83:127
B. Additions, insertions and changes. The following are hereby revised as
follows:
(1) 200.6 Means of Identifying Grounded Conductors.
(D) Grounded Conductors of Different Systems. Where grounded
conductors of different systems are installed in the same
raceway, cable, box, auxiliary gutter, or other type of
enclosure, each grounded conductor shall be identified by
system. Identification that distinguishes each system
grounded conductor shall be permitted by one of the
following means:
(1) One system grounded conductor shall have an outer
covering conforming to 200.6(A) or (B).
(2) The grounded conductor(s) of other systems shall have
a different outer covering conforming to 200.6(A) or (B)
or by an outer covering of white or gray with a readily
distinguishable colored strip other than green running
along the insulation.
(3) Other and different means of identification as allowed
by 200.6(A) or (B) that will distinguish each system
grounded conductor.
The means of identification shall be permanently posted
where the conductors of different systems originate
(2) 210.5 Identification for Branch Circuits. [Amended 4-6-2015]
(C) Identification for Ungrounded Conductors.
(1) Branch Circuits Supplied for More Than One Nominal
Voltage System
(b) Posting of Identification Means. The method utilized
for conductors originating within each branch-circuit
panelboard or similar branch-circuit distribution
equipment shall be permanently posted at each
branch-circuit panelboard or similar branch-circuit
distribution equipment.
(3) 215.12 Identification of Feeders. [Amended 4-6-2015]
(C) Identification of Ungrounded Conductors.
(1) Feeders Supplied from More Than One Nominal Voltage
System.
(b) Posting of Identification Means. The method utilized
for conductors originating within each feeder
panelboard or similar feeder distribution equipment
shall be permanently posted at each feeder
panelboard or similar feeder distribution equipment.
§ 87-2 SACO CITY CODE § 87-2
83:128
§ 87-3. Supervising official.
The Electrical Inspector who must be licensed by the State of Maine as a
Master Electrician is herewith designated as the City official to supervise
and enforce this chapter. The Electrical Inspector will be under the
direction of the Building Inspector, who will act as his/her immediate
supervisor.
(4) 334.10 Uses Permitted.
(3) Other structures permitted to be of Types III, IV and V
construction. [Amended 4-6-2015]
(5) 334.12(A)(2) Uses Not Permitted is deleted and not adopted by the
City of Saco.
(6) 338.12 Uses Not Permitted.
(B) Underground Service-Entrance Cable.
(1) For interior wiring of branch circuits and feeders
originating and terminating within the same building.
(2) For aboveground installations except where USE cable
emerges from the ground and is terminated in an
enclosure at a location acceptable to the authority having
jurisdiction and the cable is protected in accordance with
300.5(D).
(7) 702.4 Capacity and Rating.
(B) System Capacity.
(2) Automatic Transfer Equipment. For other than singlefamily
dwellings, where automatic transfer equipment is
used, an optional standby system shall comply with (2)(a)
or (2)(b)
(8) Smoke and heat detectors. In addition to smoke detectors required
elsewhere in this Code, a smoke or heat detector shall be installed
in any new attached residential garage. Installation, including
wiring and power sources for all smoke and heat detectors shall be
in accordance with the provisions of the 2007 Edition of NFPA
Standard 72, Chapter 11.
(9) Adoption of utility requirements. The authority having jurisdiction
may, at the request of the electrical utility company, enforce the
requirements as found in the Handbook of Standard Requirements
for Electric Service and Meter Installations published by Central
Maine Power, effective January 1, 2009, and as amended.
(10) Removal of old wiring required. All readily accessible cable that is
not properly capped and terminated and labeled for future use shall
be removed.
§ 87-2 COST RECOVERY § 87-4
83:129
§ 87-4. Appeals.
§ 87-5. Violations and penalties.
The following provisions shall apply to violations of the laws and ordinances
set forth in this chapter, and all monetary penalties shall be civil penalties.
A. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Electrical Inspector with
regard to the enforcement of the Electrical Code may take an appeal to
the Mayor and City Council.
B. An appeal may be taken within 30 days from the date of the decision
appealed by filing with the City Council, through its Clerk, a notice of
appeal specifying the grounds thereof, except that in the case of a
building or structure which, in the opinion of the Electrical Inspector, is
unsafe, dangerous and a threat to life safety, the Electrical Inspector
may, in his/her order, limit the time for such an appeal to seven days.
The Electrical Inspector shall forthwith transmit to the Mayor and City
Council all the papers upon which the action appealed from was taken.
A. The minimum penalty for starting construction or undertaking a land
use activity without a required permit shall be $100, and the maximum
penalty shall be $2,500.
B. The minimum penalty for a specific violation shall be $100, and the
maximum penalty shall be $2,500.
C. The violator may be ordered to correct or abate the violations. Where
the court finds that the violation was willful, the violator shall be
ordered to correct or abate the violation, unless the abatement or
correction will:
(1) Result in a threat or hazard to public health or safety;
(2) Result in substantial environmental damage; or
(3) Result in substantial injustice.
D. If the City of Saco is the prevailing party, it shall be awarded reasonable
attorney fees, expert witness fees and costs, unless the court finds that
special circumstances make the award of these fees and costs unjust. If
the defendant is the prevailing party, the defendant may be awarded
reasonable attorney fees, expert witness fees and costs, as provided by
court rule.
E. The maximum penalty may exceed $2,500 but shall not exceed $25,000
when it can be shown that there has been a previous conviction of the
same party, within the past two years, of the same law or ordinance.
F. All proceedings arising under the provisions of locally administered
laws and ordinances shall be brought in the name of the City of Saco,
and fines shall be paid to the City of Saco.
§ 87-4 SACO CITY CODE § 87-6
83:130
§ 87-6. Electrical permits and fee schedule. [Amended 8-4-2008;
3-5-2012; 4-6-2015]
Electrical permits shall be administered as provided for in Informative
Annex H, Section 80.19(A) through (C) and (E) through (H) of the 2014
National Electric Code. The City Council shall determine fees after a public
hearing.
Chapter 90
EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 57. Ambulance service — See Ch. 60.
§ 90-1. Purpose; access number.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide the citizens of Saco with direct
telephone access to emergency services by utilizing a common access
number for all City emergency agencies. The designated access number
shall be consistent with the national standard emergency number and is
hereby designated as the digits "911." The emergency access number and
any related activity shall hereinafter be referred to as the "911 system."
§ 90-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
911 — A telephone access number used to make contact with emergency
services, specifically the digits activated on a telephone device by
depressing or dialing the digit 9 followed by the digit 1, followed by the digit
1.
911 SYSTEM — The hardware, software, telephone lines and service,
personnel, procedures and other related activity connected with the
operation and maintenance of the emergency access number.
EMERGENCY — A sudden, unexpected occurrence which requires
immediate response and/or action on the part of a City agency.
EMERGENCY SERVICE — Those services maintained by the City which
provide for the protection of life and property. Generally, these services
consist of the Police Department and the Fire Department (to include
Emergency Medical Services).
§ 87-6 COST RECOVERY § 90-3
83:131
§ 90-3. Permitted use of system.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the 911 system shall be used
only as a means of contacting the emergency services of the City of Saco for
the following purposes:
§ 90-4. Prohibited uses.
Any use of the 911 system contrary to the uses defined in § 90-3 is a
violation of this chapter. Specifically, the 911 system is not to be used for
the following purposes:
Chapter 93
ENTERTAINMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult businesses — See Ch. 53. Licenses — See Ch. 132.
A. Reporting any situation which the caller reasonably believes is of an
emergency nature and requires the response of emergency personnel
and equipment.
B. Requesting assistance for himself/herself and/or a third party who is or
has been exposed to a situation which has caused harm, injury, illness,
distress or similar conditions.
C. Reporting or notifying law enforcement personnel of a crime, incident
or action which has happened or is reasonably expected to happen and
which the caller reasonably believes to be a violation of a state, county
or federal law or municipal ordinance.
D. Reporting or notifying Fire Department personnel of a situation which
has occurred or is reasonably likely to occur and which the caller
reasonably believes requires the services of the Fire Department
personnel and/or equipment.
E. Reporting any other situation, occurrence, incident or event which is of
a nature so as to cause a loss of life, destruction of property or injury to
persons or animals.
A. Questions of general information, such as travel directions, weather
conditions, road conditions or school closings.
B. Questions regarding event times or locations.
C. Requests for services which are not of an emergency nature.
§ 90-3 SACO CITY CODE § 93-1
93:132
§ 93-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENTERTAINMENT — Any amusement, performance, exhibition or diversion
for patrons or customers of the licensed premises, whether provided by
professional entertainers or by full-time or part-time employees of the
licensed premises whose incidental duties include activities with an
entertainment value.
EXPOSE or EXPOSED — Unclothed or uncostumed or not covered by a fully
opaque material.
§ 93-2. Permit required; fee; hearing; term.
No licensee for the sale of liquor to be consumed on his licensed premises
shall permit on his licensed premises any music except radio or other
mechanical devices, any dancing or entertainment of any sort unless the
licensee shall have first obtained from the City a special amusement permit.
§ 93-3. Suspension or revocation of permit.
The City Council which has issued a permit may, after a public hearing
preceded by notice to interested parties, suspend or revoke any permits
which it has issued under this chapter, on the grounds that the music,
dancing or entertainment so permitted constitutes a detriment to the public
health, safety or welfare or violates municipal ordinances or rules and
regulations.
§ 93-4. Appeals.
Any licensee who has applied for a permit and has been denied or whose
permit has been revoked or suspended may appeal the decision to the
Municipal Board of Appeals, as defined in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691, within
30 days of the denial, suspension or revocation. The Municipal Board of
A. The fee for a special amusement permit shall be established by the City
Council after a public hearing, plus a fee for advertisement. [Amended
4-7-2003]
B. The City Council shall, prior to granting a permit and after reasonable
notice to the City and applicant, hold a public hearing at which the
testimony of the applicant and that of any interested members of the
public shall be taken. The City Council shall grant a permit, unless it
finds that issuance of the permit would be detrimental to the public
health, safety or welfare or would violate municipal ordinances or rules
and regulations.
C. A permit shall be valid only for the license year of the existing liquor
license.
§ 93-1 ENTERTAINMENT § 93-4
93:133
Appeals, if the municipality has such a board, may grant or reinstate the
permit if it finds that:
§ 93-5. Admission charge.
A licensed hotel, Class A restaurant, Class A tavern or restaurant malt
liquor licensee who has been issued an entertainment permit may charge
admission in designated areas approved by the municipal permit.
§ 93-6. Live entertainment.
Chapter 99
A. The permitted activities would not constitute a detriment to the public
health, safety or welfare or violate municipal ordinances or regulations;
or
B. The denial, revocation or suspension was arbitrary and capricious.
A. The purpose of this section is to regulate nudity as a form of commercial
exploitation, to avoid adverse consequences of having nudity presented
in an establishment serving alcoholic beverages, to regulate dress as a
form of conduct and not to impede the free exchange and expression of
ideas.
B. No licensee shall permit entertainment on the licensed premises,
whether provided by a professional entertainer(s), employee(s) of the
licensed premises or any other person(s), when the entertainment
involves:
(1) The performance of acts or simulated acts of any specified sexual
activity (as defined in Chapter 53, Adult Businesses, § 53-1) or any
other sexual acts which are prohibited by law.
(2) The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the
breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals.
(3) The actual or simulated displaying of the genitals, pubic hair,
buttocks, anus or any portion of the female breasts at or below the
areola area thereof.
(4) The permitting by any licensee of any person to remain in or upon
the licensed premises who exposes to any public view any portion
of his or her genitals or anus or female breasts at or below the
areola area thereof.
C. For purposes of this section, the words "displaying" and "expose(s)"
shall mean being unclothed or uncostumed or not covered by fully
opaque cloth or textile material or employing any device or covering
which is intended to give the appearance of or to simulate the genitals,
pubic hair, buttocks, anus or the portions of the female breast at or
below the areola area thereof.
§ 93-4 SACO CITY CODE § 93-6
93:134
FIREARMS
§ 99-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVED OUTDOOR FIREARMS RANGE — An approved outdoor
firearms range having a backstop constructed of logs or timbers of at least
12 inches in diameter with an earth barrier behind or an earth barrier of
suitable materials with no less than a forty-five-degree slope. There shall
be a natural obstruction of trees or terrain to the rear of the backstop. The
target area shall be placed no less than three feet from the top and sides of
the backstop. The range widths of the target shall be no less than 15 feet
for 50 yards, 25 feet for 100 yards and 50 feet for 200 yards. No range shall
be situated closer than 100 feet from any roadway and shall be constructed
so that bullets or projectiles will not travel toward the nearest roadway.
No shooting at an outdoor range shall be allowed between the hours of
sunset and sunrise. These regulations shall not apply to indoor shooting
ranges.[Amended 5-2-2016]
FIREARM — Any weapon, whether loaded or unloaded, which is designed
to expel a projectile by the action of an explosive, and includes any such
weapon commonly referred to as a "pistol," "revolver," "rifle," "gun,"
"machine gun" or "shotgun." Any weapon which can be made into a firearm
by the insertion of a firing pin or other similar thing or repair is a firearm.
MUZZLELOADING FIREARM — A rifle or smoothbore firearm that is loaded
through the muzzle with powder or priming charge or a flint-, match- or
wheel lock mechanism.
NO-DISCHARGE ZONE — That portion of the City encompassed within
the following boundaries: Deep Brook, from the Saco River notherly to
Route 112; then easterly to the intersection of Route 112 and Jenkins
Road; then northerly to so-called Newton Farm Pond; then easterly to
the Maine Turnpike; then southerly to Goosefare Brook; then following
Goosefare Brook easterly to Old Orchard Road; then southerly to Ferry
Road; then easterly to the easternmost boundary of Laurel Hill Cemetery;
then southerly to the Saco River, thence along the Saco River to Deep
Brook, the point of beginning.[Amended 11-7-2005]
SHOTGUN — A rifled or smoothbore firearm designated to shoot shot
shells, e.g., 10-, 12-, 16-, 20- and 28-gauge and .410-caliber.
SHOTGUN/MUZZLELOADING FIREARM-ONLY ZONE — That portion of
the City encompassed within the following boundaries:[Amended
4-1-1996; 11-7-2005; 5-2-2016]
That area from the point where Deep Brook joins the Saco River
northerly along the westerly side of Deep Brook to Buxton Road; then
westerly along Buxton Road to Simpson Road; then southwesterly along
Simpson Road to Fire Lane 4; then from the intersection of Fire Lane
A.
§ 93-6 ENTERTAINMENT § 99-1
93:135
UNRESTRICTED ZONE — That portion of the City not encompassed within
the no-discharge or shotgun/muzzleloading firearm-only zones.[Added
5-2-2016]
§ 99-2. Permission required for discharge near residences.
[Amended 5-2-2016]
It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or discharge a firearm of any
kind or description in the City within 100 yards of a residential dwelling
without the permission of the owner or, in their absence, of an adult
occupant of that dwelling.
§ 99-3. Discharge in a reckless manner prohibited. [Amended
5-2-2016]
It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or discharge a firearm of any
kind or description in the City in a reckless manner.
§ 99-4. Zones. [Amended 5-2-2016]
§ 99-5. Exceptions. [Amended 5-2-2016]
No provision of this chapter shall be construed to limit the authority to
discharge a firearm by a person who is:
4 and Simpson Road southwesterly to the Saco River; thence along the
Saco River to the Maine Turnpike, the point of beginning.
Beginning at a point along the Saco River at the southeast corner of
Laurel Hill Cemetery; then in a northerly direction to Ferry Road; then
westerly on Ferry Road to Old Orchard Road; then northerly on Old
Orchard Road to the Goosefare Brook at the town line; then easterly
along Goosefare Brook to the ocean's edge; then southerly along the
shoreline to the breakwater at Camp Ellis; then westerly along the Saco
River to Laurel Hill Cemetery, being the point of beginning.
B.
A. Shotgun/muzzleloading firearm-only zone. It shall be unlawful for any
person to shoot or discharge a firearm of any kind or description other
than a shotgun, muzzleloading firearm, or blank cartridges in any
portion of the City which is designated as a shotgun/muzzleloading
firearm-only zone, and the western-style shooting will be done in a
confined internal building.
B. No-discharge zone. It shall be unlawful for a person to shoot or
discharge a firearm of any kind or description in the no-discharge zone
except as specifically allowed in this chapter.
C. Unrestricted zone. There are no municipal restrictions on discharging
legally possessed or licensed firearms in this zone, subject to all
applicable federal, state or municipal laws or ordinances.
A. Acting in lawful defense of a person, including themselves.
§ 99-1 SACO CITY CODE § 99-5
93:136
§ 99-6. Noise limitations. [Added 5-2-201630]
Notwithstanding the preceding, any contest or event that involves shooting,
and any facility that hosts, promotes or facilitates shooting on its premises,
must also comply with any applicable City noise limitation and ordinance.
§ 99-7. Violations and penalties; recovery of fines.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, plus costs,
which fines shall be recovered in a civil action to the use of the City.
Chapter 102
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 57.
Ambulance service — See Ch. 60.
Building construction — See Ch. 73.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 87.
Emergency telephone system — See Ch. 90.
Mobile homes — See Ch. 143.
Petroleum products — See Ch. 159.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 163.
B. A law enforcement officer or government official acting within the
scope of their lawful duties.
C. A member of any branch of the United States military, veterans'
organizations or similar organizations in connection with public
ceremonial events and do involve the release of projectiles.
D. Discharging a firearm with blank cartridges for school-sanctioned
theatrical productions or athletic events.
E. In the shotgun/muzzleloading firearm-only zone, discharging a firearm
with blank cartridges if otherwise compliant with 12 M.R.S.A. § 11209.
F. In the shotgun/muzzleloading firearm-only zone, discharging a firearm
at an approved firearms range.
G. Raccoon hunting at night with a .22 long rifle caliber firearm.
H. A trapper tending his traps.
30.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former § 99-6 as § 99-7.
§ 99-5 FIRE PREVENTION § 99-7
102:137

ARTICLE I
Fire Code
§ 102-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Fire Code."
§ 102-2. Adoption of standards by reference.
Reference is herewith made to the 1993 BOCA National Fire Prevention
Code, Ninth Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators (BOCA) International, and said code is hereby adopted and
made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes as found herein.
§ 102-3. Additions, insertions and changes.
§ 102-4. Automatic sprinkler systems.
A. In Section F-101.1 (page 1, second line), insert "City of Saco."
B. Section F-113.0 (page 5, entire section). Delete the entire section and
replace with: "F-113.0 Means of Appeal: Any person who wishes to
make an appeal shall follow the procedure outlined in Chapter 102,
Article I, of the Code of the City of Saco."
A. Approved automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed in all buildings
in which construction exceeds any of the following criteria:
(1) Three stories in height.
(2) Forty feet in height.
(3) Two hundred thousand cubic feet in volume.
(4) Five dwelling units, but only when the structure housing such
dwelling units exceeds two stories in height.
B. All such sprinkler systems shall be equipped with approved supervisory
equipment which will transmit an alarm to an approved receiver.
C. This section shall apply only to applications for building permits after
the effective date of this section for the construction of new buildings or
to make substantial renovations in existing buildings where the
remodeled building will exceed the criteria set forth in Subsection A. In
the case of existing buildings being substantially remodeled, the Fire
Chief or the Deputy Chief in charge of fire prevention may grant a
waiver from compliance with the requirements of this section where it
is determined that the permittee will suffer economic hardship and the
cost of the system will be disproportionate to the cost of the renovations
and/or the fire danger involved.
§ 102-1 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-4
102:139
§ 102-5. Supervisory official.
The Fire Chief is herewith designated as the city official to supervise and
enforce this article.
§ 102-6. Appeals.
§ 102-7. Violations and penalties.
The following provisions shall apply to violations of the laws and ordinances
set forth in this article, and all monetary penalties shall be civil penalties:
D. In all cases where sprinkler systems are installed, whether or not
required by this section, no such system shall be modified, extended or
altered without notification to the Saco Fire Department.
E. Once an automatic sprinkler system has been installed and is
operational, no one shall remove it or cause the water supply to be
disconnected or interrupted without first notifying the Fire
Department, nor shall any such system be tested without the knowledge
of the Fire Department.
F. Approval of sprinkler systems and supervisory equipment shall be made
by the Chief of the Fire Department or the Deputy Chief in charge of fire
protection in accordance with standards of quality and efficiency
generally accepted in the industry.
G. This section replaces and supersedes the provisions in the BOCA Code
that may be inconsistent herewith.
A. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Fire Chief may take appeal
to the Mayor and City Council.
B. Any appeal may be taken within 30 days from the date of the decision
appealed by filing with the Mayor and City Council a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds thereof, except that in the case of a building or
structure which, in the opinion of the Fire Chief, is unsafe or dangerous,
the Fire Chief may, in his/her order, limit the time for such appeal to a
shorter period. The Fire Chief shall forthwith transmit to the Mayor and
City Council all the papers upon which the action appealed from was
taken.
A. The minimum penalty for starting construction or undertaking a land
use activity without a required permit shall be $100 and the maximum
penalty shall be $2,500.
B. The minimum penalty for a specific violation shall be $100 and the
maximum penalty shall be $2,500.
C. The violator may be ordered to correct or abate the violations. Where
the court finds that the violation was willful, the violator shall be
§ 102-4 SACO CITY CODE § 102-7
102:140
ordered to correct or abate the violation, unless the abatement or
correction will:
(1) Result in a threat or hazard to public health or safety;
(2) Result in substantial environmental damage; or
(3) Result in substantial injustice.
D. If the City of Saco is the prevailing party, it shall be awarded reasonable
attorney fees, expert witness fees and costs, unless the court finds that
special circumstances make the award of these fees and costs unjust. If
the defendant is the prevailing party, the defendant may be awarded
reasonable attorney fees, expert witness fees and costs, as provided by
court rule.
E. The maximum penalty may exceed $2,500, but shall not exceed
$25,000, when it can be shown that there has been a previous
conviction of the same party, within the past two years, of the same law
or ordinance.
F. All proceedings arising under the provisions of locally administered
laws and ordinances shall be brought in the name of the City of Saco,
and fines shall be paid to the City of Saco.
§ 102-7 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-7
102:141

ARTICLE II
Life Safety Code
§ 102-8. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "NFPA Life Safety Code,
1991 Edition."
§ 102-9. Adoption of standards by reference.
Reference is herewith made to the most current edition of the NFPA 101
Life Safety Code, as published by the National Fire Protection Association
(NFPA), which code is hereby adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set
out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes as
found herein.
§ 102-10. Supervisory official.
The Fire Chief is herewith designated as the city official to supervise and
enforce this article.
§ 102-11. Appeals.
§ 102-12. Violations and penalties.
The following provisions shall apply to violations of the laws and ordinances
set forth in this article, and all monetary penalties shall be civil penalties:
A. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Fire Chief with regard to
the enforcement of this code may take appeal to the Mayor and City
Council.
B. An appeal may be taken within 30 days from the date of the decision
appealed by filing with the Mayor and City Council a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds thereof, except that in the case of a building or
structure which, in the opinion of the Fire Chief, is unsafe or dangerous,
the Fire Chief may in his/her order limit the time for such appeal to a
shorter period. The Fire Chief shall forthwith transmit to the Mayor and
City Council all the papers upon which the action appealed from was
taken.
A. The minimum penalty for starting construction or undertaking a land
use activity without a required permit shall be $100 and the maximum
penalty shall be $2,500.
B. The minimum penalty for a specific violation shall be $100 and the
maximum penalty shall be $2,500.
C. The violator may be ordered to correct or abate the violations. Where
the court finds that the violation was willful, the violator shall be
ordered to correct or abate the violation, unless the abatement or
correction will:
§ 102-8 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-12
102:143
(1) Result in a threat or hazard to public health or safety;
(2) Result in substantial environmental damage; or
(3) Result in substantial injustice.
D. If the City of Saco is the prevailing party, it shall be awarded reasonable
attorney fees, expert witness fees and costs, unless the court finds that
special circumstances make the award of these fees and costs unjust. If
the defendant is the prevailing party, the defendant may be awarded
reasonable attorney fees, expert witness fees and costs, as provided by
court rule.
E. The maximum penalty may exceed $2,500, but shall not exceed
$25,000, when it can be shown that there has been a previous
conviction of the same party, within the past two years, of the same law
or ordinance.
F. All proceedings arising under the provisions of locally administered
laws and ordinances shall be brought in the name of the City of Saco,
and those fines shall be paid to the municipality.
§ 102-12 SACO CITY CODE § 102-12
102:144
ARTICLE III
Fire Lanes
§ 102-13. Purpose.
Fire lanes are established for the purpose of promoting the public health,
safety and welfare by recognizing that there exist and will in the future
exist buildings and other areas in the city within which and to which the
public will be invited, served or housed. These buildings or other areas must
be provided prompt, adequate emergency services, including access by fire
fighters and fire-fighting equipment and other emergency personnel and
equipment, in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public
and effect the saving of life and property in emergency situations.
§ 102-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIRE LANE — A designated, unobstructed passageway, at least 20 feet
in width, with an outside turning radius of 60 feet and constructed and
maintained in a manner to permit free passage of fire apparatus and other
emergency equipment and personnel from a public way to all necessary
areas, regardless of the season of year or weather conditions, around
buildings, in areas or in developments or subdivisions as may be required
elsewhere in this article.
PARKING AREA — Lots, areas or other accommodations for the parking of
motor vehicles off the street, alley or other way, which said lots, areas or
other accommodations are available for use by the public either with or
without charge.
§ 102-15. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall, in order to accomplish the stated
purpose, be applicable to all proposed and existing developments,
subdivisions, buildings and other premises which are included with the
following:
A. Subdivisions, both residential and nonresidential.
B. Any nonresidential development not requiring subdivision approval or
site plan review.
C. Any proposed construction requiring site plan review.
D. All schools, whether public or private.
E. Hospitals.
F. Convalescent homes, rest homes and/or nursing homes.
§ 102-13 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-15
102:145
§ 102-16. Establishment; appeals.
§ 102-17. Maintenance and identification.
Fire lanes established under this article shall be kept free of ice and snow
and rubbish containers or other obstructions. The owner, owners, agent or
occupant of any premises to which this article is applicable shall cause to
G. In addition to the foregoing, all other places of public assembly used for
the gathering together of 50 or more persons.
A. Each application for residential or nonresidential subdivision approval
and each application for site plan review submitted to the Planning
Board shall be reviewed by the Chief of the Saco Fire Department and/
or the Fire Marshal of the fire district within which the development or
building is located. The Fire Chief and/or Fire Marshal shall review
each application to determine the locations of such fire lanes as are
necessary under this section and report his/her findings,
recommendations and suggested designations of fire lanes to the
Panning Board, in writing. All findings, recommendations and
suggested designations of fire lanes shall be made a part of the record
of proceedings before the Planning Board on each subdivision or site
plan review application. The decision of the Planning Board shall
govern the requirements and designation of all fire lanes.
B. In any application for a building permit or occupancy or change of use
permit not requiring subdivision or site plan review and approval but
otherwise included within § 102-15 above, the Building Inspector shall
notify the Fire Chief of the application for the permit, and the Fire Chief
or Fire Marshal shall designate directly to the owner, owners or agent
of the premises for which permit application is made the location of
required fire lanes.
C. Within existing developments and premises to which this article is
applicable, the Fire Chief shall designate fire lanes by written order and
shall notify, in writing, both the Saco Planning Board and the owner,
owners or agents of such development or premises, by certified mail, of
such designation and of any specific requirements for compliance with
this article and shall publish notice of such establishment of such fire
lanes once in a newspaper having general circulation within the City of
Saco. The Fire Chief shall file one copy of any order of designation of
any such fire lanes with the City Clerk. Any person aggrieved by such
order may file with the City Clerk, within 15 days after the date of the
receipt of such order, written notice of appeal, setting forth therein
reasons for aggrievement. A public hearing shall be held by the Saco
Planning Board, after which the Board must affirm, modify or rescind
the order of the Fire Chief within 30 days of the public hearing. The
Board shall notify the Fire Chief, as may be applicable, by written
communication of any and all action taken relative to the establishment
of a fire lane.
§ 102-15 SACO CITY CODE § 102-17
102:146
be erected, installed and maintained, at his or her own expense, permanent,
adequate signs, bearing the words "Fire Lane — No Parking — Vehicles Will
Be Towed At Owner's Expense," in or adjacent to the fire lane. Such owner,
owners, agent or occupant shall cause such other and further notices or
signage as are reasonably required by the Fire Chief to warn persons
to keep the fire lanes unobstructed. Failure to maintain a fire lane in
accordance with this section shall render the owner, owners, agent or
occupant of the development liable to a fine in accordance with the general
penalty provision of this Code,31 with each continuing day of such violation
constituting a separate offense.
§ 102-18. Time limit for compliance.
The notice of establishment of fire lanes shall prescribe a reasonable time
for compliance. If compliance is not obtained within the stated time, then
the owner, owners or agent shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the
general penalty provision of this Code. Each day following such specified
time for compliance shall constitute a new and separate violation.
§ 102-19. Parking prohibited; violations and penalties.
A. No person shall park or permit to stand a motor vehicle in any fire lane
established in accordance with this article, except when actually
picking up or discharging passengers or actively engaged in loading or
unloading a motor vehicle.
B. Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in violation of the
regulations established above, any police officer may attach to the
vehicle a notice, to the owner or operator thereof, that the vehicle has
been parked in violation of the regulations. The registered owner or
operator shall pay to the City a fine to be established after a public
hearing. The registered owner of the motor vehicle shall be presumed
to be the operator of the vehicle. Any motor vehicle found parked or
standing in a fire lane that has been established in accordance with this
article, in addition to the foregoing, may be towed, upon the direction of
a police officer, to any public or private parking facility, and all expense
of towing and any subsequent storage shall be borne by the registered
owner or operator of the vehicle.32 [Amended 5-3-2004]
31.Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
32.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 200, Towers and Wreckers.
§ 102-17 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-19
102:147

ARTICLE IV
Mutual Fire Aid Pacts
§ 102-20. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to authorize the Saco Fire Department to
aid in extinguishing fires and providing emergency ambulance service in
municipalities which, under 30 M.R.S.A. § 377733 and through properly
adopted ordinances or agreements, are authorized to aid in extinguishing
fires and providing emergency ambulance service in the City of Saco.
§ 102-21. Authority of Fire Chief.
The Saco Fire Chief is authorized to enter into an agreement to use the
equipment and personnel of the Saco Fire Department to aid in
extinguishing fires and to provide emergency ambulance service in another
municipality if that municipality's Fire Department or volunteer fire
company has been authorized to provide the same services in the City of
Saco under the same types of terms and conditions contained in this article.
§ 102-22. Requests for aid.
When another municipality requests aid, the Saco Fire Chief or the officer
then in charge of the Saco Fire Department may provide such aid, subject
to the following provisions:
§ 102-23. Withdrawal from agreements.
The Saco Fire Chief is authorized to withdraw from any agreement entered
into under this article upon giving 30 days' notice, in writing, of his/her
intention to do so to the municipal officers of the other municipality.
A. Aid may be provided to an extent that the Saco Fire Chief or officer in
charge of the Saco Fire Department, in his/her sole discretion and
judgment, determines is warranted and available.
B. When aid is provided, the officers of the Saco Fire Department shall
command its own fire fighters, subject to the direction of the head of the
Fire Department of the requesting municipality, who is responsible for
overall strategy in any event.
C. When providing aid to a requesting municipality, the Saco Fire
Department has the same privileges and immunities as the Fire
Department or volunteer fire company in the requesting municipality.
D. Any wages incurred or damages sustained, due to injury or death or
damage to or loss of property, by the Saco Fire Department or any of its
personnel in responding to a request for aid from another municipality
are the liability of the City of Saco.
33.Editor's Note: See now 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3156.
§ 102-20 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-23
102:149

ARTICLE V
Fire Hydrants
§ 102-24. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish uniform standards for fire hydrants
within the City of Saco so that fire protection activities are not hampered
during the course of fire fighting. This article is designed to provide for
public safety.
§ 102-25. Design standards.
All fire hydrants installed in the City of Saco after the effective date of this
article shall comply with the following specifications:
§ 102-26. Installation.
Hydrants shall be set to provide a minimum horizontal distance between
the hydrant and hydrant valve of 10 feet. Hydrants shall be securely braced
against firm, undisturbed material by means of an acceptable and approved
method of thrust restraint. All hydrant branch piping shall be of six-inch
diameter.
§ 102-27. Maintenance of privately owned hydrant.
All privately owned hydrants within the City of Saco are subject to the
following provisions, and owners of such hydrants shall be responsible for
compliance with these provisions:
A. The hydrant shall be a Darling B62B or a substantially similar unit, of
design approved by the Biddeford and Saco Water Company.
B. The hydrant shall be equipped with the following:
(1) An internal valve of 5 1/4 inches.
(2) One port of 4 1/2 inches and two ports of 2 1/2 inches.
(3) A six-inch mechanical joint base.
(4) Open right design.
C. Hydrant gate valves shall be of six-inch, open right, metropolitan
design.
D. Hydrant tees shall be cast iron, manufactured in accordance with
standards of the American Water Works Association and current at the
time of installation.
E. The hydrant shall have 5 1/2 feet depth of bury (five feet of cover).
F. All hydrants shall be not less than 12 inches to the center line of hose
outlet from finish grade. All hydrant flanges must be above finish grade.
§ 102-24 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-27
102:151
A. The hydrant owner shall provide for biannual maintenance inspections
by a qualified professional, such as a plumber or maintenance engineer.
One such inspection shall occur prior to the winter freeze period.
B. The maintenance inspection shall include:
(1) A visual inspection.
(2) Opening and flushing.
(3) Testing during actual operation.
C. The maintenance inspection shall be performed in the presence of a
representative of the City of Saco Fire Department. The hydrant owner
shall contact the Saco Fire Department to make arrangements for a site
visit during the maintenance inspection.
D. The hydrant owner shall submit a biannual inspection report for each
hydrant to the Saco Fire Chief.
E. After the prewinter inspection, the owner shall arrange with the
Biddeford and Saco Water Company for pumping of the hydrant.
§ 102-27 SACO CITY CODE § 102-27
102:152
Chapter 104
FLEA MARKETS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses — See Ch. 132.
§ 104-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Saco Flea Market Ordinance."
§ 104-2. Purpose.
The City recognizes the economic value of so-called "flea markets" to the
community. These markets are a place for individuals from both the local
community and from out-of-state to sell, merchandise and purchase new and
secondhand goods at low cost. Flea markets also are a community gathering
spot. They produce jobs for local citizens and income for merchants, as
well as a place for people to meet. These markets, however, have been
unregulated and have been disruptive of neighbors and traffic flow. They
are a visual distraction and detriment to the City when not adequately
controlled. In addition, some individual flea market vendors violate City
zoning standards, offer for sale dangerous or illegal products and do not
always comply with state tax laws. Because of the nature of their
operations, these individual vendors are difficult to regulate. The City
adopts the following chapter to promote flea markets in general but with
the goal of protecting the visitors to our community and the neighborhoods
where such markets are found.
§ 104-3. Scope.
A. Any person, family, association, corporation or other business entity
who/which promotes, authorizes and/or suffers the operation or
maintenance of a flea market on their property, or on property they
rent, lease or otherwise control, must possess a flea market operators
license from the City.
B. A flea market operator, whether or not they actually charge admission
fees to the public or charge fees to any flea market vendor at the flea
market, and regardless whether they operate for profit or not, must
secure a flea market operator's license to maintain the flea market.
C. A "flea market vendor" is defined as a person, family, corporation,
association or other business entity who rents, leases, pays for or
otherwise occupies any amount of space, land and/or tables at a flea
market for the purposes of advertising, displaying, promoting or selling
new or used goods or merchandise.
§ 102-27 FLEA MARKETS § 104-4
104:153
§ 104-4. Prohibition.
§ 104-5. Terms for license.
A. Flea market operator. No person, family, corporation, association or
other business entity may operate, suffer, permit or conduct a flea
market on their property without a City license. The failure to secure a
license is hereby deemed a nuisance which may be abated by
enforcement of state law and subject to the fines and penalties
described therein.
B. Vendor. No person, family, corporation, association or other business
may sell, market, merchandise, display, promote or package new or
used goods at a flea market without a valid flea market vendor's license.
The failure to secure a license is deemed a nuisance which may be
abated by enforcement of state law or by means of arrest and removal
from the flea market by the Police Department.
A. Operators. To receive a flea market operator's license, a person, family,
corporation, association or other business entity must agree to the
following terms and conditions, which terms and conditions are made a
part of its license:
(1) The flea market operator will not permit any individual, family,
corporation, association or other business entity to sell, display,
market or otherwise avail themselves of the benefits and privileges
of the flea market unless the individual or entity holds a valid City
flea market vendor's license.
(2) The flea market operator must comply with all City of Saco zoning
ordinances and all City regulations.
(3) The flea market will open no sooner than 7:00 a.m. and remain
open no longer than 9:00 p.m.
(4) The operator will not permit or suffer any violation of City
ordinances or regulations, nor jeopardize or endanger the public
health or safety in any way, or the health and safety of any
customers at the market; nor suffer or permit any flea market
vendor from doing any of the same.
(5) The operator will prohibit, bar and/or expel from the flea market
any flea market vendor who disturbs the peace or who violates any
City ordinance or regulation.
(6) The flea market operator will advise and instruct all flea market
vendors on the property to prominently display at all times the
vendor's City license.
(7) An operator's license shall run for one year January 1 through
December 31, and the fee shall be established by the City Council
after a public hearing. [Amended 4-7-2003]
§ 104-4 SACO CITY CODE § 104-5
104:154
§ 104-6. Compliance required; authority.
§ 104-7. Standards for denial, suspension or revocation of license;
renewal.
B. Vendors. To receive a flea market vendor's license, a person, family,
corporation, association or other business entity must meet and agree
to the following terms and conditions, which are made a part of its
license:
(1) Flea market vendors will comply with all City of Saco zoning
ordinances and all City regulations.
(2) The flea market vendor will not display merchandise, flags,
pennants, banners or other advertising at a height greater then
nine feet above ground level and agrees that if such are found they
may be immediately removed by Saco Police.
(3) The flea market vendor will open no sooner than 7:00 a.m. and
must close by 9:00 p.m.
(4) The flea market vendor must display, at all times, and in a
prominent place of public view, its City license.
(5) The flea market vendor will not disturb the peace.
(6) A flea market vendor's license shall run for a term of one year,
January 1 through December 31, and the fee for such license shall
be established by City Council after a public hearing. [Amended
4-7-2003]
(7) Flea market vendors will not disturb the peace nor jeopardize or
endanger the public health and safety in any way.
(8) Flea market vendors will not sell illegal, counterfeit or contraband
items or goods nor engage in any illegal activities at the flea
market.
A. The failure to meet, follow and/or comply with any license condition
may result in forfeiture of the operator's or vendor's license. Past
license violations may be considered as a factor upon request for
renewal.
B. It shall be the Clerk's responsibility to issue, suspend and/or deny any
license described herein. The Clerk shall maintain license applications
and a file with all license holders. In the absence of the Clerk, the City
Administrator will assume all authority hereunder.
A. A flea market operator's license or a flea market vendor's license may
be denied, suspended or revoked upon a determination of the existence
of one or more of the following grounds:
§ 104-5 FLEA MARKETS § 104-7
104:155
§ 104-8. Hearings.
Except as expressly provided in this chapter, no license may be revoked or
suspended without prior notice to the licensee and after a hearing. In the
case of the suspension or revocation of a license, a hearing shall be given
to the licensee and a generalized statement of the nature of the complaint
constituting the basis for the proposed action shall be included in the notice
of hearing. Failure of the business to appear at the hearing shall be deemed
a waiver of the rights to said hearing. All suspensions or revocation shall
be upon substantial evidence and all hearings shall be conducted with
substantial fairness. "Substantial fairness" is defined to mean that the Clerk
or Council shall not arbitrarily deny, suspend or revoke a license but will
base their decision upon credible evidence of one or more of the grounds
described above.
(1) Failure to fully complete the application forms for licenses;
knowingly making an incorrect statement of a material nature on
such form; failure to supply any additional documentation required
or reasonably necessary to determine whether such license is
issuable, or failure to pay any fee required hereunder.
(2) The business or persons on the premises of the business have
caused one or more breaches of the peace.
(3) There is a clear danger that a breach of the peace will occur if the
licensed activity is permitted or continued.
(4) The business or persons patronizing the business will substantially
and adversely affect the peace and quiet of the neighborhood,
whether or not residential.
(5) The business has violated one or more provisions of this chapter or
other ordinances of the City of Saco, including its Zoning
Ordinance.
(6) Real or personal property taxes or final judgments are due and
payable to the City and are determined to be in arrears as of the
date of the license request.
(7) The operator has permitted unlicensed vendors to sell, display or
market goods on the property and has failed to remove or expel
such vendors.
B. A license may be renewed year to year upon review by the Clerk/
Council, again applying the standards described above in § 104-7. As
part of the review process, and as described in § 104-6, the Clerk/
Council will consider compliance from prior years in its consideration
and, based upon that review, may add conditions to any future license to
correct, abate or limit past problems. Such conditions may be removed
if the operator or vendor satisfies the Clerk/Council of future
compliance with this chapter.
§ 104-7 SACO CITY CODE § 104-9
104:156
§ 104-9. Appeals.
§ 104-10. Notices of hearing.
§ 104-11. Transfer of license.
§ 104-12. Public complaints.
All flea market operators shall post on their property a conspicuous notice
that guests and/or customers of the market may bring any complaint
regarding the market or any vendor to the City, Monday through Friday,
9:00 to 4:00, at 300 Main Street, Saco.
A. Procedure. An appeal to the City Council may be taken by any person
aggrieved by the denial, suspension or revocation of license by the
Clerk by filing a notice of appeal within 30 days of the decision. Every
appeal should be in writing and shall state the basis for the appeal. The
City Administrator/City Council shall hear the appeal within two weeks
after the filing of the appeal and may affirm, reverse or modify the
decision appealed from.
B. Appeal to the Superior Court. Any person aggrieved by the decision on
appeal may appeal to the Superior Court in accordance with the
provisions of Maine Rules of Civil Procedure 80B.
A. Content. Whenever a hearing is required, the Clerk shall give notice of
the time and place of the hearing, the type of license involved and the
nature of the hearing and the address or location of the property
involved.
B. Service. Except as expressly provided, whenever notice by mail is
required, such notice shall be mailed by regular United States mail at
least five days in advance of the hearing date.
A. No license may be transferred by the licensee to any person, business
or entity, nor shall any license fee be refunded if the licensed activity is
ceased prior to the expiration of the license.
B. In all cases arising out of this section in which the Clerk, if required to
determine the identity or composition of or ownership interests in an
application or licensee, or to determine whether a transfer of an
ownership interest in an applicant or licensee has taken place, he shall
look to the substance rather than the form of transactions, and any
person aggrieved may appeal the Clerk's determination to the City
Manager.
§ 104-9 FLEA MARKETS § 104-12
104:157
Chapter 106
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 73.
Cost recovery — See Ch. 83.
Mobile homes — See Ch. 143.
Sewers — See Ch. 176.
§ 106-1. Purpose and establishment.
A. Certain areas of the City of Saco, Maine are subject to periodic flooding,
causing serious damages to properties within these areas. Relief is
available in the form of flood insurance as authorized by the National
Flood Insurance Act of 1968.
B. Therefore, the City of Saco, Maine has chosen to become a participating
community in the National Flood Insurance Program and agrees to
comply with the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Act of
1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended), as delineated in this Floodplain
Management Ordinance.
C. It is the intent of the City of Saco, Maine to require the recognition and
evaluation of flood hazards in all official actions relating to land use in
the floodplain areas having special flood hazards.
D. The City of Saco has the legal authority to adopt land use and control
measures to reduce future flood losses pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A.
§§ 3001 through 3007, 4352, 4401 through 4407, and 38 M.R.S.A.
§ 440.
E. The National Flood Insurance Program, established in the aforesaid
Act, provides that areas of the City of Saco having a special flood hazard
be identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and that
floodplain management measures be applied in such flood hazard
areas. This chapter establishes a flood hazard development permit
system and review procedure for development activities in the
designated flood hazard areas of the City of Saco, Maine.
F. The areas of special flood hazard, Zones A, A1-30, AE, AO, V1-30 and
VE, are identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a
report entitled "Flood Insurance Study - City of Saco, Maine, York
County," dated January 5, 2006, with accompanying Flood Insurance
Rate Map dated January 5, 2006, and Flood Boundary and Floodway
Map dated, January 5, 2006, which are hereby adopted by reference
and declared to be a part of this chapter.
§ 104-12 SACO CITY CODE § 106-2
104:158
§ 106-2. Permit required.
Before any construction or other development (as defined in § 106-14),
including the placement of manufactured homes, begins within any areas
of special flood hazard established in § 106-1, a flood hazard development
permit shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer except as
provided in § 106-7. This permit shall be in addition to any other permits,
which may be required pursuant to the codes and ordinances of the City of
Saco, Maine.
§ 106-3. Application for permit.
The application for a flood hazard development permit shall be submitted to
the Code Enforcement Officer and shall include:
A. The name, address and phone number of the applicant, owner and
contractor.
B. An address and a map indicating the location of the construction site.
C. A site plan showing location of existing and/or proposed development,
including but not limited to structures, sewage disposal facilities, water
supply facilities, areas to be cut and filled and lot dimensions.
D. A statement of the intended use of the structure and/or development.
E. A statement of the cost of the development, including all materials and
labor.
F. A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed.
G. Specification of dimensions of the proposed structure and/or
development.
[NOTE: Subsections H through K(3) apply only to new construction
and substantial improvements.]
H. The elevation in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD), or to a locally established datum in Zone A only, of the:
(1) Base flood at the proposed site of all new or substantially improved
structures, which is determined:
(a) In Zones A1-30, AE, AO, V1-30 and VE from data contained in
the Flood Insurance Study - City of Saco, Maine, as described
in § 106-1; or
(b) In Zone A:
[1] From any base flood elevation data from federal, state, or
other technical sources (such as FEMA's Quick-2 model,
FEMA 265/July 1995) including information obtained
pursuant to §§ 106-6K and 106-9D;
§ 106-2 FLEA MARKETS § 106-3
104:159
[2] From the contour elevation extrapolated from a best fit
analysis of the floodplain boundary when overlaid onto a
USGS quadrangle map or other topographic map prepared
by a professional land surveyor or registered professional
engineer, if the floodplain boundary has a significant
correlation to the elevation contour line(s); or
[3] In the absence of all other data, to be the elevation of the
ground at the intersection of the floodplain boundary and a
line perpendicular to the shoreline which passes along the
ground through the site of the proposed building.
(2) Highest and lowest grades at the site adjacent to the walls of the
proposed building.
(3) Lowest floor, including basement, and whether or not such
structures contain a basement.
(4) Level, in the case of nonresidential structures only, to which the
structure will be floodproofed.
I. A description of an elevation reference point established on the site of
all developments for which elevation standards apply as required in
§ 106-6;
J. A written certification by a professional land surveyor, registered
professional engineer or architect, that the base flood elevation and
grade elevations shown on the application are accurate.
K. The following certifications as required in § 106-6 by a registered
professional engineer or architect:
(1) A floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65, 01-03, as amended)
to verify that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential
structures will meet the floodproofing criteria of §§ 106-3H(4),
106-6G and other applicable standards in § 106-6;
(2) A V-Zone certificate to verify that the construction in coastal highhazard
areas, Zones V1-30 and VE, will meet the criteria of
§ 106-6P and other applicable standards in § 106-6.
(3) A hydraulic opening certificate to verify that engineered hydraulic
openings in the foundation walls will meet the standards of
§ 106-6L(2)(a).
(4) A certified statement that bridges will meet the standards of
§ 106-6M.
(5) A certified statement that containment walls will meet the
standards of § 106-6N;
L. A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of the proposed development.
§ 106-3 SACO CITY CODE § 106-3
104:160
§ 106-4. Application fee and expert's fee.
§ 106-5. Review of standards for flood hazard development permit
applications.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall:
M. A statement of construction plans describing in detail how each
applicable development standard in § 106-6 will be met.
A. An application fee as established in the City's Cost Recovery
Ordinance34 shall be paid to the Finance Department, and a copy of a
receipt for the same shall accompany the application. Any application
reviews, either by City staff or other professionals retained by the City,
shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Cost
Recovery Ordinance.
B. An additional fee may be charged if the Code Enforcement Officer and/
or Board of Appeals need the assistance of a professional engineer or
other expert. The applicant shall pay the expert's fee in full within 10
days after the City submits a bill to the applicant. Failure to pay the bill
shall constitute a violation of the chapter and be grounds for the
issuance of a stop-work order. An expert shall not be hired by the
municipality at the expense of an applicant until the applicant has
either consented to such hiring in writing or has been given an
opportunity to be heard on the subject. An applicant who is dissatisfied
with the decision to hire expert assistance may appeal that decision to
the Board of Appeals.
A. Review all applications for the flood hazard development permit to
assure that proposed developments are reasonably safe from flooding
and to determine that all pertinent requirements of § 106-6
(Development standards) have been or will be met.
B. Utilize, in the review of all flood hazard development permit
applications, the base flood and floodway data contained in the Flood
Insurance Study - City of Saco, Maine, as described in § 106-1. In
special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and floodway data
are not provided, the Code Enforcement Officer shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data from
federal, state or other technical sources, including information
obtained pursuant to §§ 106-3H(1)(b), 106-6K and § 106-9D, in order to
administer § 106-6 of this chapter. When the community establishes a
base flood elevation in a Zone A by methods outlined in § 106-3H(1)(b),
the community shall submit that data to the Maine Floodplain
Management Program in the State Planning Office.
C. Make interpretations of the location of boundaries of special flood
hazard areas shown on the maps described in § 106-1 of this chapter.
34.Editor's Note: See Ch. 83, Cost Recovery.
§ 106-3 FLEA MARKETS § 106-5
104:161
D. In the review of flood hazard development permit applications,
determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those
federal, state and local government agencies from which prior approval
is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section
404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33
U.S.C. § 1344.
E. Notify adjacent municipalities, the Department of Environmental
Protection and the Maine Floodplain Management Program in the State
Planning Office prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse
and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
F. Issuance of permit.
(1) If the application satisfies the requirements of this chapter,
approve the issuance of one of the following flood hazard
development permits based on the type of development:
(a) A two-part flood hazard development permit for elevated
structures. Part I shall authorize the applicant to build a
structure to and including the first horizontal floor only above
the base flood level. At that time the applicant shall provide the
Code Enforcement Officer with a second elevation certificate
completed by a professional land surveyor, registered
professional engineer or architect based on the Part I permit
construction, as built, for verifying compliance with the
elevation requirements of § 106-6F, G, H or P. Following
review of the elevation certificate data, which shall take place
within 72 hours of receipt of the application, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall issue Part II of the flood hazard
development permit. Part II shall authorize the applicant to
complete the construction project;
(b) A flood hazard development permit for floodproofing of
nonresidential structures that are new construction or
substantially improved nonresidential structures that are not
being elevated but that meet the floodproofing standards of
§ 106-6G(1)(a), (b) and (c). The application for this permit shall
include a floodproofing certificate signed by a registered
professional engineer or architect; or
(c) A flood hazard development permit for minor development for
all development that is not new construction or a substantial
improvement, such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or
additions whose value is less than 50% of the market value of
the structure. Minor development also includes, but is not
limited to, accessory structures as provided for in § 106-6J,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling
operations, storage of equipment or materials, deposition or
extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal
§ 106-5 SACO CITY CODE § 106-5
104:162
§ 106-6. Development standards.
All developments in areas of special flood hazard shall meet the following
applicable standards:
systems or water supply facilities that do not involve structures
and nonstructural projects such as bridges, dams, towers,
fencing, pipelines, wharves and piers.
(2) For development that requires review and approval as a conditional
use permit, as provided for in this chapter, the flood hazard
development permit application shall be acted upon by the
Planning Board as required in § 106-7.
G. Maintain, as a permanent record, copies of all flood hazard
development permit applications, corresponding permits issued and
data relevant thereto, including reports of the Board of Appeals on
variances granted under the provisions of § 106-10 of this chapter and
copies of elevation certificates, floodproofing certificates, certificates of
compliance and certifications of design standards required under the
provisions of §§ 106-3, 106-6 and 106-8 of this chapter.
A. All development. All development shall:
(1) Be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation (excluding piers and docks), collapse or lateral movement
of the development resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
(2) Use construction materials that are resistant to flood damage.
(3) Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
(4) Use electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during flooding conditions.
(5) Include the total cost of all improvements, modifications, additions
and reconstruction projects. All costs shall be accrued over the
lifetime of the structure. Once the total cost of the project reaches
50% of the building's market value at the time of the first permit
application following the effective date of March 3, 1998, the
project is considered a substantial improvement. See the definition
of "substantial improvement" in § 106-14 below. [Amended
5-21-2012]
B. Water supply. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
systems.
§ 106-5 FLEA MARKETS § 106-6
104:163
C. Sanitary sewage systems. All new and replacement sanitary sewage
systems shall be designed and located to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the
system into floodwaters.
D. On-site waste disposal systems. On-site waste disposal systems shall be
located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during floods.
E. Watercourse carrying capacity. All development shall be constructed
and maintained in such a manner that no reduction occurs in the floodcarrying
capacity of any watercourse.
F. Residential. New construction or substantial improvement of any
residential structure located within:
(1) Zones A1-30 and AE shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to at least three feet above the base flood
elevation. [Amended 5-21-2012]
(2) Zone AO shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on
slopes, to guide floodwater away from the proposed structures.
(3) Zone AO shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
above the highest adjacent grade:
(a) At least three feet higher than the depth specified in feet on the
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map; or [Amended
5-21-2012]
(b) At least three feet if no depth number is specified.
(4) Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to
at least three feet above the base flood elevation utilizing
information obtained pursuant to §§ 106-3H(1)(b), 106-5B or
106-9D. [Amended 5-21-2012]
(5) Zones V1-30 and VE shall meet the requirements of § 106-6P.
G. Nonresidential. New construction or substantial improvement of any
nonresidential structure located within:
(1) Zones A1-30 and AE shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to at least three feet above the base flood
elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities,
shall: [Amended 5-21-2012]
(a) Be floodproofed to at least three feet above the base flood
elevation so that below that elevation the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water;
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and
§ 106-6 SACO CITY CODE § 106-6
104:164
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the floodproofing design and methods of construction are
in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting
the provisions of this section. Such certification shall be
provided with the application for a flood hazard development
permit, as required by § 106-3K and shall include a record of
the elevation above mean sea level to which the structure is
floodproofed.
(2) Zone AO shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on
slopes, to guide floodwater away from the proposed structures.
(3) Zone AO shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
above the highest adjacent grade:
(a) At least three feet higher than the depth specified in feet on the
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map; [Amended
5-21-2012]
(b) At least three feet if no depth number is specified; or
(c) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be
floodproofed to meet the elevation requirements of this section
and floodproofing standards of § 106-6G(1).
(4) Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to
at least three feet above the base flood elevation utilizing
information obtained pursuant to §§ 106-3H(1)(b), 106-5B or
106-9D; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities,
meet the flood proofing standards of § 106-6G(1). [Amended
5-21-2012]
(5) Zones V1-30 and VE shall meet the requirements of § 106-6P.
H. Manufactured homes. New or substantially improved manufactured
homes located within:
(1) Zones A1-30 or AE shall:
(a) Be elevated such that the lowest floor (including basement) of
the manufactured home is at least three feet above the base
flood elevation; [Amended 5-21-2012]
(b) Be on a permanent foundation, which may be poured masonry
slab or foundation walls, with hydraulic openings, or may be
reinforced piers or block supports, any of which support the
manufactured home so that no weight is supported by its
wheels and axles; and
(c) Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
[1] Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to:
§ 106-6 FLEA MARKETS § 106-6
104:165
[a] Over-the-top ties anchored to the ground at the four
corners of the manufactured home, plus two
additional ties per side at intermediate points
(manufactured homes less than 50 feet long require
one additional tie per side); or
[b] Frame ties at each corner of the home, plus five
additional ties along each side at intermediate points
(manufactured homes less than 50 feet long require
four additional ties per side).
[2] All components of the anchoring system described in
§ 106-6H(1)(c)[1][a] and [b] shall be capable of carrying a
force of 4,800 pounds.
(2) Zone AO shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on
slopes, to guide floodwater away from the proposed structures.
(3) Zone AO shall have the lowest floor (including basement) of the
manufactured home elevated above the highest adjacent grade:
(a) At least three feet higher than the depth specified in feet on the
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map; or [Amended
5-21-2012]
(b) At least three feet if no depth number is specified; and
(c) Meet the anchoring requirements of § 106-6H(1)(c).
(4) Zone A shall:
(a) Be elevated on a permanent foundation, as described in
§ 106-6H(1)(b) such that the lowest floor (including basement)
of the manufactured home is at least three feet above the base
flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to
§§ 106-3H(1)(b), 106-5B or 106-9D; and [Amended
5-21-2012]
(b) Meet the anchoring requirements of § 106-6H(1)(c).
(5) Zones V1-30 and VE shall meet the requirements of § 106-6P.
I. Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles located within:
(1) Zones A1-30 and AE shall either:
(a) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational
vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking
system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect-type
utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions; or
§ 106-6 SACO CITY CODE § 106-6
104:166
(c) Be permitted in accordance with the elevation and anchoring
requirements for manufactured homes in § 106-6H(1).
(2) Zones V1-30 and VE shall meet the requirements of either
§ 106-6I(1)(a) or (b) or § 106-6P.
J. Accessory structures. Accessory structures, as defined in § 106-14,
located within Zones A1-30, AE, AO, AH and A, shall be exempt from the
elevation criteria required in § 106-6F and G above, if all other
requirements of § 106-6 and all of the following requirements are met:
(1) Be 500 square feet or less and have a value of less than $3,000;
(2) Have unfinished interiors and not be used for human habitation;
(3) Have hydraulic openings, as specified in § 106-6L(2), in at least two
different walls of the accessory structure;
(4) Be located outside the floodway;
(5) When possible, be constructed and placed on the building site so as
to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters and be
placed further from the source of the flooding than is the primary
structure; and
(6) Have only ground fault interrupt electrical outlets. The electrical
service disconnect shall be located above the base flood elevation
and, when possible, outside the special flood hazard area.
K. Floodways.
(1) In Zones A1-30 and AE riverine areas, encroachments, including
fill, new construction, substantial improvement and other
development shall not be permitted within a regulatory floodway
which is designated on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map
or Flood Boundary and Floodway Map unless a technical evaluation
certified by a registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating that such encroachments will not result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) In Zones A1-30, AE, and A riverine areas for which no regulatory
floodway is designated, encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvement and other development
shall not be permitted in the floodway as determined in § 106-6K(3)
unless a technical evaluation certified by a registered professional
engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of
the proposed development, when combined with all other existing
development and anticipated development:
(a) Will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the community; and
§ 106-6 FLEA MARKETS § 106-6
104:167
(b) Is consistent with the technical criteria contained in Chapter 5
entitled "Hydraulic Analyses," Flood Insurance Study -
Guidelines and Specifications for Study Contractors (FEMA 37/
January 1995, as amended).
(3) In Zones A1-30, AE and A, riverine areas for which no regulatory
floodway is designated, the regulatory floodway is determined to be
the channel of the river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas to a distance of 1/2 the width of the floodplain as measured
from the normal high-water mark to the upland limit of the
floodplain.
L. Enclosed areas below the lowest floor. New construction or substantial
improvement of any structure in Zones A1-30, AE, AO and A that meets
the development standards of § 106-6, including the elevation
requirements of § 106-6F, G or H, and is elevated on posts, columns,
piers, piles, stilts or crawlspaces may be enclosed below the base flood
elevation requirements, provided that all the following criteria are met
or exceeded:
(1) Enclosed areas are not "basements," as defined in § 106-14.
(2) Enclosed areas shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must
either:
(a) Be engineered and certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect; or
(b) Meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of the
enclosed area;
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be below the base flood
elevation and no higher than one foot above the lowest
grade; and
[3] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
entry and exit of floodwaters automatically without any
external influence or control such as human intervention,
including the use of electrical and other nonautomatic
mechanical means.
(3) The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation.
(4) The enclosed areas are usable solely for building access, parking of
vehicles or storage.
§ 106-6 SACO CITY CODE § 106-6
104:168
M. Bridges. New construction or substantial improvement of any bridge
located within Zones A1-30, AE, AO, AH, A, V1-30 and VE shall be
designed such that:
(1) When possible, the lowest horizontal member (excluding the pilings
or columns) is elevated to at least three feet above base flood
elevation; and [Amended 5-21-2012]
(2) A registered professional engineer shall certify that:
(a) The structural design and methods of construction shall meet
the elevation requirements of this section and the floodway
standards of § 106-6K; and
(b) The foundation and superstructure attached thereto are
designed to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due
to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on
all structural components. Water loading values used shall be
those associated with the base flood.
N. Containment walls. New construction or substantial improvement of
any containment walls located within:
(1) Zones A1-30, AE, AH, A, V1-30 and VE shall:
(a) Have the containment wall elevated to at least three feet above
the base flood elevation; [Amended 5-21-2012]
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions
of this section. Such certification shall be provided with the
application for a flood hazard development permit, as required
by § 106-3K.
(2) Zones AO and AH shall have adequate drainage paths around
containment walls on slopes, to guide the floodwater away from the
proposed walls.
(3) Zone AO shall have the top of the containment wall elevated above
the highest adjacent grade:
(a) At least three feet higher than the depth specified in feet on the
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map; or [Amended
5-21-2012]
(b) At least three feet if no depth number is specified; and
(c) Shall meet the requirements of § 106-6N(1)(b) and (c).
§ 106-6 FLEA MARKETS § 106-6
104:169
O. Wharves, piers and docks. New construction or substantial
improvement of wharves, piers, and docks are permitted in Zones A,
A1-30, AE, AO, AH, V1-30 and VE, in and over water and seaward of the
mean high tide if the following requirements are met:
(1) Wharves, piers, and docks shall comply with all applicable local,
state and federal regulations; and
(2) For commercial wharves, piers, and docks, a registered
professional engineer shall develop or review the structural design,
specifications, and plans for the construction.
P. Coastal floodplains.
(1) All new construction located within Zones A1-30, AE, A, V1-30 and
VE shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide except
as provided in § 106-6P(6).
(2) New construction or substantial improvement of any structure
located within Zones V1-30 or VE shall:
(a) Be elevated on posts or columns such that:
[1] The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of
the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is
elevated to three feet above the base flood elevation;
[Amended 5-21-2012]
[2] The pile or column foundation and the elevated portion of
the structure attached thereto is anchored to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement due to the effects
of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all
building components; and
[3] Water loading values used shall be those associated with
the base flood. Wind loading values used shall be those
required by applicable state and local building standards.
(b) Have the space below the lowest floor:
[1] Free of obstructions;
[2] Constructed with open wood lattice-work, or insect
screening intended to collapse under wind and water
without causing collapse, displacement or other structural
damage to the elevated portion of the building or
supporting piles or columns; or
[3] Constructed with nonsupporting breakaway walls which
have a design safe loading resistance of not less than 10 or
more than 20 pounds per square foot.
(c) Require a registered professional engineer or architect to:
§ 106-6 SACO CITY CODE § 106-6
104:170
[1] Develop or review the structural design, specifications and
plans for the construction, which must meet or exceed the
technical criteria contained in the Coastal Construction
Manual (FEMA-55/June, 2000); and
[2] Certify that the design and methods of construction to be
used are in accordance with accepted standards of
practice for meeting the criteria of § 106-6P(2).
(3) The use of fill for structural support in Zones A1-30, AE, A, AO,
V1-30, V1-30 and VE is prohibited. [Amended 5-21-2012]
(4) Human alteration of sand dunes within Zones V1-30 and VE is
prohibited unless it can be demonstrated that such alterations will
not increase potential flood damage.
(5) The area below the lowest floor may be used solely for parking
vehicles, building access and storage.
(6) Conditional use. Lobster sheds and fishing sheds located seaward
of mean high tide shall be exempt from the elevation requirement
in § 106-6G and are permitted as a conditional use only upon
review and approval by the Planning Board, as provided in § 106-7,
and if all the following requirements and those of § 106-6A, K, and
L are met:
(a) The conditional use shall be limited to low-value structures,
such as metal or wood sheds 200 square feet or less and shall
not exceed more than one story.
(b) The structure shall be securely anchored to the wharf or pier to
resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the
effect of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all
building components.
(c) The structure will not adversely increase wave or debris
impact forces affecting nearby buildings.
(d) The structure shall have unfinished interiors and shall not be
used for human habitation.
(e) Any mechanical, utility equipment and fuel storage tanks must
be anchored and either elevated or floodproofed to three feet
above the base flood elevation. [Amended 5-21-2012]
(f) All electrical outlets shall be ground-fault interrupt type. The
electrical service disconnect shall be located on shore above
the base flood elevation and when possible, outside the special
flood hazard area.
§ 106-6 FLEA MARKETS § 106-7
104:171
§ 106-7. Conditional use review.
The Planning Board shall hear and decide upon applications for conditional
uses provided for in this chapter. The Planning Board shall hear, and
approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove all applications for
conditional uses. An applicant informed by the Code Enforcement Officer
that a conditional use permit is required shall file an application for the
permit with the Planning Board.
§ 106-8. Certificate of compliance.
No land in a special flood hazard area shall be occupied or used and no
structure, which is constructed or substantially improved, shall be occupied
until a certificate of compliance is issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
subject to the following provisions:
A. Review procedure for a conditional use flood hazard development
permit.
(1) The flood hazard development permit application with additional
information attached addressing how each of the conditional use
criteria specified in the chapter will be satisfied, may serve as the
permit application for the conditional use permit.
(2) Before deciding any application, the Planning Board shall hold a
public hearing on the application within 30 days of its receipt of the
application.
(3) If the Planning Board finds that the application satisfied all relevant
requirements of the chapter, the Planning Board must approve the
application or approve with conditions within 45 days of the date of
the public hearing.
(4) A conditional use permit issued under the provisions of this chapter
shall expire if the work or change involved is not commenced
within 180 days of the issuance of the permit by the Planning
Board.
(5) The applicant shall be notified by the Planning Board in writing
over the signature of the Chairman of the Planning Board that flood
insurance is not available for structures located entirely over water
or seaward of mean high tide.
B. Expansion of conditional uses.
(1) No existing building or use of premises may be expanded or
enlarged without a permit issued under this section if that building
or use was established or constructed under a previously issued
conditional use permit or if it is a building or use which would
require a conditional use permit if being newly established or
constructed under this chapter.
§ 106-7 SACO CITY CODE § 106-8
104:172
§ 106-9. Review of subdivision and development proposals.
The Planning Board shall, when reviewing subdivisions and other proposed
developments that require review under other federal law, state law or local
ordinances or regulations and all projects on five or more disturbed acres,
or in the case of manufactured home parks divided into two or more lots,
assure that:
A. For new construction or substantial improvement of any elevated
structure the applicant shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer:
(1) An elevation certificate completed by a professional land surveyor,
registered professional engineer or architect for compliance with
§ 106-6F, G, H or P; and
(2) For structures in Zones V1-30 and VE, certification by a registered
professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of
construction used are in compliance with § 106-6P(2).
B. The applicant shall submit written notification to the Code Enforcement
Officer that the development is complete and complies with the
provisions of this chapter.
C. Within 10 working days, the Code Enforcement Officer shall:
(1) Review the required certificate(s) and the applicant's written
notification; and
(2) Upon determination that the development conforms with the
provisions of this chapter, issue a certificate of compliance.
A. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.
B. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damages.
C. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
D. All proposals include base flood elevations, flood boundaries, and, in a
riverine floodplain, floodway data. These determinations shall be based
on engineering practices recognized by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
E. Any proposed development plan must include a condition of plan
approval requiring that structures on any lot in the development having
any portion of its land within a special flood hazard area, are to be
constructed in accordance with § 106-6 of this chapter. Such
requirement will be included in any deed, lease, purchase and sale
agreement, or document transferring or expressing an intent to
transfer any interest in real estate or structure, including but not
§ 106-8 FLEA MARKETS § 106-9
104:173
§ 106-10. Appeals and variances.
The Board of Appeals of the City of Saco may, upon written application of
an aggrieved party, hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there
is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by,
or failure to act by, the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board in the
administration or enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. The Board
of Appeals may grant a variance from the requirements of this chapter
consistent with state law and the following criteria:
limited to a time-share interest. The condition shall clearly articulate
that the municipality may enforce any violation of the construction
requirement and that fact shall also be included in the deed or any
other document previously described. The construction requirement
shall also be clearly stated on any map, plat or plan to be signed by
the Planning Board or local reviewing authority as part of the approval
process.
A. Variances shall not be granted within any designated regulatory
floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge
would result.
B. Variances shall be granted only upon:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that should a flood comparable to the base flood
occur, the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, public expense or create
nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances;
(3) A showing that the issuance of the variance will not conflict with
other state, federal or local laws or ordinances; and
(4) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
undue hardship, which in this section means that:
(a) The land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a
variance is granted;
(b) The need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of
the property and not to the general conditions in the
neighborhood;
(c) The granting of a variance will not alter the essential character
of the locality; and
(d) The hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant
or a prior owner.
C. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief,
§ 106-9 SACO CITY CODE § 106-10
104:174
and the Board of Appeals may impose such conditions to a variance as
it deems necessary.
D. Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial
improvements or other development for the conduct of a functionally
dependent use, provided that:
(1) Other criteria of §§ 106-10 and 106-6K are met; and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threats to public safety.
E. Variances may be issued for the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of historic structures upon the determination that:
(1) The development meets the criteria of § 106-10A through D above;
and
(2) The proposed repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure, and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
F. Any applicant who meets the criteria of § 106-10A through E shall be
notified by the Board of Appeals, in writing, over the signature of the
Chairman of the Board of Appeals that:
(1) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood level will result in greatly increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 per $100 of insurance
coverage;
(2) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life
and property; and
(3) The applicant agrees, in writing, that the applicant is fully aware of
all the risks inherent in the use of land subject to flooding, assumes
those risks and agrees to indemnify and defend the municipality
against any claims filed against it that are related to the applicant's
decision to use land located in a floodplain and that the applicant
individually releases the municipality from any claims the applicant
may have against the municipality that are related to the use of
land located in a floodplain.
G. Reconstructed buildings in areas governed by this Floodplain
Management Ordinance may exceed the maximum height requirements
of the Zoning Ordinance, without the need for a variance, only if the
requirements of § 504-2A of the Zoning Ordinance are met. [Added
5-21-201235]
35.Editor's Note: This amendment also redesignated former Subsection G as Subsection H.
§ 106-10 FLEA MARKETS § 106-10
104:175
§ 106-11. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
H. Appeal procedure for administrative and variance appeals.
(1) An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Board of
Appeals by an aggrieved party within 30 days after the receipt of a
written decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning
Board.
(2) Upon being notified of an appeal, the Code Enforcement Officer or
Planning Board, as appropriate, shall transmit to the Board of
Appeals all of the papers constituting the record of the decision
appealed from.
(3) The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal
within 35 days of its receipt of an appeal request.
(4) The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
(5) The Board of Appeals shall decide all appeals within 35 days after
the close of the hearing, and shall issue a written decision on all
appeals.
(6) The Board of Appeals shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer
a report of all variance actions, including justification for the
granting of the variance and an authorization for the Code
Enforcement Officer to issue a flood hazard development permit,
which includes any conditions to be attached to said permit.
(7) Any aggrieved party who participated as a party during the
proceedings before the Board of Appeals may take an appeal to
Superior Court in accordance with state laws within 45 days from
the date of any decision of the Board of Appeals.
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the
provisions of this chapter pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
B. The penalties contained in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452 shall apply to any
violation of this chapter.
C. In addition to any other actions, the Code Enforcement Officer, upon
determination that a violation exists, shall submit a declaration to the
Administrator of the Federal Insurance Administration requesting a
denial of flood insurance. The valid declaration shall consist of:
(1) The name of the property owner and address or legal description of
the property sufficient to confirm its identity or location;
(2) A clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in violation
of a cited state or local law, regulation or ordinance;
(3) A clear statement that the public body making the declaration has
authority to do so and a citation to that authority;
§ 106-10 SACO CITY CODE § 106-11
104:176
§ 106-12. Validity and severability.
If any section or provision of this chapter is declared by the courts to be
invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of
this chapter.
§ 106-13. Conflict with other ordinances.
This chapter shall not in any way impair or remove the necessity of
compliance with any other applicable rule, ordinance, regulation, bylaw,
permit or provision of law. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction
upon the use of land, buildings or structures, the provisions of this chapter
shall control.
§ 106-14. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall have the same meanings as they have at common law and to give
this chapter its most reasonable application. Words used in the present
tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural, and the
plural number includes the singular. The word "may" is permissive; "shall"
is mandatory and not discretionary.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A small detached structure that is incidental
and subordinate to the principal structure.
ADJACENT GRADE — The natural elevation of the ground surface prior to
construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO and AH Zone on
a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent or
greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain having a
one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year, as specifically
identified in the Flood Insurance Study cited in § 106-1F of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year, commonly called the "one-hundred-year flood."
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
(4) Evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the
violation and the prospective denial of insurance; and
(5) A clear statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant
to Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as
amended.
§ 106-11 FLEA MARKETS § 106-14
104:177
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended through its design and construction to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to
the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A document signed by the Code
Enforcement Officer stating that a structure is in compliance with all of the
provisions of this chapter.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — A person certified under 30-A
M.R.S.A., § 4451 (including exceptions in § 4451, Paragraph 1) and
employed by a municipality to enforce all applicable comprehensive
planning and land use laws and ordinances.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use that, because of its potential impact on
surrounding areas and structures, is permitted only upon review and
approval by the Planning Board pursuant to § 106-7.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations or storage
of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING —
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE — An official form (FEMA Form 81-31, 07-00, as
amended) that:
A nonbasement building:
Built, in the case of a building in Zone A1-30, AE, A, AO or AH,
to have the top of the elevated floor or, in the case of a building
in Zone V1-30 or VE, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal
structural member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground
level by means of pilings, columns, posts, piers or stilts; and
(1)
Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of
the building during a flood of up to one foot above the magnitude
of the base flood.
(2)
A.
In the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, AO or AH, "elevated building"
also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation
perimeter walls with hydraulic openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of Zone V1-30 or
VE, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the
definition of elevated building, even though the lower area is enclosed
by means of breakaway walls, if the breakaway walls meet the
standards of § 106-6P(2)(b)[3].
B.
Is used to verify compliance with the floodplain management
regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program; and
A.
B. Is required for purchasing flood insurance.
§ 106-14 SACO CITY CODE § 106-14
104:178
FLOOD or FLOODING —
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community
on which the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the
special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source. (See "flooding").
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including
but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and contents.
FLOODWAY — See "regulatory floodway."
FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT LINES — The lines marking the limits of
floodways on federal, state and local floodplain maps.
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal wate
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
A.
The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other
body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves
or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly
caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm or by an unanticipated force of nature,
such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly
unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in
Subsection A(1)of this definition.
B.
§ 106-14 FLEA MARKETS § 106-14
104:179
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors, such as wave action, bridge
openings and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed, that
could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a
selected size flood and floodway conditions.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers and ship
building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or
related manufacturing facilities.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOCALLY ESTABLISHED DATUM — For purposes of this chapter, an
elevation established for a specific site to which all other elevations at the
site are referenced. This elevation is generally not referenced to the North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or any other established datum and is
used in areas where mean sea level data is too far from a specific site to be
practically used.[Amended 5-21-2012]
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements described in § 106-6L of this
chapter.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior to qualify as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a State Inventory of Historic Places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 106-14 SACO CITY CODE § 106-14
104:180
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
For floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured home" also
includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a
site for greater than 180 consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, or other datum, to
which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate
Map are referenced.[Amended 5-21-2012]
MINOR DEVELOPMENT — All development that is not new construction or
a substantial improvement, such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or
additions, whose value is less than 50% of the market value of the structure.
It also includes, but is not limited to, accessory structures as provided for
in § 106-6J, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling
operations, storage of equipment or materials, deposition or extraction
of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply
facilities that do not involve structures; and nonstructural projects such as
bridges, dams, towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves, and piers.36
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM (NAVD) — North American vertical
datum, whose standard was established in 1988, and adopted by the
National Geodetic Survey in 1991 to replace the NGVD 1929 datum. NAVD
1988 is used by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), and has been
used on Saco's Flood Insurance Rate Maps since 2006. NAVD 1988 can also
be called "Mean Sea Level (MSL)."[Amended 5-21-2012]
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — See "base flood."
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection, not including slideouts;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a motor
vehicle; and
C.
36.Editor's Note: The former definition of "National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD)," which
immediately followed this definition, was amended 5-21-2012, and is now included as the
definition of "North American Vertical Datum (NAVD)."
§ 106-14 FLEA MARKETS § 106-14
104:181
REGULATORY FLOODWAY —
RIVERINE — Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — See "area of special flood hazard."
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the building permit was issued,
provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial improvement or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start"
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation;
or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading
and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways;
nor does it include excavation for basements, footings, piers or foundations
or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on
the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, or modification
of any construction element, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed
building. A gas- or liquid-storage tank that is principally above ground is
also a structure.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use.
D.
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas
that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot;
and
A.
When not designated on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map or
Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, it is considered to be the channel of
a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas to a distance
of 1/2 the width of the floodplain, as measured from the normal high
water mark to the upland limit of the floodplain.
B.
§ 106-14 SACO CITY CODE § 106-14
104:182
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or development to comply with a
community's floodplain management regulations.
§ 106-15. Abrogation.
This chapter repeals and replaces any municipal ordinance previously
enacted to comply with the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L.
90-488, as amended).
Chapter 112
GENERAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure and a variance is obtained from the community's Board of
Appeals.
B.
Any completed project to elevate a building or structure, to a height of
one foot or more above the base flood elevation, for which a building
permit was issued after March 3, 1998, and prior to May 1, 2012.
[Added 5-21-2012]
C.
§ 106-14 FLEA MARKETS § 106-15
104:183

ARTICLE I
Statement of Policy
§ 112-1. Policy established.
The City of Saco administers a program of general assistance (GA) available
to all persons who are eligible to receive assistance in accordance with
the standards of eligibility as provided within this chapter, Department of
Health and Human Services (DHHS) GA policy and in 22 M.R.S.A. § 4301 et
seq.
A. Every effort will be made to recognize the dignity of the applicant while
encouraging self-reliance. The program will strive to help eligible
persons achieve self-maintenance by promoting the work incentive.
When possible, it will seek to alleviate needs other than financial
through rehabilitative, preventive and protective services. The general
assistance program will place no unreasonable restrictions on the
personal rights of the applicant or recipient, nor will there be any
unlawful discrimination based on sex, age, race, nationality, religion,
sexual orientation or disability. The municipality is committed to
including qualified individuals with disabilities in municipal services,
programs, and activities. As a result, the municipality will promote a GA
program that, when viewed in its entirety, is readily accessible to and
usable by individuals with disabilities. GA applicants with physical or
mental disabilities that require a reasonable accommodation in order to
access and/or utilize the municipal GA program are encouraged to
provide the municipality with advance notice regarding the
accommodation request.
B. The General Assistance Administrator will act promptly on all
applications for assistance and requests for fair hearings. GA applicants
will be provided information regarding their rights and responsibilities
under the GA program. Within 24 hours of receiving an application, the
Administrator will provide the applicant a written decision, whether or
not assistance is granted, that will state the specific reasons for the
decision. The Administrator will also provide the applicant written
notice that the applicant may appeal to the municipal fair hearing
authority if dissatisfied with the decision. When an applicant is
determined to be eligible, assistance appropriate to the need will be
furnished within 24 hours after the completed application is submitted
except when the Administrator issues nonemergency assistance
conditionally on the successful completion of a workfare assignment.
(See § 112-22 of this chapter.)
C. The Administrator will maintain complete and accurate records
pertaining to each applicant and recipient. These records are
confidential as a matter of law (see 22 M.R.S.A. § 4306).
D. The Administrator will post notice stating the day(s) and hours the
Administrator will be available. The Administrator, or other designated
person/entity, will be available to take applications in the event of an
§ 112-1 FLEA MARKETS § 112-1
104:185
emergency at all other times. A copy of this chapter and the Maine
General Assistance Law will be readily available to any member of the
public upon request. Notice to this effect will be posted.
§ 112-1 SACO CITY CODE § 112-1
104:186
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 112-2. Word usage; terms defined.
A. Common meaning of words. Unless otherwise apparent or defined, all
words in this chapter will have their common meaning.
B. Special definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
APPLICANT — A person who has submitted, either directly or through
an authorized representative, an application for general assistance
or who has, in an emergency, requested assistance without first
completing an application. In addition, all persons on whose behalf an
authorized application has been submitted or on whose behalf benefits
have been granted shall be considered applicants.
APPLICATION FORM — A standardized form used by the General
Assistance Administrator for the purpose of allowing a person to apply
for general assistance and confirming the fact that a person has made
application. The application form must be signed by the applicant to be
considered complete.
BASIC NECESSITIES —
Food, clothing, shelter, fuel, electricity, nonelective essential
medical services as prescribed by a physician, nonprescription
drugs, basic telephone service where it is necessary for medical
reasons, property taxes when a tax lien placed on the property
threatens the loss of the applicant's place of residence, and any
other commodity or service determined essential by the
municipality.
(1)
"Basic necessities" do not include:
(a) Phone bills.
(b) Cable or satellite dish television.
(c) Mail orders.
(d) Vehicle payments.
Credit card debt. (NOTE: Repayments of loans or credit will
be treated as having been spent on basic necessities when the
applicant can provide verification of this fact.)
(e)
(f) Furniture.
Loan repayments. (NOTE: Repayments of loans or credit will
be treated as having been spent on basic necessities when the
applicant can provide verification of this fact.)
(g)
(h) Cigarettes.
(2)
§ 112-2 FLEA MARKETS § 112-2
104:187
CASE RECORD — An official file containing application forms;
correspondence; narrative records and all other communications
pertaining to an applicant or recipient; written decisions regarding
eligibility, including reasons for those decisions, as well as the types
and amounts of assistance provided; and all records concerning an
applicant's request for fair hearing and those fair hearing decisions.
CATEGORICAL ASSISTANCE — All state and federal income
maintenance programs.
CLAIMANT — A person who has requested a fair hearing.
DEFICIT — An applicant's deficit is the appropriate overall maximum
level of assistance for the household as provided in § 112-33 of this
chapter less the household income as calculated pursuant to § 112-32
of this chapter, provided such a calculation yields a positive number. If
the household income is greater than the appropriate overall maximum
level of assistance, the household has no deficit.
DISABLED PERSON — A person who is presently unable to work or
maintain a home due to a physical or mental disability that is verified
by a physician or qualified mental health provider.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or part thereof used for separate living
quarters for one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit
[22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(2)].
ELIGIBLE PERSON — A person who is qualified to receive general
assistance from the municipality according to the standards of
eligibility set forth in this chapter [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(3)]. "Eligible
person" does not include a fugitive from justice as defined in 15
M.R.S.A. § 201(4).
EMERGENCY — Any life-threatening situation or a situation beyond
the control of the individual which, if not alleviated immediately, could
reasonably be expected to pose a threat to the health or safety of
a person. At the municipality's option, a situation which is imminent
(i) Alcohol.
(j) Pet care costs.
(k) Vacation costs.
(l) Legal fees.
(m) Late fees.
(n) Key deposits.
Security deposits for rental property (except for those
situations where no other permanent lodging is available
unless a security deposit is paid and a waiver, deferral or
installment arrangement cannot be made between the landlord
and tenant to satisfy the need for the immediate payment of
the security deposit or payment in full) [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(1)].
(o)
§ 112-2 SACO CITY CODE § 112-2
104:188
and which may result in undue hardship or unnecessary cost to the
individual or municipality if not resolved immediately [22 M.R.S.A.
§§ 4301(4), 4308(2), and 4310].
GENERAL ASSISTANCE ADMINISTRATOR — A municipal official
designated to receive applications, make decisions concerning an
applicant's right to receive assistance, and prepare records and
communications concerning assistance. He or she may be an elected
overseer or an authorized agent such as a town manager, welfare
director, or caseworker [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(12)].
GENERAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM — A service administered by a
municipality for the immediate aid of persons who are unable to provide
the basic necessities essential to maintain themselves or their families.
A general assistance program provides a specific amount and type of
aid for defined needs during a limited period of time and is not intended
to be a continuing "grant-in-aid" or "categorical" welfare program.
This definition shall not in any way lessen the responsibility of each
municipality to provide general assistance to a person each time that
the person is in need and is found to be otherwise eligible to receive
general assistance [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(5)].
HOUSEHOLD — An individual or a group of individuals who share a
dwelling unit. When an applicant shares a dwelling unit with one or
more individuals, even when a landlord-tenant relationship may exist
between individuals residing in the dwelling unit, eligible applicants
may receive assistance for no more than their pro rata share of the
actual costs of the shared basic needs of that household according
to the maximum levels of assistance established in the municipal
ordinance. The pro rata share is calculated by dividing the maximum
level of assistance available to the entire household by the total number
of household members. The income of household members not legally
liable shall be considered as available to the applicant only when there
is a pooling of income [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(6)].
INCOME —
Any form of income in cash or in kind received by the household,
including:
(a) Net remuneration for services performed.
(b) Cash received on either secured or unsecured credit.
Payments received as an annuity or retirement or disability
benefits.
(c)
(d) Veterans' pensions and/or benefits.
(e) Retirement accounts or benefits.
(f) Workers' compensation.
(g) Unemployment benefits.
(1)
§ 112-2 FLEA MARKETS § 112-2
104:189
(h) Federal and/or state tax returns.
Benefits under any state or federal categorical assistance
program such as TANF, Supplemental Security Income, Social
Security and any other payments from governmental sources
(unless specifically prohibited by any law or regulation).
(i)
(j) Court-ordered support payments, e.g., child support.
(k) Income from pension or trust funds.
Household income from any other source, including relatives
or unrelated household members.
(l)
(m) Student loans.
(n) Rental income.
The following items shall not be considered as income or assets
that must be liquidated for the purposes of deriving income:
Real or personal income-producing property, tools of trade,
governmental entitlement specifically treated as exempt assets
by state or federal law;
(a)
Actual work-related expenses, whether itemized or by standard
deduction, such as taxes, retirement fund contributions, union
dues, transportation costs to and from work, special equipment
costs and child-care expenses; or
(b)
Earned income of children below the age of 18 years who are
full-time students and who are not working full-time.
(c)
(2)
In determining need, the period of time used as a basis for the
calculation shall be a thirty-day period commencing on the date of
the application. This prospective calculation shall not disqualify an
applicant who has exhausted income to purchase basic necessities,
provided that the income does not exceed the income standards
established by the municipality [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)].
(3)
Certain public benefit programs are specifically exempt from being
counted as income for purposes of GA. These programs include:
(a) Food stamps [7 U.S.C. § 2017(b)].
(b) Li-Heap (42 U.S.C. § 8624).
(c) Family development accounts (22 M.R.S.A. § 3762).
(d) Americorp VISTA program benefits [42 U.S.C. § 5044(f)].
Property tax rebates issued under the Maine Property Tax
Fairness Credit Program, only so long as the money is spent on
basic necessities [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)].
(e)
(4)
§ 112-2 SACO CITY CODE § 112-2
104:190
INITIAL APPLICANT — A person who has not applied for assistance in
this or any other municipality is considered an initial applicant.
JUST CAUSE — A valid, verifiable reason that hinders an individual
from complying with one or more conditions of eligibility or from
attending a scheduled fair hearing [22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4301(8) and
4316-A(5)].
LUMP SUM PAYMENT — A one-time or typically nonrecurring sum of
money issued to an applicant or recipient. Lump sum payment includes,
but is not limited to, retroactive or settlement portions of social security
benefits, workers' compensation payments, unemployment benefits,
disability income, veterans' benefits, severance pay benefits, or money
received from inheritances, lottery winnings, personal injury awards,
property damage claims or divorce settlements. A lump sum payment
includes only the amount of money available to the applicant after
payment of required deductions has been made from the gross lump
sum payment. A lump sum payment does not include conversion of a
non-liquid resource to a liquid resource if the liquid resource has been
used or is intended to be used to replace the converted resource or for
other necessary expenses [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(8-A)].
MATERIAL FACT — A fact that necessarily has some bearing on the
determination of an applicant's general assistance eligibility and which
would, if disclosed to the Administrator, have some determinable effect
on the calculation of eligibility or the issuance of a grant of assistance.
MAXIMUM LEVELS OF ASSISTANCE — The amount of financial
assistance for a commodity or service as established in § 112-33 of this
chapter or the actual cost of any such basic necessity, whichever is less.
MISCONDUCT — For purposes of the GA work requirement (see 22
M.R.S.A. § 4316-A), "misconduct" shall have the same meaning as
misconduct defined in 26 M.R.S.A. § 1043(23). (See Appendix I of this
chapter for the official definition of misconduct.)37 Generally, employees
are guilty of misconduct when the employee violates his or her duties
or obligations to the employer. Employees who engage in a pattern of
irresponsible behavior to the detriment of the employer's interest may
also be found guilty of misconduct.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, town or plantation administering a general
assistance program.
MUNICIPALITY OF RESPONSIBILITY — The municipality which is
financially liable for the support of an eligible person at the time of
application [22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4301(9) and 4307].
NEED — The condition whereby a person's income, money, property,
credit, assets or other resources available to provide basic necessities
(f) ASPIRE support service payments (10-144 CMR Ch. 323).
37.Editor's Note: Appendix I is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 112-2 FLEA MARKETS § 112-2
104:191
for the individual and the individual's family are less than the maximum
levels of assistance [22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4301(10) and 4308].
NET GENERAL ASSISTANCE COSTS — Those direct costs incurred by
a municipality in providing assistance to eligible persons according to
standards established by the municipal officers. These do not include
the administrative expenses of the general assistance program [22
M.R.S.A. §§ 4301(11) and 4311].
PERIOD OF ELIGIBILITY — The time for which a person has been
granted assistance. The period of eligibility may vary depending on
the type of assistance provided; however, in no event shall this period
extend beyond one month [22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(1)].
POOLING OF INCOME — The financial relationship among household
members who are not legally liable for mutual support in which there
occurs any commingling of funds or sharing of income or expenses.
Municipalities may by ordinance establish as a rebuttable presumption
that persons sharing the same dwelling unit are pooling their income.
Applicants who are requesting that the determination of eligibility be
calculated as though one or more household members are not pooling
their income have the burden of rebutting the presumed pooling of
income.
REAL ESTATE — Any land, buildings, homes, mobile homes and any
other things affixed to the land [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(13)].
RECIPIENT — A person who has applied for and is currently receiving
general assistance.
REPEAT APPLICANTS — All applicants for general assistance that
are not initial applicants are repeat applicants. For purposes of this
chapter, "repeat" and "subsequent" shall have the same meaning.
RESIDENT — A person who is physically present in a municipality with
the intention of remaining in that municipality in order to maintain
or establish a home and who has no other residence. A person who
applies for assistance in a municipality who is not a resident of that
municipality or any other municipality is the responsibility of the
municipality where the person first applies. That municipality must take
an application and grant assistance to the applicant if he/she is eligible,
until he/she establishes a new residence in another municipality (22
M.R.S.A. § 4307).
RESOURCES —
Resources include any program, service, or other sources of
support which are an alternative to or supplement for general
assistance. There are two kinds of resources: "available" and
"potential."
Potential resources are programs, services, nonliquid assets,
or trusts that typically require people to apply in writing and/
or wait a period of time before eligibility is determined or the
(a)
(1)
§ 112-2 SACO CITY CODE § 112-2
104:192
THIRTY-DAY NEED — An applicant's thirty-day need is the sum of the
household's prospective thirty-day costs, from the date of application,
for the various basic necessities. For the purpose of this calculation, the
thirty-day cost for any basic need shall be the household's actual thirtyday
cost for the basic necessity or the maximum thirty-day cost for the
basic necessity as established by this chapter, whichever is less.
UNFORESEEN REPEAT APPLICANTS — Repeat applicants who have
not applied for assistance within the last 12 months and who have
been regularly employed or receiving support from a public benefit
or private source and who have unexpectedly become unemployed
through no fault of their own or whose benefits (e.g., through an
available resource) have ceased through no fault of their own.
UNMET NEED — An applicant's unmet need is the household's thirtyday
need as established by § 112-31 of the ordinance less the household
income as calculated pursuant to § 112-32 of this chapter, provided that
such a calculation yields a positive number. If the household income is
greater than the household's thirty-day need, the household does not
have an unmet need.
potential income is released. Potential resources include but
are not limited to any state or federal assistance program,
employment benefits, governmental or private pension
program, available trust funds, support from legally liable
relatives, child support payments, and jointly held resources
where the applicant or recipient share may be available to the
individual (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317). Potential resources include the
TANF (previously known as AFDC) program, food stamps, fuel
assistance (HEAP), subsidized housing, and similar programs.
Available resources include resources which are immediately
available to the applicant or which can be conveniently secured
by the applicant without delay, such as cash on hand or in
bank accounts, assets for which there is an immediate and
available market, or support from relatives which is being
made available at the time of application and for which the
applicant does not have to take any unreasonable steps to
secure (e.g., relocation beyond the immediate region). At the
discretion of the GA Administrator a necessary minimum
balance required by a financial institution in order to obtain
free checking or in order to maintain the account shall not be
considered an available resource.
(b)
The Municipal GA Administrator reserves the right to inform GA
clients of services, commodities or facilities made available by
private organizations or charities. Although GA applicants/
recipients may be informed of the existence of a charitable
resource and/or organization, GA eligibility shall not be based or
conditioned on the use of a private charitable resource(s).
(2)
§ 112-2 FLEA MARKETS § 112-2
104:193
WORK REQUIREMENTS — Work requirements are those obligations
the Municipal Administrator places on applicants for general assistance
as directed and/or authorized by 22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A to the extent
such obligations ensure a continuing potential eligibility for general
assistance when complied with, result in ineligibility when violated, and
are not merely optional, discretionary, or advisory. Work requirements
include registering for work, looking for work in good faith, accepting
all suitable job offers, maintaining employment, performing workfare,
and participating in training, educational, or rehabilitation programs
that will assist the participant in securing employment.
§ 112-2 SACO CITY CODE § 112-2
104:194
ARTICLE III
Administrative Rules and Regulations
§ 112-3. Establishment.
The following are rules and regulations for the administration of general
assistance.
§ 112-4. Confidentiality of information.
Case records and all other information relating to an applicant or recipient
of general assistance are confidential and will not be disclosed to the
general public, unless the applicant or recipient states in writing what
information is to be released (22 M.R.S.A. § 4306).
§ 112-5. Maintenance of records.
A. Release of information. Applicants, recipients and their legal
representatives have the right to review their case records. No record
will be released to a third party, however, unless the Administrator
receives a consent form signed by the applicant expressly authorizing
the release of his or her records to the specified parties. Whenever the
Administrator releases any information, he/she will make a notation in
the applicant's file stating to whom the record was released and the
date. The Administrator may charge a reasonable fee for the
reproduction of any records when appropriate.
B. Information from other sources; penalty.
(1) Information furnished to the municipality by the Department of
Health and Human Services or any other agency or institution
pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4314 is confidential. The General
Assistance Administrator will also comply with laws relating to the
confidentiality of vital statistic records, such as those concerning
birth, marriage and death (22 M.R.S.A. § 2706).
(2) Any representative of a financial institution (except national banks)
or any employer of a general assistance applicant who refuses to
provide necessary information to the Administrator in order to
verify an applicant's eligibility must state in writing the reason for
the refusal. Any such person who refuses to provide information,
without just cause, may be subject to a civil penalty of not less than
$25 nor more than $100. Any person, including the applicant, who
knowingly and willfully makes a false representation of a material
fact to the Administrator is committing a Class E crime (22
M.R.S.A. §§ 4314 and 4315).
C. Misuse of information. Misuse of any information relating to an
applicant or recipient is a punishable offense [22 M.R.S.A. § 42(2)].
§ 112-3 FLEA MARKETS § 112-5
104:195
A. The General Assistance Administrator will keep complete and accurate
general assistance records (22 M.R.S.A. § 4306). These records are
necessary to:
(1) Provide a valid basis of accounting for municipal expenditures;
(2) Document and support decisions concerning an applicant or
recipient; and
(3) Ensure the availability of all relevant information in the event of a
fair hearing or judicial review of a decision by the General
Assistance Administrator.
B. Case records.
(1) The Administrator will establish and maintain a separate case
record, either in paper format or in digital format, for each
applicant or recipient. Each case record will include at least:
(a) Household applications.
(b) Budget sheets.
(c) Information concerning the types and amounts of assistance
provided.
(d) Narrative statements describing the nature of the emergency
situation whenever general assistance is granted in amounts
greater than the applicant's mathematical eligibility (i.e.,
deficit or unmet need, whichever is less).
(e) Written decisions.
(f) Requests for fair hearings and the fair hearing authority
decisions.
(g) Workfare participation records.
(h) Repayments to the municipality.
(i) Narrative writings documenting the need for general
assistance, the results of home visits, collateral information,
referrals, changes in status.
(j) Client authorization(s) for the release of GA information and/or
reason(s) for the release of confidential information.
(k) Adjustments in aid, and suspension or termination of eligibility.
(l) Physician's documentation.
(m) Supplemental Security Income (SSI) interim assistance
reimbursement authorization forms.
(n) Vendor forms.
§ 112-5 SACO CITY CODE § 112-5
104:196
(2) Case records will not include information or material that is
irrelevant to either the applicant's or the recipient's application or
the Administrator's decisions.
C. Retention of records. General assistance records shall be retained for a
minimum of three full years. The three-year period shall coincide with
the state's fiscal year, which begins July 1 and ends on the following
June 30. Records may be destroyed after three years by one of the two
preferred methods of destruction for confidential records, i.e.,
supervised shredding, burning or appropriate digital deletion/
destruction process. In the event a client's records contain SSI
reimbursement forms, the client's records should be maintained so that
the municipality may seek reimbursement.
§ 112-5 FLEA MARKETS § 112-5
104:197

ARTICLE IV
Application Procedure
§ 112-6. Right to apply; method of application.
A. Who may apply. Anyone may apply for general assistance. The head of
the family, any other responsible household member, or an authorized
representative must apply in person, except in special emergency
situations as provided in § 112-14 of this chapter or except when the
applicant is a resident of an emergency shelter and the municipality has
made an agreement with that emergency shelter to presume shelter
residents to be eligible for general assistance [22 M.R.S.A. § 4304(3)].
In such cases, the Administrator may require a representative to
present a signed statement documenting that he/she is in fact
authorized to apply for general assistance on behalf of the named
applicant. The applicant or representative must complete a written
application and any other required forms so that the Administrator can
determine eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4305 and 4308). With notice, all
members of the household receiving general assistance may be
required to physically present themselves to the Administrator. Note
that fugitives from justice are ineligible for general assistance.
B. Application via telephone. When a person has an emergency but is
unable to apply in person due to illness, disability, lack of child care,
lack of transportation or other good cause and he/she cannot send an
authorized representative, the Administrator will accept an application
by telephone. The telephone application process will include the
Administrator receiving written verification by mail and visiting the
applicant's home with his or her permission (22 M.R.S.A. § 4304).
C. Written application upon each request. Each request for assistance will
be administered in accordance with these guidelines. The
Administrator will make an independent determination of eligibility for
general assistance each time a person applies (22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4308 and
4309).
D. Applications accepted; posted notice. Application forms will be
available during regular business hours at the municipal office and
when the General Assistance Administrator is conducting interviews
with applicants. Notice will be posted stating when and where people
may apply for assistance and the name of the Administrator available to
take emergency applications at all other times. In addition, the posted
notice shall include the fact that the municipality must issue a written
decision on all applications within 24 hours and the DHHS toll-free
telephone numbers for reporting alleged violations or complaints.
Completed applications will be accepted and interviews given only
during the regular hours established and posted by the Administrator.
In an emergency, however, the Administrator or his or her designee will
be available to accept applications for assistance whenever necessary
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4304).
§ 112-6 FLEA MARKETS § 112-7
104:199
§ 112-7. Application interview.
Except when it is impractical, the General Assistance Administrator will
interview each applicant personally before making a decision. The interview
will be conducted in private, although the applicant may be accompanied by
a legal representative, friend or family member.
§ 112-8. Contents of application.
§ 112-9. General Assistance Administrator's responsibilities at time
of application.
The Administrator will make every effort to inform all applicants of their
rights and responsibilities as well as the general program requirements
associated with applying for and receiving general assistance, including
A. At a minimum, the application will contain the following mandatory
information:
(1) The applicant's name, address, date of birth, social security
number or appropriate United States Customs and Immigration
Services (USCIS) documentation, and phone number;
(2) Names, date(s) of birth, and social security number(s) or
appropriate USCIS documentation of other household members for
whom the applicant is seeking assistance;
(3) Total number of individuals living with the applicant;
(4) Employment and employability information;
(5) All household income, resources, assets, and property;
(6) Household expenses;
(7) Types of assistance being requested;
(8) Penalty for false representation;
(9) The applicant's permission to verify information;
(10) Signature of the applicant and date.
B. In the event an initial applicant is unable to provide identification
records (e.g., social security card/number) because the record may
have been lost, stolen or misplaced, the initial applicant may be
provided a reasonable amount of time, e.g., five working days, in order
to obtain copies of identification records. Provided the initial applicant
makes a good faith effort to obtain the item/record sought, GA required
to cure an immediate and/or emergency need shall not be withheld. In
such cases, the municipality may elect to provide only a prorated
amount of GA, e.g., five days' worth, while the applicant proceeds to
obtain the required information.
§ 112-7 SACO CITY CODE § 112-9
104:200
application requirements, eligibility guidelines, applicant rights, and
applicant reimbursement obligations.
A. Application requirements. The Administrator will help the applicant fill
out the application form as described in the preceding section. The
Administrator will inform the applicant of any other information or
documentation that the applicant will have to provide in order for the
Administrator to evaluate the applicant's eligibility for assistance. The
Administrator will fully explain the purpose of any release of
information form or reimbursement agreement before seeking to obtain
the applicant's signature or written authorization.
B. Eligibility requirements. The Administrator will inform, either verbally
or in writing, the applicant of the eligibility requirements of the
program, including:
(1) The income standard of need;
(2) The applicant's ongoing use-of-income, work-related, and resourcerelated
responsibilities, as described in the section immediately
below;
(3) The financial reduction in assistance that is the consequence of
spending household income on nonbasic necessities; and
(4) The disqualification penalties associated with committing fraud,
failing to perform work-related assignments without just cause, or
failing to make a good faith effort to secure potential resources
when the requirement to attempt to obtain those resources has
been explained to the applicant in writing.
C. Applicant rights. The Administrator will inform all applicants of their
rights to:
(1) Review the Municipal General Assistance Ordinance and Maine
General Assistance Law;
(2) Apply for assistance;
(3) Receive a written decision concerning eligibility within 24 hours of
applying for assistance;
(4) Confidentiality;
(5) Contact the DHHS;
(6) Challenge the Administrator's decision by requesting a fair
hearing.
D. Reimbursement/recovery. The Administrator will inform the applicant
that he/she must reimburse the municipality for the amount of general
assistance he/she has been granted in the event of a subsequent ability
to pay. The municipality may also, as appropriate, contact the client's
legal representative to inform him or her of the client's obligation to
§ 112-9 FLEA MARKETS § 112-9
104:201
§ 112-10. Applicant's responsibilities.
repay the municipality under the GA program. In addition to seeking
repayment from a recipient, the municipality also may recover the
amount of assistance granted to a recipient during the previous 12
months from any relative legally liable for the applicant's support
(spouses, parents of persons under the age of 25; see Article VIII,
Recovery of Expenses) (22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4318 and 4319). Whenever
applicable, the Administrator will explain the various liens a
municipality may place against a recipient's real or personal property,
such as the mortgage or capital improvement lien, the workers'
compensation lump sum payment lien, or the SSI interim assistance
agreement lien, as these liens are described in Article VIII, Recovery of
Expenses.
A. The applicant has the responsibility at the time of each application to
provide accurate, complete and current household information and
verifiable documentation concerning:
(1) Income.
(2) Resources.
(3) Assets.
(4) Employment.
(5) Use of income.
(6) Names and addresses of any relatives legally liable for the
applicant's support.
(7) Any change in this information from a previous application that
would affect household eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309).
B. In addition, the applicant must accurately report and provide verifiable
documentation that shows the applicant:
(1) Has remained employed, if previously employed, and not quit work
without just cause or been discharged from employment for
misconduct;
(2) Has been seeking employment, if previously unemployed or
employed on a part-time basis, has accepted any suitable offer of
employment, and has satisfactorily performed all workfare
assignments or had just cause not to perform those assignments;
(3) Has made use of all available and potential resources when
directed in writing to such a program by the Administrator,
including, but not limited to, other government benefit programs or
the assistance of liable relatives of sufficient means; and
§ 112-9 SACO CITY CODE § 112-10
104:202
§ 112-11. Action on applications.
§ 112-12. Withdrawal of application.
An application is considered withdrawn if:
§ 112-13. Temporary refusal to accept application.
Under special circumstances, the General Assistance Administrator may
temporarily refuse to accept applications. Such circumstances may include,
but are not limited to, the following:
(4) Has participated in any training, retraining, educational or
rehabilitative program when appropriate and when directed in
writing to such a program by the Administrator, in order to
diminish the applicant's need for general assistance (22 M.R.S.A.
§§ 4316-A and 4317).
A. Written decision. The General Assistance Administrator will give a
written decision to the applicant concerning his or her eligibility within
24 hours after the applicant submits a written application. Assistance
will be furnished to eligible applicants within that period, except when
the municipality is permitted by law (and pursuant to § 112-22 of this
chapter) to issue assistance conditionally on the successful completion
of a workfare assignment (22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4305, 4316-A, and 4321). A
written decision will be given each time a person applies, whether
assistance is granted, denied, reduced or terminated.
B. Content. The written decision will contain the following information:
(1) The type and amount of aid the applicant is being granted or the
applicant's ineligibility;
(2) The period of eligibility if the applicant is eligible for assistance;
(3) The specific reasons for the decision;
(4) The applicant's right to a fair hearing; and
(5) The applicant's right to notify the DHHS if he/she believes the
municipality has acted illegally (22 M.R.S.A. § 4321).
A. The applicant requests in writing that his or her application be
withdrawn; or
B. The applicant refuses to complete or sign the application or any other
form needed by the General Assistance Administrator.
A. When the applicant's conduct is abusive, disruptive, or harassing, or
when the applicant is under the influence of drugs or alcohol. In these
situations, the applicant will be asked to leave, and if the applicant
refuses to leave, the police may be summoned. The applicant will be
§ 112-10 FLEA MARKETS § 112-13
104:203
§ 112-14. Emergencies.
An emergency is considered to be any life-threatening situation or a
situation beyond the control of the applicant which, if not alleviated
immediately, could reasonably be expected to pose a threat to the health
or safety of the applicant or a member of the household [22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4301(4)]. Although they may be considered otherwise ineligible to receive
general assistance, persons who apply for assistance to alleviate an
emergency may be granted assistance, except as provided below, if they do
not have sufficient income and resources to meet an actual emergency need
and have not had sufficient income and resources to avert the emergency
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4308). A municipality may provide emergency assistance
when the municipality determines that an emergency is imminent and that
failure to provide assistance may result in undue hardship and unnecessary
costs to either the client or the municipality.
informed that an application will only be accepted when his or her
conduct is under control.
B. If the Administrator believes that an applicant's behavior presents a
threat to the health or safety of the public or to a municipal employee,
or if such behavior is violent, or if an applicant has engaged in abusive,
disruptive or harassing behavior and has been required to leave on
more than one occasion, then the applicant may be required to
designate a third party to apply for assistance on his or her behalf, and
the applicant may be prohibited from entering the municipal building.
C. When a third person applies for assistance on behalf of the applicant,
that person may be required to provide written verification that he/she
has been duly authorized to act as a representative for the applicant (22
M.R.S.A. § 4308).
A. Disqualification.
(1) A person who is currently disqualified from receiving general
assistance due to a violation of §§ 112-21 through 112-25 or 112-29
of this chapter is ineligible to receive emergency assistance [22
M.R.S.A. § 4308(2)(A)]. However, dependents of a disqualified
person may be eligible for assistance. For the purposes of this
section, "dependents" are defined as 1) a dependent minor child; 2)
an elderly, ill or disabled person; or 3) a person whose presence is
required to provide care for any child under the age of six years or
any ill or disabled member of the household [22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4309(3)].
(2) In the event one or more members of a household are disqualified
and assistance is requested for the remaining dependents, the
eligibility of those dependents will be calculated by dividing the
maximum level of assistance available to the entire household by
the total number of household members.
§ 112-13 SACO CITY CODE § 112-14
104:204
B. Assistance prior to verification. Whenever an applicant informs the
Administrator that he/she needs assistance immediately, the
Administrator will grant, pending verification, the assistance within 24
hours, provided that:
(1) After interviewing the applicant, the Administrator has determined
that the applicant will probably be eligible for assistance after a
verification of information is completed; and
(2) The applicant submits documentation, when possible, to verify his
or her need. The Administrator may contact at least one other
person to confirm the applicant's statements about needing
emergency assistance. No further assistance will be authorized
until the applicant's eligibility is confirmed (22 M.R.S.A. § 4310).
C. Telephone applications.
(1) If a person has an emergency need and cannot apply in person due
to illness, disability, lack of transportation, or other good cause, and
if there is no authorized representative who can apply on behalf of
the applicant, the Administrator shall accept an application over
the telephone (22 M.R.S.A. § 4304).
(2) The Administrator will not grant any assistance as the result of a
telephone application if the applicant refuses to allow the
Administrator to verify the information either by visiting his or her
home or by mail and the Administrator cannot determine his or her
eligibility through any other means.
D. Limitation on emergency assistance.
(1) Applicants are not automatically eligible for emergency assistance.
If applicants had income which could have been used to prevent all
or part of an emergency, but they spent that income on items which
are not basic necessities, they will not be eligible to receive general
assistance to replace the misspent money [22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4308(2)
and 4315-A].
(2) All applicants have the responsibility to provide the Administrator
with verifiable documentation demonstrating that the applicant did
not have sufficient income to avert the emergency situation.
According to the following criteria, the Administrator may limit
emergency assistance to cover only the difference between the
amount of money necessary for the household to avoid the
emergency and the amount of income available to the household
during the applicable time period:
(a) The applicable time period shall be the 30 days preceding the
application for emergency assistance, except in those cases
where the emergency was created by a negative account
balance for a commodity or service (such as rent, mortgage or
utility payments), and the negative account balance was
§ 112-14 FLEA MARKETS § 112-14
104:205
§ 112-15. Residency requirements.
The Administrator shall provide general assistance to all eligible persons
applying for assistance who are residents of this municipality. A resident
is a person who has no other residence and is physically present in this
municipality and who intends to remain here and establish a household.
The municipality also recognizes its responsibility to provide assistance
to eligible persons who apply here and who are not residents of this
municipality or any other municipality. If a person who is not a resident
of any municipality applies in this municipality first, the Administrator will
created over a longer period of time. In such cases, the
applicable time period shall be the consecutive length of time
the account balance has been in the negative.
(b) The Administrator shall seek from the applicant all information
pertinent to the applicant's ability to provide for his or her
basic necessities for the applicable time period, including
evidence of all income and resources received over that period
of time.
(c) The Administrator shall calculate all costs for the household's
basic necessities during the applicable time period, per month,
in accordance with the maximum levels established by this
chapter for the specific basic necessity or the actual monthly
cost, whichever is less, including all costs associated with
averting the particular emergency situation for which the
applicant is seeking assistance.
(d) From the total household costs for basic necessities during the
applicable time period, the Administrator shall subtract the
total income and lump sum payments available to the
household for the applicable time period as well as the total
general assistance actually received during the applicable time
period.
(e) The Administrator may restrict the issuance of emergency
assistance to the difference yielded by the computation in
Subsection D(2)(d), even when such a grant will not totally
alleviate the emergency situation.
(f) The Administrator may waive this limitation on emergency
assistance in life-threatening situations or for initial
applicants, that is, persons who have never before applied for
general assistance.
(g) Nothing in these criteria may be construed as prohibiting a
municipality from electing to alleviate an emergency situation
in the most cost-effective manner available, provided that such
a determination of eligibility for emergency assistance is in
conformance with general assistance law.
§ 112-14 SACO CITY CODE § 112-15
104:206
determine his or her eligibility and, if eligible, will grant assistance until he/
she establishes a residence in another municipality (22 M.R.S.A. § 4307).
A. Moving/relocating. The municipality will not consider moving or
transporting an applicant or recipient into another municipality unless
the person requests assistance to relocate to another municipality. If
the Administrator determines the applicant is eligible and grants
financial assistance to help with the requested relocation, this
municipality will be responsible for providing assistance to the
applicant for 30 days after he/she moves, provided that the recipient
remains eligible.
B. Institutions. If a resident of this municipality enters an institution
located in another municipality (such as a group home, shelter,
rehabilitation center, nursing home, or hospital) and requests
assistance while at the institution, he/she will be the responsibility of
this municipality for up to six months after he/she enters the institution
if the conditions of 22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4307 and 4313 are met. The
municipality thereafter retains responsibility for an applicant in an
institution only if the applicant has maintained a home in this
municipality to which he/she intends to return. The municipality also
recognizes its responsibility for applicants residing in an institution in
this municipality if such an applicant had no residence prior to entering
the institution [22 M.R.S.A. § 4307(4)].
C. Temporary housing. Hotels/motels and similar places of temporary
lodging are considered institutions if the municipality grants financial
assistance for, makes arrangements for, or advises or encourages an
applicant to stay in temporary lodging. Note: Municipalities which
illegally deny housing assistance and, as a result of the denial, the
applicant stays in temporary lodging are responsible for the applicant
for up to six months and may be subject to other penalties [22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4307(4)].
D. Disputes. When the Administrator believes that an applicant is a
resident of another municipality but that municipality disputes its
responsibility, the Administrator will notify the DHHS in Augusta
(287-3654 or 1-800-442-6003). If the applicant applies in this
municipality first, the Administrator will determine his or her eligibility
and, if eligible, will grant assistance until the DHHS has concluded
which municipality is responsible for providing assistance. If another
municipality was responsible, the DHHS will recover the amount due
from the other municipality [22 M.R.S.A. § 4307(5) and (6)].
§ 112-15 FLEA MARKETS § 112-15
104:207

ARTICLE V
Eligibility Factors
§ 112-16. Compliance required.
A person will be eligible for general assistance if he/she is in need and has
complied with the eligibility requirements set forth below.
§ 112-17. Initial application.
§ 112-18. Eligibility for categorical assistance.
A. Initial Application.
(1) For initial applicants, except as provided immediately below, need
will be the sole condition of eligibility. The exception to this general
rule, as provided by law, applies to all applicants, including initial
applicants, who are disqualified for a defined period for quitting
employment without just cause or for being discharged from
employment for misconduct [26 M.R.S.A. § 1043(23)] (see § 112-21
of this chapter) and to fugitives from justice as defined in 15
M.R.S.A. § 201(4) [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(3)]. An initial applicant is a
person who has never before applied for general assistance in any
municipality in Maine [22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(1)].
(2) "Need" means that the applicant's income (including prorated
income, where applicable), property, credit, assets or other
resources are less than the overall maximum level of assistance
contained in § 112-33 of this chapter or the applicant's thirty-day
need, whichever is less, and he/she does not have adequate income
or other resources available to provide basic necessities.
B. Subsequent applicants. Persons who are not initial applicants are
repeat applicants. Repeat applicants are people who have applied for
general assistance at any time in the past. Repeat applicants are also
people on whose behalf a general assistance application was made at
any time in the past, provided that at such a time the applicant was not
a dependent minor in the household. For repeat applicants to be eligible
for general assistance, they must be in need and meet all other
eligibility requirements. The eligibility of repeat applicants may also be
adversely affected to the extent they have not used their income and
resources to secure basic necessities.
A. Receipt of categorical assistance will not disqualify a person from
receiving general assistance if the applicant is otherwise eligible.
Benefits received from other assistance programs will be considered as
income when determining need, with the exception of food stamps,
which will not be counted as income or resources or otherwise taken
into consideration when determining need [7 U.S.C. § 2017(b)].
§ 112-16 FLEA MARKETS § 112-18
104:209
§ 112-19. Personal property.
B. In addition, any fuel assistance (HEAP/ECIP) received by an applicant
will not be considered as income, that is, the Administrator will always
compute the heating needs of an applicant who has received HEAP or
ECIP as if that applicant paid all costs associated with his or her fuel
needs [42 U.S.C. § 8624(f)]. The calculation of general assistance for
heating energy needs when an applicant has received HEAP or ECIP
shall be accomplished in accordance with Subsection C, Types of
income, at § 112-32 of this chapter. For several additional exceptions
please refer to the definition of "income" in this chapter [Subsection
(4)].
C. Applicants or recipients must apply for other program benefits within
seven days after being advised in writing to do so by the General
Assistance Administrator. Persons who, without just cause, make no
good faith effort to obtain a potential resource will be disqualified from
receiving assistance until they make a good faith effort to obtain the
benefit (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
A. Liquid assets. No person owning assets easily convertible into cash,
including, but not limited to, bank deposits, stocks, bonds, certificates
of deposit, retirement accounts, life insurance policies and other
marketable security, will be eligible for general assistance unless and
until he or she uses these assets to meet his or her basic needs and
thereby exhausts them. At the discretion of the GA Administrator, liquid
assets do not mean a reasonable minimum balance necessary for
obtaining free checking. Although one checking account per household
may be allowed, any monies over the minimum required to obtain free
checking are to be considered available liquid assets.
B. Tangible assets. No person owning or possessing personal property,
such as, but not limited to, a motor vehicle (except as provided
immediately below in Subsection C), or a boat, trailer, recreation
vehicle or other assets that are convertible into cash and are
nonessential to the maintenance of the applicant's household, will be
eligible for general assistance. Exceptions may be made when a person
is making an initial application or is an unforeseeable repeat applicant
as defined in § 112-2B or when reasonable efforts to convert assets to
cash at fair market value are unsuccessful. Tools of a trade, livestock,
farm equipment and other equipment used for the production of income
are exempt from the above category and are not considered available
assets.
C. Automobile ownership.
(1) Ownership of one automobile per household will not make a person
ineligible for assistance if such vehicle is essential for
transportation to employment or for seeking employment,
obtaining medical care, rehabilitation or training facilities, or for
any other reason the GA Administrator determines reasonable for
§ 112-18 SACO CITY CODE § 112-19
104:210
§ 112-20. Ownership of real estate.
the maintenance of the applicant's household. Recipients of
general assistance who own an automobile with a market value
greater than $8,000 may be required, with written, seven-day
notice, to make a good faith effort to trade that automobile for an
automobile with a market value of less than $8,000. Any income
received by the applicant by virtue of such a trade down must
be used for his or her basic necessities. Failure to liquidate or
trade down the excess value of any automobile asset can result in
disqualification (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
(2) The municipality will neither pay nor consider as necessary any car
payment or vehicle maintenance cost, including insurance for
which the applicant is responsible. However, provided that the
vehicle value is $8,000 or less and the applicant is utilizing the
vehicle for any of the above-mentioned "essential" reasons, the
municipality, in its discretion, may choose to not consider
reasonable car payments, reasonable car insurance and reasonable
associated costs of maintenance as "misspent" income. General
assistance for travel-related needs shall be computed in
accordance with § 112-33B(7)(g), Work-related expenses, and (h),
Travel expenses.
D. Insurance. Insurance that is available to an applicant on a
noncontributory basis or that is required as a condition of employment
will not be a factor in determining eligibility for general assistance. Life
insurance with a cash surrender value may, at the discretion of the GA
Administrator, be considered as a tangible asset.
E. Transfer of property. Applicants who transfer assets for less than fair
market value to someone else solely for the purpose of establishing
eligibility for general assistance will not be granted general assistance
to replace the uncompensated value of the transferred asset. Assistance
will be denied within a one-hundred-twenty-day limit up to the
uncompensated value of the asset which was transferred unless the
transfer of asset is fraudulently misrepresented, in which case a onehundred-
twenty-day disqualification will be issued. There will be a
presumption that the applicant transferred his or her assets in order to
be eligible for general assistance whenever property is sold for less
than the fair market value or when the transfer occurred within 30 days
prior to applying for general assistance unless the applicant can
demonstrate the existence of a good faith transaction.
A. Principal residence.
(1) For purposes of general assistance solely, the applicant's principal
residence, including any adjoining land, is considered an exempt
resource, even if temporarily unoccupied because of employment,
job training, education, illness or disaster, provided that there is
demonstrated an intent to return. If the applicant owns land in
§ 112-19 FLEA MARKETS § 112-20
104:211
excess of the minimum lot size for the zone or district in which
the home is located, then that land may be considered a potential
resource if:
(a) The applicant has received general assistance for the last 120
consecutive days; and
(b) The applicant has the legal right to sell the land (e.g., any
mortgagee will release any mortgage, any co-owners agree to
the sale, zoning or other land use laws do not render the sale
illegal or impracticable); and
(c) The applicant has the financial capability to put the land into a
marketable condition (e.g., the applicant can pay for any
necessary surveys); and
(d) The land is not utilized for the maintenance and/or support of
the household; and
(e) A knowledgeable source (e.g., a realtor) indicates that the land
in question can be sold at fair market value, for an amount
which will aid the applicant's financial rehabilitation; and
(f) No other circumstances exist which cause any sale to be
unduly burdensome or inequitable.
(2) If the above conditions are met, then the Administrator may
condition the receipt of future assistance on the applicant's good
faith efforts to sell, or render salable, land which could be used to
provide necessary support for the applicant (e.g., the applicant
owns 100 "excess" acres; sale of 10 of the acres would provide for
the necessary support, and therefore not all the land need be sold
at the present time). Assistance shall not be denied during the time
that the applicant is making a good faith effort to sell or render
salable the land in question.
(3) Once the applicant ceases to receive assistance, the obligations
under this section shall also cease.
B. Other property.
(1) If the applicant or dependents own real property other than that
occupied as the principal residence, continued eligibility will
depend on the applicant making a reasonable effort to:
(a) Dispose of the property at fair market value in order to convert
the property into cash which can be applied toward meeting
present need; or
(b) Obtain a loan against such property which may be used to meet
present need. Applicants who transfer their excess property to
a third party in order to become eligible for general assistance
will be ineligible.
§ 112-20 SACO CITY CODE § 112-20
104:212
§ 112-21. Work requirement.
All general assistance recipients are required to register for work, look for
work, work to the extent of available employment, and otherwise fulfill the
work requirements, unless the applicant is exempt from such requirements
as provided below.
(2) If an applicant is granted assistance in the form of a mortgage
payment or capital improvement payment, the municipality may
claim a lien against the property. The lien shall not be enforceable
until the time of sale of the property or upon the death of the
recipient (see also § 112-33 of this chapter) (22 M.R.S.A. § 4320).
A. Employment; rehabilitation.
(1) All unemployed applicants and members of their households who
are 16 years of age or older and who are not attending a full-time
primary or secondary school intended to lead to a high school
diploma will be required to accept any suitable job offer and/or
meet with job counselors, attend employment workshops and
rehabilitative services, except as provided below (see
Exemptions38). Applicants must demonstrate to the Administrator
that they are available for work and are actively seeking
employment.
(2) A "suitable job" means any job which the applicant is mentally and
physically able to perform. "Available for work" means that
applicants must make themselves available for work during normal
business hours prevailing in the area and show that no
circumstance exists which would prevent them from complying
with the work requirement.
B. Verification.
(1) Unemployed applicants or applicants employed on a part-time basis
will be required to provide verifiable documentation of their pursuit
of employment at the time of each application. At a minimum, such
documentation shall consist of a list of the employers contacted,
the date and time of the application contact, and the name of the
employer representative contacted. "Pursuit of employment"
means actually submitting a written application or applying for a
job in person when reasonable, or submitting a written application
or letter of inquiry to employers.
(2) For the duration of any repeat applicant's period of unemployment
or partial employment, the Administrator will establish the number
of employers per week to whom each nonexempt applicant shall be
required to apply in order to fulfill his or her work search
requirements. The number of weekly employer contacts required
38.Editor's Note: See Subsection I in this section.
§ 112-20 FLEA MARKETS § 112-21
104:213
by the Administrator shall be reasonably related to the number
of potential employers in the region and the number of hours in
the week the applicant has available for work search activities
after considering all time the applicant must devote to existing
employment obligations, workfare obligations, and required
classroom or on-site participation in job training, educational, or
rehabilitation programs. Fulfillment of these requirements will not
be expected at the time of the initial application but will be a
condition of eligibility for subsequent assistance.
C. Ineligibility. After being granted assistance at the time of initial
application, applicants will be considered ineligible for further
assistance for 120 days if they, without just cause:
(1) Refuse to register for employment with the Maine Job Service;
(2) Refuse to search diligently for employment when the search is
reasonable and appropriate; recipients who unreasonably seek
work at the same places repeatedly will not be considered to be
performing a diligent work search and will be disqualified;
(3) Refuse to accept a suitable job offer;
(4) Refuse to participate in an assigned training, education or
rehabilitation program that would assist the applicant in securing
employment;
(5) Fail to be available for work; or
(6) Refuse to participate or participate in a substandard manner in the
municipal work program (see § 112-22).
D. Ineligibility due to job quit or discharge for misconduct. No applicant,
whether an initial or repeat applicant, who has quit his or her full-time
or part-time job without just cause or who has been discharged from
employment for misconduct (see Appendix I, 26 M.R.S.A. § 1043(23),
for the definition39 will be eligible to receive general assistance of any
kind for a one-hundred-twenty-day period from the date of separation
from employment [22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4301(8) and 4316-A (1-A)].
E. Just cause. Applicants will be ineligible for assistance for 120 days if
they refuse to comply with the work requirements of this section
without just cause. With respect to any work requirement, just cause
will be considered to exist when there is reasonable and verifiable
evidence that:
(1) The applicant has a physical or mental illness or disability which
prevents him/her from working;
(2) The work assignment pays below minimum wages;
39.Editor's Note: Appendix I is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 112-21 SACO CITY CODE § 112-21
104:214
(3) The applicant was subject to sexual harassment;
(4) The applicant is physically or mentally unable to perform required
job tasks or to meet piecework standards;
(5) The applicant has no means of transportation to or from work or a
training or rehabilitation program;
(6) The applicant is unable to arrange for necessary child care or care
of ill or disabled family members; or
(7) Any reason found to be good cause by the Maine Department of
Labor, or any other verifiable reason the Administrator considers
reasonable and appropriate will be accepted as just cause. [22
M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(5)]
F. Applicant's burden of establishing just cause. If the Administrator finds
that the applicant has violated a work-related rule without just cause, it
shall be the responsibility of the applicant to establish the presence of
just cause (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A).
G. Eligibility regained.
(1) Persons who are disqualified for 120 days because they violated a
work requirement may regain their eligibility if and only when they
become employed or otherwise satisfy the Administrator that they
are complying with the work requirement by fulfilling the work
requirement or requirements they violated.
(2) For the purpose of regaining eligibility by becoming employed,
"employment" shall mean employment by an employer as defined in
26 M.R.S.A. § 1043 et seq. or the performance of a service for an
employer who withholds from the employee a social security tax
pursuant to federal law.
(3) The special provisions regarding the opportunity to regain
eligibility after a disqualification for workfare violations are
detailed in § 112-22 of this chapter, under "Eligibility regained."40
H. Dependents.
(1) Failure of an otherwise eligible person to comply with the work
requirements shall not affect the eligibility of any member of the
person's household who is not capable of working, including:
(a) A dependent minor child;
(b) An elderly, ill, or disabled person; and
(c) A person whose presence is required in order to provide care
for any child under six years of age or for any ill or disabled
member of the household. [22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(3)]
40.Editor's Note: See Subsection G of § 112-22.
§ 112-21 FLEA MARKETS § 112-21
104:215
§ 112-22. Municipal work program.
Each applicant and any member of the household who is capable of working
may be required to perform work for the municipality, including work for a
nonprofit organization, as a condition of receiving assistance [22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4316-A(2)]. As part of the municipal work program, the municipality can
require recipients to participate in training, education, or rehabilitative
programs that will assist the recipient in securing employment. The work
requirement provisions found in § 112-21 regarding just cause, dependents,
and exemptions also apply to the municipal workfare program.
(2) In the event one (or more) member(s) of a household is disqualified
and assistance is requested for those remaining members of the
household who are dependents, the eligibility of those dependents
will be calculated by dividing the maximum level of assistance
available to the entire household by the total number of household
members.
I. Exemptions.
(1) The above work requirements do not apply to any person who is
elderly, physically or mentally ill, or disabled. Any person whose
presence is required to care for any preschool-age child or for any
ill or disabled member of the household is also exempt from these
requirements.
(2) The requirements of this section will not be imposed so as to
interfere with an applicant's existing employment, ability to pursue
a bona fide job offer, ability to attend an interview for possible
employment, classroom participation in a primary or secondary
educational program intended to lead to a high school diploma,
classroom or on-site participation in a training program which is
either approved by the Department of Labor or determined by the
Department of Labor to be expected to assist the applicant in
securing employment, or classroom participation in a degreegranting
program operated under the control of the Department of
Labor.
A. Consent. Persons assigned to the work program are required to sign a
form stating that they understand the requirements of general
assistance and the work program. Prior to signing the form, the
Administrator will read it to the applicants or the applicants will read it
themselves. The form will also state the number of hours the applicants
must work and the hourly rate by means of which the duration of the
work assignment is calculated. In addition, the consent form shall
describe the consequences of failing to adequately perform part or all of
the workfare or workfare-first assignment.
B. Subtracting value of workfare performed from client's GA debt.
Pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4318, individuals owing the municipality
funds for general assistance provided to them are obligated to repay
§ 112-21 SACO CITY CODE § 112-22
104:216
the municipality when and if they become able (see Article VIII).
However, persons performing workfare shall have the value of the
workfare performed deducted from any and all GA debt, including GA
liens (e.g., workers' compensation settlement, SSI retroactive payment,
capital improvement, home mortgage) that might exist against their
settlements, payments or other such property.
C. Limitations. The work requirement is subject to the following
limitations [22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(3)]:
(1) No person shall, as a condition of eligibility, be required to do any
amount of work that exceeds the value of the net general assistance
that the person receives under municipal general assistance
standards. Any person performing work under this subsection shall
be provided with net general assistance, the value of which is
calculated at a rate of at least the prevailing minimum wage under
state or federal law at the time the workfare was performed.
(2) No workfare participant shall be required to work for a nonprofit
organization if that work would violate the participant's basic
religious beliefs.
(3) In no case shall eligible persons performing work under this
subsection replace regular municipal employees.
(4) In no case will work performed under this subsection interfere with
an eligible person's:
(a) Existing employment;
(b) Ability to follow up on a bona fide job offer;
(c) Attendance at an interview for possible employment;
(d) Classroom participation in a primary or secondary educational
program intended to lead to a high school diploma; or
(e) Classroom or on-site participation in a training program which
is approved by the Department of Labor or determined by the
Department of Labor to be reasonably expected to assist the
person in securing employment, or classroom participation in a
degree-granting program administered by the DHHS or the
Department of Labor.
(5) In no case may an eligible person be required to work more than 40
hours per week. An eligible person who has full- or part-time
employment shall be exempt from the work requirement to the
extent that the work requirement in combination with his or her
regular employment would result in the person working more than
40 hours per week.
(6) In no case will an eligible person be required to perform work
beyond his or her capabilities. However, when an illness or
§ 112-22 FLEA MARKETS § 112-22
104:217
disability is claimed, an eligible person may be required, as a
condition of receiving assistance, to present a doctor's statement
detailing the extent of the disability or illness (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309).
If the Administrator requires a doctor's statement to verify an
applicant's illness or disability and the applicant is not currently
under the care of a provider, the municipality may pay for the
doctor's evaluation if the applicant has no means to pay for the
exam. However, in such a case the Administrator will choose the
doctor. If there is a no-cost or low-cost health care option, the
municipality may elect to refer the client to such a resource. The
Administrator will not require verification of medical conditions
which are apparent or which are of such short duration that a
reasonable person would not ordinarily seek medical attention [22
M.R.S.A. § 4316(5)].41
(7) In no case may an eligible person with an immediate need (i.e., a
person in an emergency situation who has not been disqualified
from receiving assistance for committing a program violation) be
required to perform work under this subsection prior to receiving
general assistance. The Administrator shall meet immediate needs
upon receiving written assurance from the eligible person that he/
she is willing to work to maintain eligibility for general assistance.
When the recipient has no immediate need, workfare participation
may be required prior to receiving general assistance in
accordance with the following "workfare first" policy.
D. "Workfare first policy. Under the authority of 22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4316-A(2)(D), the Administrator may, in accordance with the following
guidelines, require a recipient of general assistance to perform a
workfare assignment prior to the actual issuance of the general
assistance benefit conditionally granted:
(1) In no circumstance will emergency general assistance for which an
applicant is eligible be withheld pending the satisfactory
performance of workfare.
(2) All workfare participants under this policy will be provided a
written decision, as otherwise required by law, within 24 hours of
submitting an application for general assistance and prior to
performing any workfare for the municipality associated with that
request for assistance. That written decision must include:
(a) A specific description of the amount of general assistance
being conditionally granted to the household, and for which
basic needs;
(b) The period of eligibility for which the general assistance grant
is being issued (in days or weeks, but not to exceed 30 days);
41.Editor's Note: See 22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(5).
§ 112-22 SACO CITY CODE § 112-22
104:218
(c) The rate, at a dollar-per-hour basis (but not less than the
prevailing minimum wage), upon which the duration of the
workfare assignment is calculated;
(d) The actual duration of the workfare assignment that must be
performed, in hours, before the general assistance grant will
be actually issued;
(e) The specifics of the workfare assignment(s), including the
general nature of the type of work being assigned, location(s)
of worksite, date(s) and time(s) of assigned workfare, workfare
supervisors' names and contact telephone numbers; and
(f) Any other pertinent information related to the workfare
assignment(s) the recipient will be expected to perform.
(3) As previously provided in this section, all workfare participants
under this policy must sign a consent form that informs the
participant of his or her workfare-related rights and
responsibilities, including the consequences of failing to perform
all or part of the workfare assigned without just cause.
(4) If a portion of the workfare-first assignment is satisfactorily
performed but there has been a failure to perform the remainder of
the assignment, without just cause, the Administrator shall issue a
grant of general assistance in the amount of the number of
workfare hours satisfactorily performed times the hourly rate used
to calculate the duration of the workfare assignment. In addition to
any disqualification penalty that may apply, the remaining value of
the conditionally issued general assistance grant shall be
terminated, and notice of the partial termination, and the reasons
therefor, will be issued to the workfare participant in accordance
with § 112-35 of this chapter.
(5) Any amount of the workfare assignment that is not performed
because the workfare participant was temporarily unable to
perform the assignment for just cause reasons shall be reassigned
or excused at the discretion of the GA Administrator.
E. Work-related expenses. A participant's expenses related to work
performed under this section will be added to the amount of net general
assistance to be provided to the person [22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(2)(E)].
The municipality will provide any special clothes or equipment the
recipient needs to perform his or her work assignment.
F. Disqualification. Any person who either willfully fails to perform or
willfully performs below-average standards the work assigned by the
municipality will be ineligible for assistance for 120 days [22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4316-A(1)]. As soon as the Administrator knows that a recipient failed
to fulfill the work assignment, the Administrator will notify the recipient
in writing that he/she is disqualified for 120 days starting from the last
date of authorized assistance unless the recipient can show just cause.
§ 112-22 FLEA MARKETS § 112-22
104:219
The burden of demonstrating a just cause failure to perform a workfare
assignment falls on the workfare participant.
G. Eligibility regained.
(1) Recipients who are disqualified from receiving assistance because
they have violated the requirements of the municipal work program
may regain their eligibility under the following conditions:
(a) Recipients who fail to complete the first municipal work
assignment they have been given will be disqualified from
receiving assistance during the next 120 days, although
dependents in the household may be eligible (see § 112-21H,
Dependents).
(b) If during the one-hundred-twenty-day disqualification period
the recipient requests an opportunity to perform the work
assignment which he or she without just cause failed to
perform, the disqualified recipient will be given one
opportunity to regain eligibility. The Administrator will give the
recipient a work assignment as soon as possible.
[1] If under such a set of circumstances the recipient has an
emergency need and the Administrator is unable to
schedule a work assignment in time to alleviate the
emergency, the Administrator will provide sufficient
assistance to the recipient to avert the emergency.
However, the provision of such emergency assistance will
not bar the Administrator from subsequently enforcing the
previously issued one-hundred-twenty-day disqualification
if the recipient fails to regain eligibility by satisfactorily
performing the work assignment. The amount of
emergency assistance granted will be considered in the
computation of the total number of hours the recipient
must work.
[2] Recipients who have asked for the opportunity to regain
their eligibility during a one-hundred-twenty-day
disqualification period and who agreed to fulfill the
assignment which they previously failed to perform and
who, without just cause, fail to fulfill their municipal work
assignment will be considered to have acted in bad faith.
In such a circumstance, the Administrator will enforce the
one-hundred-twenty-day disqualification for the term of its
initial duration.
(2) If a workfare participant regains eligibility under this section but is
subsequently disqualified within the initial one-hundred-twenty-day
period of ineligibility for failing to comply with the municipal work
program, that participant will be ineligible for a new one-hundredtwenty-
day period beginning with the new disqualification date but
will be provided no opportunity to requalify.
§ 112-22 SACO CITY CODE § 112-22
104:220
§ 112-23. Use of resources.
Each applicant has the responsibility to make a good faith effort to utilize
every available or potential resource that may reduce his or her need for
general assistance (see § 112-2B for the definition of "resources"). People
who refuse or fail to make a good faith effort to secure a potential resource
after receiving written notice to do so are disqualified from receiving
assistance until they make an effort to secure the resource. Applicants are
required to prove that they have made a good faith effort to secure the
resource (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
(3) Any recipient who intentionally causes damage to property,
harasses or harms other employees or otherwise conducts himself
or herself in a disruptive manner and is discharged by the work
supervisor will not be entitled to regain eligibility by returning to
the work program. Eligibility may be regained by otherwise
becoming employed and meeting the definition of "need."
H. Reports. The Administrator will itemize the assistance that has been
provided to persons who work for the municipality in reports to the
DHHS [22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(2)].
A. Minors.
(1) A minor under the age of 18 who has never married and is applying
independently for general assistance and who is pregnant or has a
dependent child or children will be eligible to receive general
assistance only if the minor is residing in the home of his or her
parent, legal guardian or other adult relative, in which case the
entire household will be evaluated for eligibility. Exceptions to this
limitation on eligibility will be made when:
(a) The minor is residing in a foster home, maternity home, or
other adult-supervised supportive living arrangement; or
(b) The minor has no living parent, or the whereabouts of the both
parents are unknown; or
(c) No parent will permit the minor to live in the parent's home; or
(d) The minor has lived apart from both parents for at least one
year before the birth of any dependent child; or
(e) The DHHS determines that the physical or emotional health or
safety of the minor or the minor's dependent child or children
would be jeopardized if the minor and his or her child or
children lived with a parent; or
(f) The DHHS determines, in accordance with its regulation, that
there is good cause to waive this limitation on eligibility [22
M.R.S.A. § 4309(4)].
§ 112-22 FLEA MARKETS § 112-23
104:221
(2) Any person under the age of 25 who is applying independently from
his or her parents for general assistance will be informed that until
he or she reaches the age of 25, the applicant's parents are still
legally liable for his or her support, and the municipality has the
right to seek recovery from the parents of the cost of all assistance
granted to such a recipient to the extent his or her parents are
financially capable of repaying the municipality (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4319).
(3) With regard to such application, the municipality may seek
verification of the applicant's need for general assistance by
contacting his or her parents. If the applicant's parents declare a
willingness to provide the applicant with his or her basic needs
directly and there is no convincing evidence that the applicant
would be jeopardized by relying on his or her parents for basic
needs, the Administrator may find the applicant not to be in need of
general assistance for the reason that his or her needs can be
provided by a legally liable relative.
B. Mental or physical disability. Any applicant who has a mental or
physical disability must make a good faith effort to utilize any medical
or rehabilitative services which have been recommended by a
physician, psychologist or other professional retraining or
rehabilitation specialist when the services are available to the applicant
and would not constitute a financial burden or create a physical risk to
the individual.
C. Written notice; disqualification. The Administrator will give each
applicant written notice whenever the applicant is required to utilize
any specific potential resource(s). Any applicant who refuses to utilize
potential resources, without just cause, after receiving written sevenday
notice, will be ineligible for further assistance until he/she has
made a good faith effort to utilize or obtain the resources. General
assistance will not be withheld from the applicant pending receipt of a
resource if the applicant has made, or is in the process of making, a
good faith effort to obtain the resource.
D. Forfeiture of benefits.
(1) Any applicant who forfeits receipt of or causes a reduction in
benefits from another public assistance program due to fraud,
misrepresentation, a knowing or intentional violation of program
rules or a refusal to comply with that program's rules without just
cause will be ineligible to receive general assistance to replace the
forfeited benefits. To the extent the forfeited benefits can be
considered income under general assistance law, the worth of the
forfeited benefits will be considered income that is available to the
applicant for the duration of the forfeiture.
(2) To the extent the forfeited benefits were provided not in the form of
income but, rather, in the form of a specific, regularly issued
§ 112-23 SACO CITY CODE § 112-23
104:222
§ 112-24. Period of ineligibility.
No one will have his or her assistance terminated, reduced, or suspended
prior to being given written notice and an opportunity for a fair hearing
(22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4321 through 4322). Each person will be notified in writing
of the reasons for his or her ineligibility, and any person disqualified for
not complying with the chapter will be informed in writing of the period of
ineligibility.
§ 112-25. Unemployment fraud.
An applicant who is found ineligible for unemployment compensation
benefits because of a finding of fraud by the Department of Labor pursuant
to 26 M.R.S.A. § 1051(1) is ineligible to receive general assistance to
replace the forfeited unemployment compensation benefits for the duration
of the forfeiture established by the Department of Labor (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4317).
resource of a calculable value, that resource, up to its forfeited
value, need not be replaced with general assistance for a period of
120 days from the date of the forfeiture — unless the municipality
is prohibited by federal or state law from considering the forfeited
resource as available with respect to local public assistance
programs (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
A. Work requirement. Applicants/recipients who do not comply with a
work requirement are disqualified from receiving assistance for a
period of 120 days (unless they regain their eligibility) (see §§ 112-21
and 112-22). If an applicant/recipient is provided assistance and does
not comply with the work requirement, the applicant/recipient shall be
disqualified for 120 days following the end of the period covered by the
grant of assistance. The Administrator shall give recipients written
notice that they are disqualified as soon as the Administrator has
sufficient knowledge and information to render a decision of
ineligibility.
B. Fraud. People who commit fraud are disqualified from receiving
assistance for a period of 120 days (see § 112-29, Fraud). The
Administrator shall give recipients written notice that they are
ineligible as soon as the Administrator has sufficient knowledge and
information to render a decision. If the disqualification for fraud is
issued before the expiration of a grant of assistance, the period of
ineligibility shall commence on the day following the end of the period
covered by the grant of assistance. If fraud is discovered after the
period covered by the grant of assistance has expired, the period of
ineligibility will commence on the day of the written notice of
ineligibility.
§ 112-23 FLEA MARKETS § 112-25
104:223

ARTICLE VI
Determination of Eligibility
§ 112-26. Recognition of dignity and rights.
Any determination or investigation into an applicant's eligibility will be
conducted in a manner that will not violate the applicant's privacy or
personal dignity or violate his or her individual rights.
§ 112-27. Determination; redetermination.
§ 112-28. Verification.
A. The Administrator will make an individual, factual determination of
eligibility each time a person applies or reapplies for general
assistance. The Administrator will make a redetermination of eligibility
at least monthly but may do so as often as necessary to administer the
program efficiently and meet the needs of the applicants. Upon any
application, the Administrator will determine the applicant's eligibility
on the basis of a thirty-day prospective analysis but may elect to
disburse that applicant's assistance periodically, e.g., weekly,
throughout a thirty-day period of eligibility pursuant to that initial
eligibility determination.
B. The Administrator may redetermine a person's eligibility at any time
during the period he or she is receiving assistance if the Administrator
is notified of any change in the recipient's circumstances that may alter
the amount of assistance the recipient may receive. Once a recipient
has been granted assistance, the Administrator may not reduce or
rescind the grant without giving prior written notice to the recipient
explaining the reasons for the decision and offering the recipient an
opportunity to appeal the decision to the fair hearing authority (22
M.R.S.A. § 4309).
A. Eligibility of applicant; duration of eligibility. The overseer shall
determine eligibility each time a person applies or reapplies for general
assistance. The period of eligibility will not exceed one month. At the
expiration of this period, applicants/recipients may reapply for
assistance, and the person's eligibility will be redetermined.
B. Applicant's responsibilities.
(1) Applicants and recipients for general assistance are responsible for
providing to the overseer all information necessary to determine
eligibility. If further information or documentation is necessary to
demonstrate eligibility, the applicant must have the first
opportunity to provide the specific information or documentation
required by the overseer. When information required by the
overseer is unavailable, the overseer must accept alternative
available information, which is subject to verification.
§ 112-26 FLEA MARKETS § 112-28
104:225
(2) Each applicant and recipient has the responsibility at the time of
application and continuing thereafter to provide complete,
accurate and current information and documentation concerning
his/her:
(a) Need.
(b) Income.
(c) Employment.
(d) Use of income.
(e) Expenses.
(f) Assets and liabilities.
(g) Use of available resources.
(h) Household composition.
C. Initial applicants. Persons who have not applied for assistance in this or
any other municipality are considered initial applicants and must have
their eligibility determined solely on the basis of need. Initial applicants
are not subject to eligibility conditions placed on repeat applicants (see
below). However, such applicants are still responsible for providing the
GA Administrator with reasonably obtainable documentation adequate
to verify that there is a need for assistance. In addition, initial
applicants must also comply with both lump sum and relevant work
rules (i.e., job quit).
D. Repeat applicants.
(1) All applicants for general assistance that are not initial applicants
are repeat applicants. The eligibility of repeat applicants must be
determined on the basis of need and all other conditions of
eligibility established by law and this chapter.
(2) The Administrator will require documentation of a repeat
applicant's income, use of income, assets and resources plus actual
bills and receipts for rent, utilities, fuel, telephone, medical
services and other basic necessities. In addition, repeat applicants
instructed to seek employment shall verify their work search
results, e.g., provide a list of the employers contacted, the date and
time of the application contact, and the name of the employer
representative contacted, as required by the GA Administrator.
(3) Repeat applicants are also responsible for providing any changes of
information reported on previous applications, including changes
in his/her household or income that may affect his/her eligibility.
E. Unforeseen repeat applicants. Unforeseen repeat applicants are
applicants who have not applied for assistance within the last 12
months and who have been regularly employed or receiving support
§ 112-28 SACO CITY CODE § 112-28
104:226
from a public benefit or private source who have unexpectedly become
unemployed through no fault of their own or whose income and/or
benefits (e.g., through an available resource) have ceased through
no fault of their own. Such unforeseen repeat applicants may be
considered initial applicants for purposes of verification requirements
and misspent income if the Administrator finds that imposing the
general verification requirements and misspent income rules imposed
on repeat applicants would be unreasonable or inappropriate.
F. Overseer's responsibilities.
(1) In order to determine an applicant's eligibility for general
assistance, the overseer first must seek information and
documentation from the applicant. Once the applicant has
presented the necessary information, the overseer is responsible
for determining eligibility. The overseer will seek verification
necessary to determine eligibility. In order to determine eligibility,
the overseer may contact sources other than the applicant for
verification only with the specific knowledge and consent of the
applicant, except that the overseer may examine public records
without the applicant's knowledge and consent.
(2) Appropriate sources, which the overseers may contact, include, but
are not limited to:
(a) DHHS and any other department/agency of the state or
nonprofit organizations.
(b) Financial institutions.
(c) Creditors.
(d) Utility companies.
(e) Employers.
(f) Landlords.
(g) Physicians.
(h) Persons with whom the applicant/recipient is a cohabitant.
(i) Legally and nonlegally liable relatives.
(3) Assistance will be denied or terminated if the applicant is unwilling
to supply the overseer with necessary information, documentation,
or permission to make collateral contacts or if the overseer cannot
determine that eligibility exists based on information supplied by
the applicant or others.
G. Redetermination of eligibility. The overseer may redetermine a person's
eligibility at any time during the period that person is receiving
assistance if the overseer is informed of any change in the recipient's
circumstances that may affect the amount of assistance to which the
§ 112-28 FLEA MARKETS § 112-28
104:227
§ 112-29. Fraud.
recipient is entitled or that may make the recipient ineligible, provided
that once a determination of eligibility has been made for a specific
time period, a reduction in assistance for that time period may not be
made without prior written notice to the recipient with the reasons for
the action and an opportunity for the recipient to receive a fair hearing
upon the proposed change.
H. Penalty for refusing to release information. Any person governed by 22
M.R.S.A. § 4314 who refuses to provide necessary information to the
Administrator after it has been requested must state in writing the
reasons for the refusal within three days of receiving the request. Any
such person who refuses to provide the information, without just cause,
commits a civil violation and may be subject to a fine of not less than
$25 nor more than $100, which may be adjudged in any court of
competent jurisdiction. Any person who willfully renders false
information to the Administrator is guilty of a Class E crime [22
M.R.S.A. §§ 4314(5) and (6) and 4315].
A. It is unlawful for a person to make knowingly and willfully a false
representation of a material fact to the Administrator in order to
receive general assistance or cause someone else to receive general
assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4315).
(1) False representation shall consist of any individual knowingly and
willfully:
(a) Making a false statement to the General Assistance
Administrator, either orally or in writing, in order to obtain
assistance to which the applicant or the applicant's household
is not entitled;
(b) Concealing information from the General Assistance
Administrator in order to obtain assistance to which the
applicant or applicant's household is not entitled; or
(c) Using general assistance benefits for a purpose other than that
for which they were intended.
(2) No person may be denied assistance solely for making a false
representation prior to being given an opportunity for a fair
hearing.
B. Period of ineligibility.
(1) When the General Assistance Administrator finds that a person has
knowingly and willfully misrepresented material facts for the
purpose of making himself or herself eligible for general
assistance, the Administrator shall notify that applicant in writing
that he or she has been disqualified from receiving assistance for
120 days. For the purpose of this section, a material
§ 112-28 SACO CITY CODE § 112-29
104:228
§ 112-30. Period of eligibility.
misrepresentation is a false statement about eligibility factor in the
absence of which some or all of the assistance would not be or
would not have been granted.
(2) The notification of ineligibility issued by the Administrator shall
inform the applicant of his or her right to appeal the
Administrator's decision to the fair hearing authority (FHA) within
five working days of receipt. The period of ineligibility shall
commence on the day following the end of the period covered by
the grant of assistance fraudulently received or upon the date of
notification of ineligibility, whichever is later.
C. Right to a fair hearing. Any applicant who is denied assistance for
making a false representation will be afforded the opportunity to appeal
the decision to the fair hearing authority (FHA) in accordance with
Article VII of this chapter. No recipient shall have his or her assistance
reduced or revoked during the period of eligibility before being notified
and given the opportunity to appeal the decision. Any person who is
dissatisfied with the decision of the FHA may appeal that decision to the
Superior Court pursuant to Rule 80-B of the Maine Rules of Civil
Procedure [22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(3)].
D. Reimbursement. If a recipient does not appeal the decision or if the fair
hearing authority determines that a recipient did make a false
representation, the recipient will be required to reimburse the
municipality for any assistance received to which he/she was not
entitled.
E. Dependents. In no event will the ineligibility of a person under this
section serve to disqualify any eligible dependent in that household [22
M.R.S.A. § 4309(3)]. In the event one or more members of a household
are disqualified and assistance is requested for the remaining
dependents, the eligibility of those dependents will be calculated by
dividing the maximum level of assistance available to the entire
household by the total number of household members.
A. The Administrator will grant assistance to all eligible persons for a
period that is sufficient to meet their need, but in no event may a grant
of assistance cover a period in excess of one month (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4309). Upon receiving a completed and signed application, the
Administrator will determine the applicant's eligibility on the basis of a
thirty-day prospective analysis.
B. When an applicant submits an incomplete or unsigned application, due
to the twenty-four-hour decision requirement placed on the GA
Administrator, the GA Administrator shall render a notice of
"ineligibility" and advise the applicant that he or she has a right to
reapply as soon as he or she has the necessary information and/or as
soon as is practicable for the applicant.
§ 112-29 FLEA MARKETS § 112-30
104:229
§ 112-31. Determination of need.
C. Although eligibility is determined on a thirty-day basis, for reasons of
administrative efficiency the Administrator may elect to disburse an
applicant's assistance for shorter periods of time, such as weekly,
throughout the thirty-day period of eligibility. When the Administrator
elects to disburse general assistance for a period of time less than 30
days, subsequent grants of assistance during that thirty-day period may
be issued pursuant to the initial determination of need unless the
applicant's financial situation changes substantially enough to warrant
a redetermination of eligibility.
A. Calculation of expenses.
(1) The period of time used to calculate need will be the next thirty-day
period from the date of application [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)]. The
Administrator will calculate applicants' expenses according to the
actual expense of the basic necessity or the maximum levels for the
specific necessities allowed in § 112-33, whichever is less. The sum
of these expenses, as calculated for a prospective thirty-day period,
is the applicant's thirty-day need. Applicants will not be considered
eligible if their income and other resources exceed this calculation
except in an emergency [22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(2)] (see § 112-14 of
this chapter).
(2) Applicants will also not be considered in need of general assistance
if their income, property, credit, assets or other resources available
to provide basic necessities for their household are greater than
the applicable overall maximum level of assistance set forth in the
beginning of § 112-33 [22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4301(10) and 4305(3-B)]. The
difference between the applicant's income and the overall
maximum levels of assistance established by this chapter is the
applicant's deficit.
(3) Once an applicant's deficit has been determined, the specific
maximum levels of assistance for each basic necessity (see
Appendixes A through H of this chapter)42 shall be used by the
Administrator to guide the distribution of assistance for which the
applicant is eligible. The specific maximum levels of assistance for
each basic necessity are intended to be reasonable and sufficient to
help recipients maintain a standard of health and decency [22
M.R.S.A. § 4305(3-A)].
B. Income for basic necessities. Applicants are required to use their
income for basic necessities. Except for initial applicants, no applicant
is eligible to receive assistance to replace income that was spent within
the thirty-day period prior to an application for assistance on goods and
services that are not basic necessities. All income spent on goods and
services that are not basic necessities will be considered available to
42.Editor's Note: Appendixes A through H are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 112-30 SACO CITY CODE § 112-31
104:230
the applicant and combined with the applicant's prospective thirty-day
income for the purposes of computing eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. § 4315-A).
Applicants who have sufficient income to provide their basic necessities
but who use that income to purchase goods or services which are not
basic necessities will not be considered eligible for assistance. Persons
who exhaust their income on basic necessities and who still need
assistance with other basic necessities will be eligible, provided that
their income does not exceed the overall maximum level of assistance.
C. Use-of-income requirements. The Administrator may require that
anyone applying for general assistance provide documentation of his or
her use of income. This documentation can take the form of canceled
checks and/or receipts which demonstrate that the applicant has
exhausted all household income received over the last thirty-day period.
Except as is deemed appropriate by the GA Administrator for
"unforeseen" repeat applicants (see § 112-28 of this chapter), repeat
applicants may be required to verify that expenditure of income was for
basic necessities. Income expended that cannot be verified will
generally be considered available and in such case will be added to the
thirty-day prospective income.
(1) Allowable expenditures include reasonable shelter costs (rent/
mortgage); the cost of heating fuel, electricity, and food up to the
ordinance maximums; telephone costs at the base rate if the
household needs a telephone for medical reasons, the cost of
nonelective medical services as recommended by a physician which
are not otherwise covered by medical entitlement, Hospital Free
Care or insurance; the reasonable cost of essential clothing and
nonprescription drugs, and the costs of any other commodity or
service determined essential by the Administrator.
(2) Items not considered to be basic necessities and thus will not be
allowed in the budget computation include:
(a) Internet services.
(b) Cable or satellite television.
(c) Cellular phones.
(d) Cigarettes/alcohol.
(e) Gifts purchased.
(f) Pet care costs.
(g) Costs of trips or vacations.
(h) Paid court fines.
(i) Repayments of unsecured loans.
(j) Legal fees.
§ 112-31 FLEA MARKETS § 112-31
104:231
(k) Late fees.
(l) Credit card debt.
(3) The municipality reserves the right to apply specific use-of-income
requirements to any applicant, other than an initial applicant, who
fails to use his or her income for basic necessities or fails to
reasonably document his or her use of income (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4315-A). Those additional requirements will be applied in the
following manner:
(a) The Administrator may require the applicant to use some or all
of his or her income, at the time it becomes available, toward
specific basic necessities. The Administrator may prioritize
such required expenditures so that most or all of the
applicant's income is applied to housing (i.e., rent/mortgage),
energy (i.e., heating fuel, electricity), or other specified basic
necessities;
(b) The Administrator will notify applicants in writing of the
specific use-of-income requirements placed on them;
(c) If upon subsequent application it cannot be determined how
the applicant's income was spent, or it is determined that some
or all of the applicant's income was not spent as directed and
was also not spent on basic necessities, the applicant will not
be eligible to receive either regular or emergency general
assistance to replace that income; and
(d) If the applicant does not spend his or her income as directed,
but can show with verifiable documentation that all income
was spent on basic necessities up to allowed amounts, the
applicant will remain eligible to the extent of the applicant's
eligibility and need.
D. Calculation of income and expenses.
(1) When determining eligibility, the Administrator will subtract the
applicant's net income from the overall maximum level of
assistance found at the beginning of § 112-33. If income is greater
than the overall maximum level of assistance, the applicant will not
be eligible except in an emergency (see § 112-14). If income is less
than the overall maximum level of assistance, the applicant has a
deficit.
(2) The municipality will provide assistance in an amount up to the
deficit to the extent the applicant also has an unmet need and is in
need of basic necessities. The municipality will not grant assistance
in excess of the maximum amounts allowed in § 112-33 of this
chapter for specific basic necessities except in an emergency or
when the Administrator elects to consolidate the applicant's deficit,
as provided immediately below.
§ 112-31 SACO CITY CODE § 112-31
104:232
§ 112-32. Income.
E. Consolidation of deficit. As a general rule and to the extent of their
deficit, applicants will be eligible for assistance for any basic necessity
up to, but not exceeding, the maximum amount allowed for that
necessity in this chapter or the actual thirty-day cost of the necessity,
whichever is less. Under certain circumstances, however, and in
accordance with the following conditions, the Administrator may
consolidate the applicant's deficit and apply it toward a basic necessity
in an amount greater than the ordinance maximum for that necessity.
(1) The practice of consolidating the deficit and applying it toward a
basic necessity in amounts greater than the ordinance maximum
shall be the exception rather than the rule;
(2) The total general assistance grant cannot exceed the total deficit
unless the applicant is in an emergency situation; and
(3) The need for the application of the recipient's consolidated deficit
toward a basic necessity was not created by the recipient
misspending his or her income or resources in violation of the useof-
income requirements of this chapter.
A. Income standards. Applicants whose income exceeds the overall
maximum level of assistance provided in § 112-33 shall not be eligible
for general assistance except in an emergency. The Administrator will
conduct an individual factual inquiry into the applicant's income and
expenses each time an applicant applies.
B. Calculation of income.
(1) To determine whether applicants are in need, the Administrator
will calculate the income they will receive during the next thirtyday
period commencing on the date of application, and identify any
assets or resources that would alleviate their need. For all
applicants other than initial applicants, the Administrator will also
consider as available income any income that was not spent during
the previous thirty-day period on basic necessities, as well as any
income that was spent on basic necessities in unreasonable excess
of the ordinance maximums for specific basic necessities. If a
household's income exceeds the amount of the household's need for
basic necessities, up to the maximum levels contained in § 112-33,
applicants will not be considered in need.
(2) Exceptions will be made in emergency situations, which may
necessitate that the maximum levels be exceeded (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4308) (see § 112-14 of this chapter). To calculate weekly income
and expenses, the Administrator will use actual income received or
actual anticipated income.
C. Types of income. Income that will be considered in determining an
applicant's need includes:
§ 112-31 FLEA MARKETS § 112-32
104:233
(1) Earned income. Income in cash or in kind earned by the applicant
through wages, salary, commissions, or profit, whether selfemployed
or as an employee, is considered earned income. If a
person is self-employed, total income will be computed by
subtracting reasonable and actual business expenses from gross
income. When income consists of wages, the amount computed will
be the income available after taxes, social security and other
payroll deductions required by state, federal, and local law. Rental
income and profit from produce that is sold is considered earned
income. Income that is held in trust and unavailable to the
applicant or the applicant's dependents will not be considered as
earned income. Note: Actual work-related expenses such as union
dues, transportation to and from work, special equipment or work
clothes, and child-care costs will be deducted from an applicant's
income [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)].
(2) Income from other assistance or social services programs.
(a) State/federal categorical assistance benefits, SSI payments,
social security payments, VA benefits, unemployment
insurance benefits, and payments from other government
sources will be considered as income, unless expressly
prohibited by federal law or regulation. Federal law prohibits
food stamps and fuel assistance payments made by the Home
Energy Assistance Program (HEAP and ECIP) from being
considered income. The value of the food stamps or fuel
assistance will not be used to reduce the amount of general
assistance the applicant is eligible to receive, although
applicants may have only a limited or reduced need for general
assistance for heating fuel or electricity if a recently received
HEAP/ECIP benefit has sufficiently credited their account or
otherwise prevented the fuel-related costs for the prospective
thirty-day period. The Administrator's obligation is to always
compute the heating needs of an applicant who has received
HEAP or ECIP as if that applicant paid for his or her total fuel
costs. Accordingly, in such cases, the Administrator will budget
for the household's heating energy needs according to actual
usage, up to the ordinance maximums, but the Administrator
may, with written notice to the applicant, hold in reserve the
heating energy portion of the applicant's deficit until such a
time during the period of eligibility that the applicant has a
demonstrable need for the disbursement of heating energy
assistance, that is, the applicant's fuel tank can accept a
minimum fuel delivery or the applicant no longer has a positive
credit balance with his or her utility company. The municipality
is not obligated to divert any recipient's heating energy
allowance toward nonheating purposes solely on the basis of
the recipient's receipt of HEAP/ECIP.
§ 112-32 SACO CITY CODE § 112-32
104:234
(b) Other programs whose income cannot be counted for purposes
of GA eligibility include:
[1] Family development accounts (22 M.R.S.A. § 3762).
[2] Americorp VISTA program benefits [42 U.S.C. § 5044(f)].
[3] Property tax rebates issued under the Maine Property Tax
Fairness Credit program, only so long as the money is
spent on basic necessities. [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)]
(3) Court-ordered support payments. Alimony and child support
payments will be considered income only if actually received by the
applicant. The General Assistance Administrator will refer cases
where support payments are not actually received to the State
Department of Health and Human Services' Child Support
Enforcement Unit. In order to be eligible for future GA, applicants
being referred to DHHS for such enforcement services shall be
required to follow through with such services. Because child
support payments are considered a resource, applicants must make
a good faith effort to secure such payments.
(4) Income from other sources. Payments from pensions and trust
funds will be considered income. Payments from boarders or
lodgers will be considered income as will cash or in-kind
contributions provided to the household from any other source,
including relatives [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)].
(5) Earnings of a son or daughter. Earned income received by sons and
daughters below the age of 18 who are full-time students and who
are not working full-time will not be considered income. The
unearned income of a minor in the household will be considered
available to the household.
(6) Income from household members. Income from household
members will be considered available to the applicant, whether or
not the household member is legally obligated for the support of
the applicant, if the household members pool or share their income
and expenses as a family or intermingle their funds so as to provide
support to one another.
(7) The pooling or nonpooling of income. When two or more individuals
share the same dwelling unit but not all members of the household
are applying for general assistance, the Administrator shall make a
finding under a rebuttable presumption that the entire household is
pooling income [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(12-A)].
(a) One or more applicants for assistance can successfully rebut
the presumption that all household income is being pooled by
providing the Administrator with verifiable documentation
affirmatively demonstrating a pattern of nonpooling for the
duration of the shared living arrangement. Such
§ 112-32 FLEA MARKETS § 112-32
104:235
documentation would include evidence of the entire household
expenses as well as bank statements, canceled checks,
receipts, landlord statements or other vendor accounts clearly
supporting a claim that the applicant has been and is presently
solely and entirely responsible for his or her pro rata share of
household costs.
(b) If the applicant is unable to successfully rebut the
municipality's presumption that all household income is being
pooled, eligibility of the entire household will be determined
based on total household income. If the applicant successfully
rebuts the municipality's presumption that all household
income is being pooled, the applicant's eligibility will be
determined on the basis of his or her income and his or her pro
rata share of actual household expenses.
(8) Lump sum income.
(a) A lump sum payment received by any GA applicant or recipient
prior or subsequent to the date of application for general
assistance will be considered as income available to the
household. However, verified required payments (i.e., any
third-party payment which is required as a condition of
receiving the lump sum payment, or any payments of bills
earmarked for the purpose for which the lump sum payment
was made) and any amount of the lump sum payment which the
applicant can document was spent on basic necessities, as
described below, will not be considered available income.
(b) Where a household receives a lump sum payment at any time
prior or subsequent to the date of application for general
assistance, the Administrator will assess the need for prorating
an applicant's eligibility for general assistance according to the
following criteria [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7) and (8-A)]:
[1] Identify the date the lump sum payment was received;
[2] Subtract from the lump sum payment all required
payments;
[3] Subtract from the lump sum any amount the applicant can
demonstrate was spent on basic necessities, including all
basic necessities as defined by the general assistance
program such as reasonable payment of funeral or burial
expenses for a family member; any reasonable travel costs
related to the illness or death of a family member; repair
or replacement of essentials lost due to fire, flood or other
natural disaster; repair or purchase of a motor vehicle
essential for employment, education, training or other dayto-
day living necessities. Repayments of loans or credit,
the proceeds of which can be verified as having been spent
on basic necessities, and payment of bills earmarked for
§ 112-32 SACO CITY CODE § 112-32
104:236
§ 112-33. Basic necessities; maximum levels of assistance.
the purpose for which the lump sum is paid must also be
subtracted [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7) and (8-A)];
[4] Add to the remainder all income received by the household
between the date of receipt of the lump sum payment and
the date of application for general assistance; and
[5] Divide the sum created in Subsection C(8)(b)[4] by the
verified actual monthly amounts for all of the household's
basic necessities. [22 M.R.S.A. § 4305(3-B)]
(c) This dividend represents the period of proration determined by
the Administrator to commence on the date of receipt of the
lump sum payment. The prorated sum for each month must be
considered available to the household for 12 months from the
date of application or during the period of proration, whichever
is less.
(d) The household of an initial applicant that is otherwise eligible
for emergency assistance may not be denied emergency
assistance to meet an immediate need solely on the basis of the
proration of a lump sum payment. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308)
A. Overall maximum levels of assistance.
(1) Notwithstanding any of the maximum levels of assistance for
specific basic necessities listed in Appendixes B through H of this
chapter, an applicant's eligibility for general assistance will be first
determined by subtracting his or her income from the overall
maximum level of assistance designated in Appendix A for the
applicable household size [22 M.R.S.A. § 4305 (3-B)].43 The
difference yielded by this calculation shall be the applicant's
deficit.
(2) Applicants will be eligible for general assistance up to the
calculated deficit to the extent the applicant is unable to otherwise
provide the basic necessities essential to maintain themselves or
their families. Applicants with no deficit shall be found ineligible for
general assistance unless they are in an emergency, in which case
eligibility for emergency general assistance will be determined
according to § 112-14 of this chapter.
B. Maximum levels of assistance for specific basic necessities.
(1) In general.
(a) The municipality will grant assistance to eligible applicants for
basic necessities according to the maximum levels for specific
43.Editor's Note: Appendixes A through H are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 112-32 FLEA MARKETS § 112-33
104:237
types of assistance set forth below. The Administrator, in
consultation with the applicant, may apply the amount of the
applicant's deficit toward assistance with any one or a
combination of necessities not to exceed the total deficit. These
maximum levels will be strictly adhered to unless the
Administrator determines that there are exceptional
circumstances and an emergency is shown to exist, in which
case these absolute levels will be waived in order to meet
immediate needs. In all cases, either the actual expenses the
applicant incurs for basic necessities or the maximum amount
allowed in each category, whichever is less, will be used in
determining need.
(b) In roommate situations, the applicant's need for common living
expenses for rent, fuel, electricity, etc., will be presumed to be
reduced by an amount equal to the other household members'
proportionate fair share of the common living expenses. No
applicant will be allowed to claim a need for any expense which
has been or will be paid by another person. In addition, as a
general rule the municipality will not provide a benefit toward
a basic need by paying a bill that is issued to a person not living
with the applicant's household or that has otherwise been
incurred by a person who has not been found eligible to receive
assistance.
(c) Temporary exceptions to this general rule may be made by the
Administrator in the following circumstances:
[1] A recent, unplanned separation has occurred in the
household resulting in the sustained or permanent
absence of a former household member in whose name the
bill was customarily issued;
[2] The applicant and members of the applicant's household
were or will be the sole recipients of the commodities or
services covered by any bill to be paid or partially paid
with general assistance; and
[3] The applicant will make a good faith effort to direct the
vendor to issue future bills in the name of the applicant or
other responsible person residing in the household.
(2) Food.
(a) The Administrator will provide food assistance to eligible
persons up to the allowed maximum amounts designated by
the USDA Thrifty Food Plan for the appropriate household size.
For this purpose, the municipality hereby incorporates by
reference the USDA Thrifty Food Plan, as distributed by the
Maine Department of Health and Human Services on or about
October of each year. See Appendix B of this chapter for the
current year's food maximums.44
§ 112-33 SACO CITY CODE § 112-33
104:238
(b) In determining need for food, the Administrator will not
consider the value of the food stamps an applicant receives as
income [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)(A); 7 U.S.C. § 2017(b)]. The
municipality will authorize vouchers to be used solely for
approved food products.
(c) The Administrator will exceed the maximums when necessary
for households having members with special dietary needs.
The Administrator may require a doctor's statement verifying
there is a special dietary need requiring an expenditure for
food that is greater than the ordinance maximums.
(3) Housing. The Administrator will provide assistance with rent or
mortgage payments that are reasonable and/or within the allowed
maximum levels. See Appendix C of this chapter for the current
year's housing maximums.45 It is the applicant's responsibility to
find suitable housing, although the Administrator may help the
applicant find housing when appropriate. The Administrator will
inform the applicant of the allowed housing maximums to assist the
applicant in his or her search for housing. The allowed maximum
for any applicant will be the categorical housing maximum
representing the minimum dwelling unit space necessary to
adequately shelter the applicant household. Applicants requesting
assistance for housing that contains more bedrooms than are
necessary for the number of household members will be provided
assistance according to the maximum level for the number of rooms
actually needed.
(a) Rental payments to relatives. The municipality may elect not to
issue any rental payment to an applicant's relatives unless the
rental relationship has existed for at least three months and
the applicant's relative(s) rely on the rental payment for their
basic needs. For the purpose of this section, a "relative" is
defined as the applicant's parents, grandparents, children,
grandchildren, siblings, parent's siblings, or any of those
relative's children [22 M.R.S.A. § 4319(2)].
(b) Rental payments to nonrelatives.
[1] When applicants are living in private homes with the
owner or sharing dwelling units with people who are not
pooling income or who are not legally liable relatives, the
amount allowed as the applicant's shelter expense will be
the applicant's pro rata share of the actual, total shelter
cost, up to the ordinance maximum [22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4301(6)].
44.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
45.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 112-33 FLEA MARKETS § 112-33
104:239
[2] Any housing assistance issued to a recipient in such a
circumstance will be issued, whenever reasonably
possible, to the landlord or property owner with the most
superior interest in the property, i.e., to a landlord before a
tenant, or to a mortgagee before a mortgagor.
[3] When the municipality issues in aggregate more than $600
in rental payments to any landlord in any calendar year, a
1099 form declaring the total amount of rental payments
issued during the calendar year will be forwarded to the
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) pursuant to IRS regulation
[see Section 6041(a) of Internal Revenue Code].
[4] Any landlord wishing to regularly receive rental payments
from the municipality on behalf of applicants renting
rooms from the landlord's own residence must, at a
minimum, make a good faith effort to obtain a lodging
license from the Department of Health and Human
Services, Division of Health Engineering, pursuant to
10-144A CMR Ch. 201, as a condition of that landlord
receiving future general assistance payments on behalf of
his or her tenants.
(c) Mortgage payments.
[1] In the case of a request for assistance with a mortgage
payment, the General Assistance Administrator will make
an individual factual determination of whether the
applicant has an immediate need for such aid. In making
this determination, the Administrator will consider the
extent and liquidity of the applicant's proprietary interest
in the housing. Factors to consider in making this
determination include:
[a] The marketability of the shelter's equity;
[b] The amount of equity;
[c] The availability of the equity interest in the shelter to
provide the applicant an opportunity to secure a shortterm
loan in order to meet immediate needs;
[d] The extent to which liquidation may aid the applicant's
financial rehabilitation;
[e] A comparison between the amount of mortgage
obligations and the anticipated rental charges the
applicant would be responsible for if he/she were to be
dislocated to rental housing;
§ 112-33 SACO CITY CODE § 112-33
104:240
[f] The imminence of the applicant's dislocation from
owned housing because of his or her inability to meet
the mortgage payments;
[g] The likelihood that the provision of housing assistance
will prevent such dislocation; and
[h] The applicant's age, health, and social situation.
[2] These factors shall be considered when determining
whether the equity in the shelter is an available asset
which may be substituted for the assistance the
municipality would otherwise be required to provide.
[3] The Administrator shall consider issuing a benefit in
response to the applicant's request for mortgage
assistance to the extent the applicant is otherwise eligible
for general assistance if, after reviewing the above
criteria, the Administrator determines that:
[a] The monthly mortgage obligation is in accordance
with the maximum levels of assistance available for
housing appropriate to the applicant's household size;
[b] There is no capacity in the accumulated equity in the
property, when considered in the context of the
applicant's borrowing capacity with the mortgagee or
the general lending community, to suspend the
mortgage obligation temporarily or reamortize the
mortgage in such a way as to suspend or reduce the
mortgage obligation; and
[c] The failure to provide a mortgage payment in a timely
manner could jeopardize the applicant's continued
right of possession of the property.
[4] If a mortgage payment is necessary, the Administrator will
pay the actual amount due, up to the amount allowed
according to the maximum levels listed below. After an
initial application, assistance with such payments will be
given only after the applicant has made all reasonable
efforts to borrow against the equity of his or her home. If
there is not sufficient equity in the home with which to
secure a loan, and if the monthly mortgage payments are
not realistically in line with the rental rates for similar
housing in the area that could meet the applicant's needs,
the Administrator will inform the applicant that he/she is
responsible for finding alternative housing within his or
her ability to pay and will be obligated to make all
reasonable efforts to secure such housing.
(d) Liens.
§ 112-33 FLEA MARKETS § 112-33
104:241
[1] The municipality may place a lien on the property in order
to recover its costs of granting assistance with mortgage
payments. In addition, a municipality may claim a lien
against the owner of real estate for the amount of money
spent by it to make capital improvements to the real estate
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4320). No lien may be enforced against a
recipient except upon his or her death or the transfer of
the property. Further, no lien may be enforced against a
person who is currently receiving any form of public
assistance or who would again become eligible for general
assistance if the lien were enforced.
[2] If the municipality determines that it is appropriate to
place a lien on a person's property to recover its costs of
providing general assistance for a mortgage payment or
capital improvement, it must file a notice of the lien with
the County Registry of Deeds where the property is
located within 30 days of making the mortgage payment.
That filing shall secure the municipality's or the state's
interest in an amount equal to the sum of that mortgage or
capital improvement payment and all subsequent
mortgage or capital improvement payments made on
behalf of the same eligible person, plus interest and costs.
[3] Not less than 10 days prior to filing the lien in the registry,
the municipal officers must send notice to the owner of the
real estate, the general assistance recipient, and any
record holder of the mortgage by certified mail, return
receipt requested, that a lien on the property is going to be
filed with the registry. This notice must clearly inform the
recipient of the limitations upon enforcement plus the
name, title, address and telephone number of the person
who granted the assistance. The municipal officers must
also give written notice to the recipient each time the
amount secured by the lien is increased because of an
additional mortgage payment. This notice must include the
same information that appeared on the original intent-tofile
notice sent to the recipient.
[4] The municipality may charge interest on the amount of
money secured by the lien. The municipal officers will
establish the interest rate not to exceed the maximum rate
of interest allowed by the State Treasurer to be charged
against delinquent taxes. The interest will accrue from the
date the lien is filed.
(e) Property taxes. In the event an applicant requests assistance
with his or her property taxes, the Administrator will inform
the applicant that there are two procedures on the local level
to request that relief: the poverty abatement process [36
M.S.R.A. § 841(2)] and general assistance. If the applicant
§ 112-33 SACO CITY CODE § 112-33
104:242
chooses to seek property tax assistance through general
assistance or if the applicant is denied a poverty tax
abatement, the Administrator may consider using general
assistance to meet this need only if:
[1] The property tax in question is for the applicant's place of
residence;
[2] There is a tax lien on the property which is due to mature
within 60 days of the date of application;
[3] As a matter of municipal policy or practice, or on the basis
of information obtained from the applicant's mortgagee, if
any, it is reasonably certain that a tax lien foreclosure will
result in subsequent eviction from the residential
property; and
[4] The applicant, with sufficient notice, applies for property
tax relief through the Maine Property Tax Fairness Credit
program, when available.
(f) Housing maximums.
[1] The maximum levels of housing assistance contained in
this chapter have been derived either from a locally
accomplished fair market rental survey or the fair market
rental values developed by the United States Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). If the
maximum levels of housing are derived from the HUD
values made effective as of every October 1 and adjusted
to disregard the current and averaged utility allowances as
developed by the Maine State Housing Authority, those
levels are hereby incorporated by reference. See Appendix
C of this chapter for the current year's housing
maximums.46
[2] If and when the maximum levels of housing contained in
this chapter are derived from a locally developed fair
market rental survey, a record of that survey will be
submitted to the DHHS, General Assistance Unit, and the
maximum levels of housing assistance will be incorporated
into this chapter pursuant to the ordinance adoption and
amendment procedures found at 22 M.R.S.A. § 4305.
(4) Utilities.
(a) General provisions.
[1] Expenses for lights, cooking, and hot water will be
budgeted separately if they are not included in the rent.
46.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 112-33 FLEA MARKETS § 112-33
104:243
Applicants are responsible for making arrangements with
the utility company regarding service, including entering
into a special payment arrangement if necessary.
[2] Assistance will be granted to eligible applicants on the
basis of their most recent bill. The municipality is not
obligated to pay back bills or utility security deposits.
Exceptions may be made in emergency situations pursuant
to § 112-14.
[3] Disconnection of utility service will not be considered an
emergency in all cases. The Administrator will make an
individual, factual analysis to determine if the termination
of utility service constitutes an emergency. The
Administrator will consider the household composition,
the time of year, the age and health of the household
members, and other appropriate factors in reaching a
decision. Applicants who had sufficient income, money,
assets or other resources to pay their utility bill when it
was received, but who spent all or part of their income on
items which were not basic necessities, will not be eligible
to receive general assistance to replace those funds.
[4] Applicants have the burden of providing evidence of their
income and use of income for the applicable time period
[22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(2)] (see §§ 112-14 and 112-28). The
Administrator will notify applicants in writing that they
must give the Administrator prompt notice if their utility
service is to be terminated or if their fuel supply is low. It is
the applicant's responsibility to attempt to make
arrangements with the utility company to maintain their
service and to notify the Administrator if assistance is
needed with a utility bill prior to service being terminated.
(b) Electricity maximums for household without electric hot water.
See Appendix D of this chapter for the current year's electricity
maximums.47
(c) Electricity maximums for households that use electrically
heated hot water. See Appendix D of this chapter for the
current year's electricity maximums.48
(d) Nonelectric utilities. The allowed amount for water and sewer
utility service will be budgeted at a thirty-day reasonable
usage rate.
(5) Fuel.
47.Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
48.Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 112-33 SACO CITY CODE § 112-33
104:244
(a) Expenses for home heating will be budgeted according to the
actual need for fuel during the heating season (September
through May), provided that such expenses are reasonable,
and at other times during the year when the Administrator
determines the request for fuel assistance is reasonable and
appropriate.
(b) Assistance will be granted to eligible applicants on the basis of
their most recent bill. The municipality is not responsible for
back bills except in an emergency as provided in § 112-14.
Applicants are responsible for monitoring their fuel supply and
requesting assistance prior to depleting their fuel supply.
When applicants who have been informed of this responsibility
run out of fuel nonetheless and can show no just cause for
failing to give the Administrator timely notice of their need for
fuel, the Administrator shall find that the emergency was not
beyond the applicants' control and process the emergency
request accordingly, pursuant to § 112-14 of this chapter. See
Appendix E of this chapter for the current year's fuel
maximums.49
(6) Personal care and household supplies. Expenses for ordinary
personal and household supplies will be budgeted and allowed
according to the applicant's actual need for these items. Personal
and household supplies include hand soap, toothpaste, shampoo,
shaving cream, deodorant, dish detergent, laundry supplies and
costs, household cleaning supplies, razors, paper products such as
toilet paper, tissues, paper towels, garbage/trash bags, light bulbs
and supplies for children under five years of age. See Appendix F of
this chapter for the current year's personal care and household
supplies maximums.50
(7) Other basic necessities. Expenses falling under this section will be
granted when they are deemed essential to an applicant's or
recipient's health and safety by the General Assistance
Administrator and, in some cases, upon verification by a physician.
Assistance will be granted only when these necessities cannot be
obtained through the utilization of available resources.
(a) Clothing. The municipality may assist a household with the
purchase of adequate clothing. Before assistance will be
granted for clothing, the General Assistance Administrator
must be satisfied that the applicant has utilized all available
resources to secure the necessary clothing. In some
circumstances, clothing will be a postponable item. Exceptions
to this would be, for example, if fire, flood or unusually cold
weather makes extra clothing an immediate necessity, special
49.Editor's Note: Appendix E is included as an attachment to this chapter.
50.Editor's Note: Appendix F is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 112-33 FLEA MARKETS § 112-33
104:245
clothing is necessary for the applicant's employment, or a
household member is without adequate clothing.
(b) Medical.
[1] The municipality will pay for essential medical expenses,
other than hospital bills (see below), provided that the
municipality is notified and approves the expenses and
services prior to their being made or delivered. Medical
expenses include prescriptions, devices, treatments, or
services that are determined to be "medically necessary"
by a licensed physician. The municipality will grant
assistance for medical services only when assistance
cannot be obtained from any other source and the
applicant would not be able to receive necessary medical
care without the municipality's assistance. The applicant is
required to utilize any resource, including any federal or
state program, that will diminish his or her need to seek
general assistance for medical expenses. The municipality
will grant assistance for nonemergency medical services
only if a physician verifies that the services are essential.
Provided that there is no cost to the applicant, the
Administrator may require a second medical opinion from
a physician designated by the municipality to verify the
necessity of the services.
[2] Generally, the municipality will issue general assistance at
the established Medicaid rates for all medical services,
prescriptions, or other medical commodities. Before
authorizing general assistance for any medical expenses,
the Administrator will inform the pharmacy or medical
service provider of the municipality's intention to pay for
the medical service at the Medicaid rate and ask to be
billed accordingly.
[3] Ordinary medical supplies/nonprescription drugs will be
budgeted at the actual amount when the applicant can
demonstrate a need for such items. Allowable supplies
include bandages, aspirin, cough syrup, and other generic
brand, nonprescription medicines. In addition, the basic
monthly rate for telephone service will be budgeted when
a telephone is essential to the health and safety of the
household. In order for telephone service to be considered
an allowable expense, the applicant must provide a written
statement from a physician certifying that the telephone is
essential.
(c) Hospital bills.
[1] In the event of an emergency admission to the hospital, the
hospital must notify the Administrator within five business
§ 112-33 SACO CITY CODE § 112-33
104:246
days of the admission. Notification must be by telephone,
confirmed by certified mail, or by certified mail only. If a
hospital fails to give timely notice to the Administrator, the
municipality will have no obligation to pay the bill.
[2] Any person who cannot pay his or her hospital bill must
apply to the hospital for consideration under the hospital's
free care program as provided in Title 22 M.R.S.A. § 1716.
Anyone who is not eligible for the hospital's free care
program may apply for general assistance. Applicants
must apply for assistance within 30 days of being
discharged from the hospital and provide a notice from the
hospital certifying that they re not eligible for the
hospital's free care program.
[3] Before the Administrator will consider whether to allow a
hospital bill as a necessary expense, the applicant must
enter into a reasonable payment arrangement with the
hospital. The payment arrangement will be based upon the
Medicaid rate. In determining an applicant's eligibility, the
municipality will budget the monthly payment to the
hospital the applicant has agreed to pay. The applicant's
need for assistance with a hospital bill will be considered
each time he/she applies by including the amount of the
bill in the applicant's monthly budget, but the recipient
will be responsible for making any necessary payments to
the hospital pursuant to the use-of-income requirements
found at § 112-31 of this chapter.
(d) Dental. The municipality will pay for medically necessary
dental services only. As is the case with medical services
generally, the municipality will issue general assistance for
dental services at the established Medicaid rates for those
services, and before authorizing the general assistance benefit
for dental services, the Administrator will inform the dentist or
dental surgeon of the municipality's intention to pay at the
Medicaid rate. If full mouth extractions are necessary, the
municipality will pay for dentures, provided that the applicant
has no other resources to pay for the dentures. The applicant
will be referred to a dental clinic in the area whenever
possible. The Administrator will expect the applicant to bear a
reasonable part of the cost for dental services, including
extractions and dentures, taking into account the applicant's
ability to pay.
(e) Eye care. In order to be eligible to receive general assistance
for eyeglasses, an applicant must have his or her medical need
certified by a person licensed to practice optometry. The
General Assistance Administrator will provide assistance for
eyeglasses to eligible persons only after the applicant has
§ 112-33 FLEA MARKETS § 112-33
104:247
exhausted all other available resources and generally only at
the Medicaid rate.
(f) Telephone charge. A payment for basic telephone will only be
allowed if a telephone is necessary for medical reasons as
verified by a physician. At the discretion of the GA
Administrator, minimum/basic telephone services may be
allowed for households with children, for households where job
search or job-related reasons exist, and/or for any other
reasons the Administrator deems necessary.
(g) Work-related expenses. In determining need, reasonable and
actual work-related expenses will be deducted from earned
income. These expenses include child-care costs, work clothes,
supplies and transportation at the actual costs, not to exceed
the ordinance maximum (see Appendix G for this year's
maximum mileage allotment).51 The applicant is required to
provide documentation substantiating the costs and that the
expenses were necessary.
(h) Travel expenses. In determining need, necessary travel which
is not work-related will be budgeted if the applicant can satisfy
the Administrator that the prospective need for travel is
necessary. For applicants in rural areas, weekly transportation
to a supermarket will be considered, as will any medically
necessary travel. See Appendix G for the current rate at which
such necessary travel will be budgeted.52 This rate shall be
construed to subsidize all costs associated with automobile
ownership and operation, including gas/oil, tires, maintenance,
insurance, financing, licensing/registration, excise tax, etc.
(i) Burials; cremations. Under the circumstances and in
accordance with the procedures and limitations described
below (see § 112-34), the municipality recognizes its
responsibility to pay for the burial or cremation of eligible
persons. See Appendix H for the current maximums.53
(j) Capital improvements.
[1] The costs associated with capital improvements/repairs
(e.g., heating/water/septic system repair) will generally
not be budgeted as a basic necessity. Exceptions can be
made only when the capital improvement/repair has been
preapproved by the Administrator as a necessary expense
and the monthly cost of the capital improvement/repair
has been reduced as far as reasonably possible, for
example, by means of the applicant entering into an
51.Editor's Note: Appendix G is included as an attachment to this chapter.
52.Editor's Note: Appendix G is included as an attachment to this chapter.
53.Editor's Note: Appendix H is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 112-33 SACO CITY CODE § 112-33
104:248
§ 112-34. Burials; cremations.
installment payment arrangement with the contractor. The
Administrator may grant general assistance for capital
improvements when:
[a] The failure to do so would place the applicant(s) in
emergency circumstances;
[b] There are no other resources available to effect the
capital repair; and
[c] There is no more cost-effective alternative available to
the applicant or municipality to alleviate an
emergency situation.
[2] In some cases, the entire immediate cost of the capital
improvement can be mitigated by the applicant entering
into an installment payment arrangement with a
contractor. The municipality reserves the right to place a
lien on any property pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4320 when
general assistance has been used to effect a capital
improvement. The lien process shall be accomplished in
the same manner as for mortgage payments, as described
in Subsection B(3)(d), Liens, above.
A. Funeral director must give timely notice. In order for the municipality
to be liable for a burial or cremation expense, the funeral director must
notify the Administrator prior to the burial or cremation or by the end of
three business days following the funeral director's receipt of the body,
whichever is earlier [22 M.R.S.A. § 4313(2)]. This contact by the funeral
director shall begin the process of developing an application for burial/
cremation assistance on behalf of the deceased. It is the funeral
director's responsibility to make a good faith effort to determine if the
family or any other persons are going to pay all or part of the burial
expenses. If family members or others are unable to pay the expenses
and the funeral director wants the municipality to pay all or part of the
expenses, the funeral director must make timely contact to the
municipal Administrator. In addition, the funeral director may refer
legally liable relatives to the Administrator so that a timely
determination of financial capacity may be accomplished.
B. Application for assistance shall be calculated on behalf of the deceased.
For the purposes of determining residency, calculating eligibility and
issuing general assistance for burial or cremation purposes, an
application for assistance shall be completed by the Administrator on
behalf of the deceased.
(1) With regard to residency, the municipality of responsibility for
burial expenses shall be the municipality in which the eligible
§ 112-33 FLEA MARKETS § 112-34
104:249
deceased person was a resident at the time of death as residency is
determined under § 112-15 of this chapter.
(2) Although legally liable relatives may be asked to provide
information regarding their income, assets, and basic living
expenses, that information will not be construed as an application
for general assistance inasmuch as living persons are not eligible
for burial assistance. To clarify this point of law, although legally
liable relatives have a financial responsibility to pay for the burial
or cremation of their relatives, that financial responsibility only
exists to the extent the legally liable relatives have a financial
capacity to do so. Therefore, legally liable relatives who are eligible
for general assistance, by virtue of their eligibility, have no legal
obligation to pay for the burial or cremation of their relatives. For
these reasons, all general assistance issued for burial or cremation
purposes shall be issued on behalf of, and in the name of, the
deceased.
C. The financial responsibility of certain family members. Grandparents,
parents, children and grandchildren of the deceased, who live in Maine
or own property in Maine, are financially responsible for the burial or
cremation of the deceased to the extent those relatives, individually or
as a group, have a financial capacity to pay for the burial or cremation
either in lump sum or by means of a budgeted payment arrangement
with the funeral home. Accordingly, at the request of the Administrator,
all legally liable relatives must provide the Municipal Administrator
with any reasonably requested information regarding their income,
assets, and basic living expenses.
D. Consideration of the financial responsibility of family members.
Generally, when the Administrator can make a finding that one or more
of the deceased's legally liable relatives have an obvious and
demonstrable financial capacity to pay for the burial or cremation, by
lump sum payment or by means of a reasonable payment arrangement,
the municipality will not grant the requested burial or cremation
assistance. When the Administrator is unable to make such a finding,
the following proration of familial responsibility will be implemented.
E. Proration of familial responsibility. A proration of familial financial
responsibility will be used when no legally liable relative possesses an
obvious and demonstrable capacity to pay for the burial or cremation,
but one or more of the financially liable relatives is found to have a
financial capacity to make a partial financial contribution, or the
Administrator is unable to determine the financial capacity of one or
more of said relatives. Under these circumstances, each legally liable
relative is considered to be responsible for his or her pro rata share of
the total municipal contribution that would exist if no legally liable
relatives had a financial capacity to contribute. Furthermore, and as
long as all other eligibility factors have been satisfied, the municipality
will provide as a burial or cremation benefit the aggregate of all pro
rata shares less the share of any legally liable relative who refuses to
§ 112-34 SACO CITY CODE § 112-34
104:250
cooperate with the Administrator by providing information or
documentation reasonably necessary to determine that relative's
financial capacity, and less any share or part of a share attributable
to a legally liable relative who can financially contribute or partially
contribute toward the burial or cremation to the extent of that relative's
share.
F. Eight days to determine eligibility. The Administrator may take up to
eight days from the date of contact by the funeral director to issue a
written decision regarding the amount of the municipal contribution
toward the burial or cremation. The eight-day eligibility determination
period from the date of contact by the funeral director shall be used as
necessary to make third-party collateral contacts, verify the listing of
legally liable family members and determine their respective financial
capacities to contribute to the burial or cremation, contact the personal
representative of the deceased's estate, if any, and other related
administrative tasks. The Administrator shall not use this eight-day
period allowed by law to unreasonably delay the municipality's
decision.
G. Municipal obligation to pay when legally liable relatives or others can
contribute. The figures provided in this section are the maximum
benefits provided by the municipality when no contributions toward the
burial or cremation are available from any other source. To the extent
any legally liable relatives of the deceased have a financial capacity to
pay for the burial or cremation, that financial capacity shall be
deducted from the maximum burial costs allowed by this section. In
addition, any other benefits or resources that are available, such as
social security burial benefits, veterans' burial benefits, or
contributions from other persons, will be deducted from the maximum
amount the municipality will pay, except there will be no deduction from
the municipal benefit level with respect to any contribution provided for
the purpose of publishing an obituary notice up to an aggregate
contribution limit for this purpose of $75 when a paid receipt
demonstrating the purchase of an obituary notice is provided to the
Administrator.
H. Burial expenses. The Administrator will respect the wishes of family
members with regard to whether the deceased is interred by means of
burial or cremated. See Appendix H for the maximum levels of
assistance granted for the purpose of burials.54
I. Cremation expenses. In the absence of any objection by any family
members of the deceased, or when neither the Administrator nor the
funeral director can locate any family members, the Administrator may
issue general assistance for cremation services. See Appendix H for the
maximum levels of assistance granted for the purpose of cremations.55
54.Editor's Note: Appendix H is included as an attachment to this chapter.
55.Editor's Note: Appendix H is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 112-34 FLEA MARKETS § 112-35
104:251
§ 112-35. Notice of decision.
A. Written decision.
(1) The Administrator will give a written decision to each applicant
after making a determination of eligibility each time a person
applies. The decision will be given to the applicant within 24 hours
of receiving a completed and signed application [22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4305(3)] (see Article IV, § 112-11).
(2) When an applicant submits an incomplete or unsigned application,
due to the twenty-four-hour decision requirement placed on the GA
Administrator, the GA Administrator may decide to render a notice
of "ineligibility" and provide the applicant with another application
to submit as soon as is practicable for the applicant.
(3) In order to ensure that applicants understand their rights, it is the
responsibility of the General Assistance Administrator to explain
the applicants' right to a fair hearing in the written notice of
decision.
B. Contents. After an application has been completed, applicants will be
given written notice of any decision concerning their eligibility for
assistance. In addition to the contents of a written decision listed in
§ 112-11 of this chapter, the notice will state that applicants:
(1) Have the right to a fair hearing and the method by which they may
obtain a fair hearing; and
(2) Have the right to contact the DHHS if they believe the municipality
has violated the law. The decision will state the method for
notifying the department.
C. Disbursement of general assistance. Except when determined
impractical by the Administrator, all general assistance will be provided
in the form of a voucher or purchase order payable to a vendor or
through direct municipal payment to a provider of goods or services.
General assistance will not be issued in the form of a cash payment to
an applicant unless there is no alternative to making such a cash
payment, in which case the Administrator shall document the
circumstances for issuing general assistance in the form of cash [22
M.R.S.A. § 4305(6)].
§ 112-35 SACO CITY CODE § 112-35
104:252
ARTICLE VII
Fair Hearing
§ 112-36. Right to fair hearing.
Within five working days of receiving a written notice of denial, reduction
or termination of assistance, or within 10 working days after any other act
or failure to act, the applicant or his or her authorized representative has
the right to request a fair hearing (22 M.R.S.A. § 4322). The right to review
a decision of the General Assistance Administrator is a basic right of the
applicant to a full evidentiary hearing and is not limited solely to a review
of the decision.
§ 112-37. Method of obtaining fair hearing.
Upon receiving notification of the decision of the General Assistance
Administrator, all claimants will be informed of the method of obtaining a
fair hearing. All complaints that are not clear requests for a fair hearing
will be answered by a personal interview or in writing by the General
Assistance Administrator. If the client is satisfied with the adjustment or
explanation, the Administrator will make an entry in the case record and file
any correspondence involved.
A. Written request.
(1) To obtain a fair hearing, the claimant, or his or her authorized
representative, must make a written request within five working
days of receiving the Administrator's decision to grant, deny,
reduce or terminate assistance or within 10 working days after any
other act or failure to act. The Administrator will make available a
printed form for requesting a fair hearing and will assist the
claimant in completing it if necessary. On the printed form, the
claimant will give the following information:
(a) The decision on which review is sought;
(b) The reason(s) for the claimant's dissatisfaction and why the
claimant believes he/she is eligible to receive assistance; and
(c) The relief sought by the claimant.
(2) The Administrator cannot deny or dismiss a request for a hearing
unless it has been withdrawn (in writing) by the claimant.
B. Scheduling the fair hearing.
(1) Upon receipt of the completed written request, the fair hearing
authority must meet and hold the hearing within five working days.
The Administrator will notify the claimant in writing when and
where the hearing will be held (22 M.R.S.A. § 4322). In addition to
the date, time and place of the hearing, the notice of fair hearing
§ 112-36 FLEA MARKETS § 112-37
104:253
§ 112-38. The fair hearing authority.
§ 112-39. Fair hearing procedure.
sent to the claimant shall include, at a minimum, the claimant's
rights to:
(a) Be his or her own spokesperson at the fair hearing or be
represented by legal counsel or other spokesperson at the
hearing, at the claimant's own expense;
(b) Confront and cross-examine any witnesses presented at the
hearing against the claimant; and
(c) Present witnesses on his or her own behalf.
(2) Arrangements for the date, time, and place of the hearing will take
into consideration the convenience of the claimant and the hearing
authority. The claimant will be given timely notice to allow for
preparation and will also be given adequate preliminary
information about the hearing procedure to allow for effective
preparation of his or her case.
A. The municipal officers will appoint a fair hearing authority (FHA) that
will determine, based on all the evidence presented at the fair hearing,
whether the claimant(s) was (were) eligible to receive assistance at the
time they applied for GA. The FHA is charged with the responsibility of
ensuring that general assistance is administered in accordance with the
state law and local ordinance.
B. The fair hearing authority may consist of the municipal officers, one or
more persons appointed by the municipal officers to act as the FHA, or,
if designated, the Board of Appeals created under 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4322). In determining the organization of the fair
hearing authority, the municipal officers will use the following criteria.
The person(s) serving as FHA must:
(1) Not have participated in the decision which is the subject of the
appeal;
(2) Be impartial;
(3) Be sufficiently skilled in interviewing techniques to be able to
obtain evidence and the facts necessary to make a fair
determination; and
(4) Be capable of evaluating all evidence fairly and realistically,
explaining to the claimant the laws and regulations under which
the Administrator operated, and interpreting to the Administrator
any evidence of unsound, unclear, or inadequate policies, practices
or actions.
§ 112-37 SACO CITY CODE § 112-39
104:254
A. When a claimant requesting a fair hearing is notified of the date, time,
and place of the hearing in writing, he/she will also be given adequate
preliminary information about the hearing procedure to allow for
effective preparation of his or her case. The claimant shall be permitted
to review his or her file prior to the hearing. At a minimum, the claimant
will be told the following information, which will govern all fair
hearings. All fair hearings will:
(1) Be conducted privately, and will be open only to the claimant,
witnesses, legal counsel, or others whom the claimant wants
present, and the General Assistance Administrator, his or her
agents, counsel and witnesses;
(2) Be opened with a presentation of the issue by the fair hearing
authority;
(3) Be conducted informally, without technical rules of evidence, but
subject to the requirements of due process;
(4) Allow the claimant and the Administrator the option to present
their positions for themselves or with the aid of others, including
legal counsel;
(5) Give all participants an opportunity to present oral or written
testimony or documentary evidence, offer rebuttal; question
witnesses presented at the hearing; and examine all evidence
presented at the hearing;
(6) Result in a decision, based exclusively on evidence or testimony
presented at the hearing; and
(7) Be tape-recorded and result in a written decision that is given to
the claimant and filed with evidence introduced at the hearing. The
fair hearing authority will allow the claimant to establish all
pertinent facts and circumstances and to advance any arguments
without undue interference. Information that the claimant does not
have an opportunity to hear or see will not be used in the fair
hearing decision or made part of the hearing record. Any material
reviewed by the fair hearing authority must be made available to
the claimant or his or her representative. The claimant will be
responsible for preparing a written transcript if he/she wishes to
pursue court action.
B. The fair hearing authority shall admit all evidence if it is the kind of
evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the
conduct of serious affairs (22 M.R.S.A. § 4322).
C. Claimant's failure to appear. In the event the claimant fails to appear,
the FHA will send a written notice to the claimant that the GA
Administrator's decision was not altered due to the claimant's failure to
appear. Furthermore, the notice shall indicate that the claimant has five
working days from receipt of the notice to submit to the GA
§ 112-39 FLEA MARKETS § 112-39
104:255
§ 112-40. Fair hearing decision.
Administrator information demonstrating "just cause" for failing to
appear.
(1) For the purposes of a claimant's failure to appear at a fair hearing,
examples of "just cause" include:
(a) A death or serious illness in the family;
(b) A personal illness which reasonably prevents the party from
attending the hearing;
(c) An emergency or unforeseen event which reasonably prevents
the party from attending the hearing;
(d) An obligation or responsibility which a reasonable person in
the conduct of his or her affairs could reasonably conclude
takes precedence over the attendance at the hearing; or
(e) Lack of receipt of adequate or timely notice; excusable neglect,
excusable inadvertence, or excusable mistake.
(2) If the claimant (or his or her attorney) establishes just cause, the
request for the hearing will be reinstated and a hearing
rescheduled.
(3) In the event a claimant who is represented by legal counsel fails to
appear at a fair hearing, legal counsel shall not testify in place of
the claimant on matters of "fact" but may cross-examine witnesses
and make "legal" arguments on behalf of the claimant.
A. The decision of the fair hearing authority will be binding on the General
Assistance Administrator and will be communicated in writing to the
claimant within five working days after completion of the hearing.
Written notice of the decision will contain the following:
(1) A statement of the issue;
(2) Relevant facts brought out at the hearing;
(3) Pertinent provisions in the law or General Assistance Ordinance
related to the decision; and
(4) The decision and the reasons for it.
B. A copy of the notice of the decision will be given to the claimant. The
hearing record and the case record will be maintained by the General
Assistance Administrator.
C. The written notice of the decision will state that if the claimant is
dissatisfied with the fair hearing decision, he/she has a further legal
right to appeal the decision pursuant to the Maine Rules of Civil
Procedure, Rule 80B. To take advantage of this right, the claimant must
§ 112-39 SACO CITY CODE § 112-40
104:256
file a petition for review with the Superior Court within 30 days of
receipt of the fair hearing decision.
D. When the decision by the fair hearing authority or court authorizes
assistance to the claimant, the assistance will be provided within 24
hours.
§ 112-40 FLEA MARKETS § 112-40
104:257

ARTICLE VIII
Recovery of Expenses
§ 112-41. Procedure.
A. Recipients.
(1) The municipality may recover the full amount of assistance granted
to a person from either the recipient or from any person liable for
the recipient, or his or her executors or administrators, in a civil
action. However, prior to recovering assistance granted, the
municipality shall "offset" the value of any workfare performed by a
GA recipient, at a rate not less than minimum wage.
(2) Prior to taking a recipient to court to recover the amount of
assistance, the municipality will seek voluntary repayment from the
recipient by notifying him/her in writing and discussing it with the
recipient. The municipality shall not attempt to recover such costs
if, as a result of the repayment, the person would again become
eligible for general assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4318).
B. Recipients anticipating workers' compensation benefits.
(1) The municipality shall claim a lien for the value of all general
assistance payments made to a recipient on any lump sum payment
made to that recipient under the Workers' Compensation Act or
similar law of any other state (22 M.R.S.A. § 4318, 39-A M.R.S.A.
§ 106). After issuing any general assistance on behalf of a recipient
who has applied for or is receiving workers' compensation, the
municipality shall file a notice of the municipal lien with the general
assistance recipient and the Office of Secretary of State, Uniform
Commercial Code division.
(2) The notice of lien shall be filed on a UCC-1 form, which must be
signed by the recipient of general assistance who has applied for or
is receiving workers' compensation. Any general assistance
applicant who has applied for or who is receiving workers'
compensation benefits and who refuses to sign a properly prepared
UCC-1 form will be found ineligible to receive general assistance
until he or she provides the required signature. The municipality
shall also send a photocopy of that filing to the recipient's worker's
compensation attorney, if known, the applicant's employer or the
employer's insurance company, and, at the Administrator's
discretion, to the Workers' Compensation Board. The lien shall be
enforced at the time any lump sum workers' compensation benefit
is issued.
C. Recipients of SSI. All applicants who receive general assistance while
receipt of their supplemental security income (SSI) assistance is
pending or suspended, and which therefore may be retroactively issued
to the applicant at a later date, will be required to sign a statement on
§ 112-41 FLEA MARKETS § 112-41
104:259
an interim assistance agreement form distributed by the DHHS that
authorizes the Social Security Administration to direct a portion of
any retroactive SSI payment to the municipality and/or the state in
repayment for the general assistance granted. Any general assistance
applicant who has applied for or who may be applying for SSI, or
who may be required to apply for SSI pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4317
and who refuses to sign the interim agreement SSI authorization form
will be found ineligible to receive general assistance until he or she
provides the required signature (22 M.R.S.A. § 4318).
D. Relatives. The spouse of an applicant, and the parents of any applicant
under the age of 25, are liable for the support of the applicant (22
M.R.S.A. § 4319). In addition, grandchildren, children, parents and
grandparents are liable for the burial costs of each other. The
municipality considers these relatives to be available resources and
liable for the support of their relatives in proportion to their respective
ability. The municipality may complain to any court of competent
jurisdiction to recover any expenses made on the behalf of a recipient if
the relatives fail to fulfill their responsibility (22 M.R.S.A. § 4319).
§ 112-41 SACO CITY CODE § 112-41
104:260
ARTICLE IX
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 112-42. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by the courts to
be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision
of the chapter.
§ 112-42 FLEA MARKETS § 112-42
104:261
Chapter 118
HARBOR, RIVER AND WATERFRONT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals on beaches — See Ch. 64, Art. I.
§ 112-42 SACO CITY CODE § 112-42
104:262
ARTICLE I
General Regulation of Waters
§ 118-1. Title; purpose.
This chapter shall be known as the "Saco River, Harbor and Waterfront
Ordinance." This chapter is hereby adopted by the City of Saco to ensure the
proper operation of recreational and commercial watercraft, and to promote
the safe enjoyment and recreational use of the City's waters, which includes
all waters adjacent to riverfronts and beaches within the City of Saco.
§ 118-2. Scope and enforcement.
No provision of this chapter shall be interpreted as conflicting with federal
and state laws applicable to the coastal waters, tidal rivers and harbors of
this state, but shall be read as supplementing said laws where applicable.
This chapter shall be enforced by the City through its designated Harbor
Master, Harbor Patrol and other subordinates or designees.
§ 118-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply, unless
the context clearly indicates another meaning:
BEACH — Refers to that shoreline area directly adjacent to bodies of water,
which is customarily comprised of sand, ledge, or loose rock.
BEACHING PILINGS — Pilings installed adjacent to the landing for purpose
of pier user permit holders' boat maintenance.
BERTH — The place where a vessel lies when at anchor, on a mooring or at
a wharf.
CAMP/CAMPING — The building of and/or occupation of any shelter, tent,
lean-to, or other structure or vehicle intended to provide its occupants
refuge from the weather.
CHANNELS — Areas of the harbor and river kept open for navigation or
other purpose by rule or regulation of the City Council, the Department
of the Army Corps of Engineers, the Harbor Master or other regulatory or
legislative body.
CHARTER VESSEL — A vessel that carries passengers for hire to engage in
sightseeing or fishing.
COASTAL WATERS — Those waters adjacent to all shorelines within the
City of Saco, including beaches and riverfront.
COMMERCIAL VESSEL — A vessel engaged in commercial fishing for
profit.
DISORDERLY CONDUCT — (per 17-A M.R.S.A., § 501-A) In a public place,
a person intentionally or recklessly causes annoyance to others by
intentionally:[Amended 2-3-2014]
§ 118-1 FLEA MARKETS § 118-3
104:263
DOCK — The slip or waterway extending between two piers or projecting
wharves or cut into land for the reception of vessels.
DOCK STEWARD — A City employee responsible for overseeing the day-today
safe and effective operations at the Camp Ellis Pier.
FLOAT — A platform that floats and is anchored at or near shore, used for
landing or other purposes.
HARBOR — The tidal waters within the geographical limits of the City from
the high tide watermark to the three-nautical-mile line shown on the most
recently published federal government nautical chart. It shall specifically
include Saco Bay and all portions of the Saco River.
HARBOR MASTER — The officer appointed by the Director of Public Works
to enforce this chapter, and oversee the jurisdiction area of the River and
Harbor.
HARRASSMENT — (per 17-A M.R.S.A, § 506-A) A person is engaged in
harassment if, without reasonable cause: the person engages in any course
of conduct with the intent to harass, torment or threaten another person,
after having been notified, in writing or otherwise, not to engage in such
conduct by any sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, police officer or justice of
the peace or person of equivalent authority.
HEADWAY SPEED — Refers to the minimum amount of power necessary to
allow a vessel to navigate safely through the water. Depending on the size,
composition and design of the vessel, headway speed may vary.
INNER HARBOR — Refers to the area from green can buoy No. 7 to the
area known as the Lower Narrows and encompasses all of Camp Ellis.
LANDING — A place for landing and discharging persons or things, as from
a vessel.
MOORING — The means of securing a vessel to a particular location in
City waters, other than temporarily by anchor. Dock, pier, wharf or float
tie-ups are not moorings. A vessel is moored if at anchor for more than 48
consecutive hours.
OBSTRUCTING or LITTERING — The throwing of large rocks or debris as
to impede the navigable river.[Added 2-3-2014]
A. Making loud and unreasonable noises; or
Activating a device, or exposing a substance, that releases noxious and
offensive odors; or
B.
Knowingly fighting, accosting, insulting, taunting or challenging any
person with offensive, derisive or annoying words, or by gestures or
other physical conduct, that would in fact have a direct tendency to
cause a violent response by an ordinary person in the situation of the
person so accosted, insulted, taunted or challenged; or
C.
D. Obstructing or littering.
§ 118-3 SACO CITY CODE § 118-3
104:264
PIER — A structure extending into navigable water for use as a landing
place or to protect or form a harbor. This definition will include
breakwaters, jetties and commercial locations used for the loading and
unloading of cargo.
PIER USE AGREEMENT — A contract between a pier user and the City
of Saco that documents the proper care and allowed uses of the Camp
Ellis pier facilities which must be signed by the prospective user prior to
issuance of a pier use permit.
PIER USE PERMIT — A document detailing the level and location of pier
use allowed for each permitted vessel, as defined below:
PORT — Includes Saco Bay, the City wharves at Saco, together with all
known landings and any other public landings or wharves that might be
acquired by the City of Saco.
RECREATIONAL VESSEL — A vessel used solely for personal recreation.
RENTAL AGENT — Any person, firm, proprietorship or corporation that
rents canoes, kayaks, sailboats under 20 feet in length, personal watercraft
and/or motorized watercraft under 22 feet in length to the general public
for a fee.
SAFETY EQUIPMENT — Includes, but is not limited to, signals, flares, horn,
fire extinguisher and personal flotation devices as defined in federal law per
the Federal Boat Safety Act of 1971, Public Law 92-75, as amended.
VESSEL — Includes boats of all sizes, propelled by sail, machinery or hand;
scows, dredges, shellfish cars and craft of any kind.
WHARF — A structure of timber, masonry, cement, earth or other material,
built on the shore of a harbor, river, canal or the like, especially one
extending parallel to the shoreline, so that vessels may lie close alongside
to receive and discharge passengers and cargo.
§ 118-4. Governance.
The safe use and enjoyment of Saco's coastal waters depends upon several
parties including the Harbor Master, the Harbor Patrol, Dock Stewards and
COMMERCIAL VESSEL PIER USE — Allows vessels paying the
appropriate fee the priority use of the floats, pier, and hoists for the
unloading of perishable product, as well as use of the fuel facility (if
available).
A.
CHARTER VESSEL PIER USE — Allows vessels paying the appropriate
fee the use of the pier, floats and hoists, as well as the fuel facility (if
available).
B.
RECREATIONAL VESSEL PIER USE — Allows vessels paying the
appropriate fee use of the floats for loading and unloading. Limited
occasional use of the pier, hoists, and fuel facility (if available) is
allowed at the discretion of the Harbor Master.
C.
§ 118-3 FLEA MARKETS § 118-4
104:265
the Coastal Waters Commission. Each of these parties shall have and enjoy
the responsibilities set forth below:
A. Coastal Waters Commission. In addition to those duties delineated in
§ 4-39 of this Code, the Coastal Waters Commission shall review,
evaluate and make a recommendation to the Director of Public Works
on the new appointment of the Harbor Master. The Commission shall
also handle all appeals of decisions made by the Harbor Master
pursuant to § 4-39 of this Code.
B. Harbor Master. There shall be a Harbor Master appointed by the
Director of the Department of Public Works (Public Works). The Harbor
Master will be under the direction of the Director of Public Works who
will act as his/her immediate supervisor. He or she shall also have those
duties and liabilities of that office as prescribed by state law, municipal
ordinances and regulations adopted by the municipal officers, Coastal
Waters Commission or such other bodies empowered to regulate
municipal harbors and specifically assigned herein. The Harbor
Master's specific duties shall include:
(1) The proper designation of channels. Channels for the passage of
boats shall be designated on the plans of the Saco River, dated
November 5, 1963, and filed with the City Clerk, and as updated
from time to time. Said plans are hereby incorporated by reference
as part of this chapter. Said channel shall also remain consistent
with the United States Army Corps of Engineers designation of the
tidal portion of the Saco River as a project.
(2) The assignment and location of anchorages. Vessels shall be
anchored in the harbor in such places or areas as the Harbor
Master shall designate. The Harbor Master may at any time order
any vessel at anchor to change position when, in his or her opinion,
such vessel is so anchored as to impede navigation or to endanger
other vessels. Anchorages shall also remain consistent with the
United States Army Corps of Engineers designation of anchorages
within the Saco River Project.
(3) The assignment and monitoring of moorings and buoys. The
placement of moorings is vital to safety in the coastal waters. The
assignment, regulation and removal of all moorings and buoys shall
rest with the Harbor Master as more fully detailed in § 118-5 below.
(4) Implementation of this chapter. The Harbor Master shall be the
party primarily responsible for assuring the goals and purposes of
this section are met except where otherwise specifically noted. The
Harbor Master shall enforce all provisions related to moorings, as
well as §§ 118-13 through 118-20 of this chapter.
C. Harbor Patrol. There shall be a Harbor Patrol which shall be comprised
of law enforcement officers under the direct direction and supervision
of the Saco Chief of Police. The duties of the Harbor Patrol shall include:
§ 118-4 SACO CITY CODE § 118-4
104:266
§ 118-5. Moorings and buoys.
(1) The Harbor Patrol will be responsible for ensuring that safe boating
practices are used within the coastal waters and for the
enforcement of City ordinances and state law.
(2) The Harbor Patrol shall have specific authority to enforce §§ 118-6
through 118-14 of this chapter.
(3) The Harbor Patrol will typically operate from Memorial Day
weekend to Labor Day weekend or longer, as determined by
available resources and the Chief of Police.
D. Dock Steward. There shall be Dock Stewards from time to time. The
Director of the Public Works, will hire one or more seasonal employees
to serve as Dock Steward at the Camp Ellis Pier. The Dock Stewards will
be responsible for the safe and orderly execution of daily operations at
the pier. The stewards are a conduit between the Harbor Master and
Public Works, and the users and visitors to the Camp Ellis Pier. The
Dock Steward(s) will typically serve Tuesday through Sunday from
Memorial Day weekend through Labor Day weekend, and on selected
weekends prior to Memorial Day or after Labor Day, at the discretion of
the Director of Public Works. Specifically, the Dock Steward(s) will:
(1) Collect and record boat launch, dock use and daily pier use fees
and deposit fees collected at City Hall daily.
(2) Welcome vessel captains and greet passengers, inform visitors of
docking rules and fees. Courteously answer questions regarding
local services available (i.e., restaurants, taxi, supplies, etc.)
(3) Record vessels using the docks to include vessel registration
numbers, arrival and departure times.
(4) Assist boaters with sewage tank pump-out operations (when the
service is available).
(5) Assist visitors with proper parking meter use.
(6) Approve overnight parking waivers, when appropriate, and notify
Public Works and the Police Department.
(7) Perform other duties as directed by the Director of Public Works or
the Harbor Master to ensure safe and effective operations at Camp
Ellis Pier.
A. Assignment of moorings.
(1) No mooring shall be set within City waters except by permission of
the Harbor Master. Any person wishing to place a mooring in City
waters or to relocate an existing mooring shall request such
permission in advance from the Harbor Master. Annually, the
Harbor Master shall prepare an updated list of approved mooring
§ 118-4 FLEA MARKETS § 118-5
104:267
holders and provide it to the City Clerk by January 1. Only
applicants appearing on the current approved mooring holders
list may submit a mooring permit application to the City Clerk.
Following acceptance of the application by the City Clerk and the
payment of the appropriate fee, and provided the conditions in
Subsection B(7) are met, the Harbor Master shall then assign a
location for such mooring and shall advise the applicant concerning
the requirements of these rules and regulations.
(2) In the assignment of moorings, the Harbor Master shall, insofar as
the same may be done consistently with these rules and regulations
and with due regard for the safety of other vessels and of
navigation, give consideration to the choice of the applicant.
However, where mooring rights of individuals are claimed to be
invaded and protection is sought of the Harbor Master, the Harbor
Master shall assign and indicate to the masters or owners of the
vessels the location which they may occupy for said mooring, and
the Harbor Master shall assign mooring privileges in all cases
where individuals who own or have an interest in the shore rights
are complainants and shall locate suitable mooring privileges
temporarily or permanently, fronting their lands if so requested,
but not so as to encroach upon the natural channel or channels
established by this chapter. Moorings shall be set by July 30 of each
year.
(3) City Hall shall maintain a waiting list, with a registration fee
established by the City Council, after a public hearing.
(4) The Harbor Master, based upon the waiting list, shall authorize
moorings on a first-come-first-served basis, except that commercial
harbor users may be given priority for facilities developed for
commercial users with federal funds. The Harbor Master will
provide the updated lists to the City Clerk on May 1, July 1 and
October 1 each year and at other times when requested. The lists
shall be provided to any member of the public who requests them.
If there is a dispute about mooring assignments, the Saco Coastal
Waters Commission shall hear appeals from the decisions of the
Harbor Master.
(5) Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked if the Harbor Master
determines that any portion of a permit holder's application
contains false or misleading information. Any revocation may be
appealed as set forth herein. [Added 2-3-2014]
B. Application for mooring permits.
(1) Applications for mooring permits for any one-year period must be
filed with the City Clerk by March 15 of the current year, on forms
prescribed by the Saco Coastal Waters Commission. Applications
and payment for renewal of a mooring permit which have not been
received within 60 days of the permit application filing date will
§ 118-5 SACO CITY CODE § 118-5
104:268
cause that mooring location to be deemed vacant, and the mooring
location reassigned. Applications received during the sixty-day
period are subject to a late fee. [Amended 2-3-2014]
(2) The City of Saco mooring permit application form contains
additional rules and regulations regarding use and placement of
moorings. The address of the applicant supplied with the permit
application shall serve as the address of record for all purposes of
notice where notice is required in this chapter.
(3) Permits shall be good for one year (January 1 to December 31).
They are at all times a revocable license issued subject to the terms
herein, and under no circumstances will they be treated as, or
deemed, a property right. [Amended 2-3-2014]
(4) Any mooring location not occupied by the vessel or float registered
to it, or a vessel of equal or lesser gross tonnage owned by the
mooring permit holder, for at least one day in each of three out of
the five months during the period May 1 through September 30
during the permit year may be considered to be abandoned. The
location may be reassigned by the Harbor Master, after the Harbor
Master has first given the registrant 30 days' advance written
notice at his/her last known address (certified mail, return receipt).
The cost of removing or dropping moorings shall be assessed to the
owner if not removed by him within 30 days of receipt of said
notice, in accordance with state law. Notwithstanding the above,
this subsection will not apply to a mooring whose owner has
notified the Harbor Master that such mooring will not be occupied
due to prolonged absence from the area, illness, or other
extenuating circumstances, provided the permit is timely renewed
annually as required by this chapter. [Amended 2-3-2014]
(5) The annual application fee for the waiting list shall be established
by the City Council after a public hearing.
(6) Moorings are not transferable except as provided by 38 M.R.S.A.
§ 3-A.
(7) A person may be denied a mooring permit if they are found to have
previously violated this chapter without good cause; or if they are
in arrears of any City tax or fee.
C. Adequacy of moorings. All existing moorings hereinafter to be set shall
be of sufficient size to hold the vessel for which they are used. All
moorings shall have approved buoys and must be visible at all times. All
mooring requirements will be determined by the Harbor Master.
Guidelines on mooring block weight, attachment requirements and
chain-link size are listed below and on the mooring permit application.
§ 118-5 FLEA MARKETS § 118-5
104:269
Maximum Boat
Length
(feet)
Maximum Boat
Weight
(gross pounds)
Minimum
Mooring
Weight
(pounds)
Minimum
Chain Link
Size
(inches)
12 500 350 3/8
20 1,500 750 3/8
25 5,000 1,500 1/2
30 8,000 1,800 1/2
35 12,000 2,500 1/2
40 3,500 5/8
D. Inspections of moorings. The Harbor Master or his/her designee shall
inspect moorings biannually. It is the permit holder's responsibility to
contact the Harbor Master to arrange for inspections. Two visits by the
Harbor Master are included in the mooring application fee; any
additional visits required to complete an inspection shall be at the
applicant's expense.
E. Manner/condition of moorings:
(1) All mooring floats shall meet United States Coast Guard
regulations.
(2) The float attached to the mooring line shall be of sufficient size to
remain afloat when not attached to the vessel.
(3) The Harbor Master may at any time examine any mooring or
mooring line to determine compliance with this section. Except in
the case of an emergency, he shall notify the owner of his or her
intention to examine the mooring, either in writing or verbally, and
request the presence of the owner during such examination. Any
cost of examination shall be borne by the owner of the mooring.
(4) If a party fails to properly maintain his/her/its mooring, float or
cable, the Harbor Master will, in writing (by certified, return
receipt mail), issue a seven-day notice-to-cure letter. If the
offending party fails to correct the deficiency identified by the
Harbor Master within seven days, the party's mooring permit shall
thereafter be revoked upon the filing of a written decision from the
Harbor Master to the City Clerk with copies provided to the
offending party and the Coastal Waters Commission.
(5) Vessels on moorings must be properly maintained to minimize
hazards to other vessels, including: [Added 2-3-201456]
56.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection E(5) and (6) and
Subsection E(6) and (7), respectively.
§ 118-5 SACO CITY CODE § 118-5
104:270
(a) The vessel must be capable of moving under its own
mechanical means.
(b) Sail, lines, and sheets must be secured at all times when the
vessel is not occupied.
(c) All accessories, anchors, lines, poles, etc., must be secured and
within the gunwales of the vessel.
(d) Nothing may be trailing behind a moored vessel or protruding
from the vessel that can damage another vessel.
(e) Failure to properly maintain a moored vessel may result in
revocation of the mooring permit.
(6) All moorings, whether now existing or hereinafter set, shall be so
located or relocated that the vessels secured thereby will not
impede navigation within City waters nor endanger other vessels
moored therein. If the Harbor Master shall find that any vessel is so
moored as to impede navigation or to endanger other vessels, he
may require that the owner of the mooring or of the vessel secured
thereby take such steps, whether by shortening the scope of the
mooring lines or by the use of additional mooring or mooring lines,
as will prevent such impeding of navigation or endangering of
other vessels; or, in the alternative, he may order that the mooring
be removed and relocated. In requiring the removal of a mooring
because of its danger to other mooring last set shall be the first
ordered to be removed. Any person so ordered by the Harbor
Master acting under this subsection shall remove a vessel within 48
hours after order, whether written or verbal; provided, however,
that if the mooring owner fails to do so, then the Harbor Master
shall thereupon cause the mooring to be removed or relocated. Any
expense incurred by the City to move or remove a mooring shall be
borne by the owner of the mooring or vessel. [Amended
2-3-2014]
(7) If in the sole opinion of the Harbor Master a mooring creates an
emergency or imminently dangerous condition, or if immediate
action is required to ensure proper navigation and safety, the
Harbor Master may temporarily, without notice to the permit
holder, take possession of the mooring and temporarily remove
and/or secure it until such time as the permit holder can be
notified. The parties shall thereafter determine together the
appropriate terms and conditions for resiting and reinstalling the
mooring.
F. The Harbor Master shall hold all moorings and tackle removed from
coastal waters as a lien against all fees, fines and costs incurred as a
result of the acts, actions or inactions of any mooring permit holder. No
such equipment shall be returned until all such charges are fully paid.
§ 118-5 FLEA MARKETS § 118-5
104:271
G. Interference with moorings. Except by direction of the Harbor Master
acting in an emergency or with permission of the owner, no person shall
move or interfere with any mooring or vessel in the harbor.
H. Removal. [Amended 2-3-2014]
(1) A mooring shall be removed after September 30, unless it is still in
use by its owner. If not removed by its owner, the Harbor Master
shall see to its removal at the expense of the mooring owner. The
mooring and ground tackle shall not be returned to its owner until
such bill is paid.
(2) All noncommercial vessels shall be removed from the river by
December 1.
I. Waiver procedures.
(1) A mooring permit holder may request a temporary waiver to the
mooring requirements stated in this chapter by submitting a
written request to the Harbor Master. A waiver will not be granted
for a violation that impacts safe navigation on the Saco River. The
waiver request must clearly state:
(a) Mooring number;
(b) Name and current address and phone number of the permit
holder;
(c) The nature of the waiver (e.g., inability to position or remove
an authorized mooring, inability to attach a boat to an
authorized mooring, inability to pay for a mooring in a timely
manner);
(d) The reason the waiver is needed; and
(e) Expected date for compliance (date the permit holder will
make corrections or come into compliance with mooring
requirements).
(2) The Harbor Master will notify the permit holder of his decision to
approve or disapprove the waiver in writing and provide a copy of
the written decision to the City Clerk, the Director of Public Works
and the Coastal Waters Commission. If the Harbor Master must
disapprove the waiver request, the Harbor Master will send the
decision via certified mail return receipt requested to the address
of record. The permit holder can appeal the Harbor Master's
decision to the Coastal Waters Commission.
(3) Waivers for medical conditions may be granted for a maximum of
one permit year. [Added 2-3-2014]
§ 118-5 SACO CITY CODE § 118-5
104:272
(4) Waivers for mechanical conditions may only be granted for
moorings which have been in use during the permit year. [Added
2-3-2014]
(5) Waivers and associated mooring privileges may be revoked if the
Harbor Master determines that the waiver request misrepresented
the facts and/or conditions that form the basis for the waiver
request. [Amended 11-4-2014]
J. Buoys other than for mooring vessels. No buoy of this type shall be
placed in channels leading to wharves, nor shall such buoys be placed
less than 150 feet from a mooring buoy for that vessel. The Harbor
Master is empowered, in the interest of public safety, to require the
removal of any buoys.
§ 118-5 FLEA MARKETS § 118-5
104:273

ARTICLE II
Prohibited or Restricted Actions
I. Enforcement by Harbor Patrol. The following provisions of this
Subarticle I shall be enforced by the Harbor Patrol as part of law
enforcement activities.
§ 118-6. Waterskiing and aircraft.
§ 118-7. Imprudent operation of vessel.
A person may not intentionally, knowingly or recklessly operate a vessel in
violation of state law (Title 12).
§ 118-8. Failing to report collision or accident.
§ 118-9. Endangerment of life or property.
A. Vessels towing water-skiers and aquaplanes. There shall be no
waterskiing in congested mooring areas, anchorage areas or in speedlimit
areas. No person shall operate a vessel while towing water-skiers,
aquaplanes or similar devices unless there is present in said vessel, in
addition to the vessel operator, another person in a position to observe
and assist the person or appurtenance being towed. The operator of
such a vessel will be held responsible for compliance with the
navigating rules for both the vessel and the person or appurtenance
being towed. Except in connection with water carnivals and exhibitions
authorized by the City Council, no such activity may be conducted
during the period between 1/2 hour after sunset and 1/2 hour before
sunrise. Special waterskiing areas will be designated by the City
Council.
B. Water-ski jumps. No person shall locate or use on the public waters
under the jurisdiction of this Council a water-ski jump without first
obtaining the approval of the City Council or its duly authorized
representative.
C. Aircraft. Aircraft shall be governed by the appropriate rules and
regulations of the Maine Aeronautics Commission, excepting that they
shall observe the same mooring and anchorage rules and regulations
that apply to vessels.
A. The owner, captain or operator of a vessel involved in a collision with
another vessel, a wharf, pier, landing, dock or other fixed object within
the harbor; a fire on-board; or an accident as defined by the United
States Coast Guard, must report such collision to local law enforcement
or the Harbor Master by quickest means.
B. Failing to report such collision, fire or accident, regardless of visible
damage or injury, constitutes a violation of this section.
§ 118-6 FLEA MARKETS § 118-9
104:275
§ 118-10. Beach restrictions.
§ 118-11. Headway speed only zones.
A. A person is guilty of endangerment of life or property if that person:
(1) Operates a vessel and fails to have a proper lookout while towing a
water-skier; or
(2) Operates a vessel and fails to require a water-skier to wear a
personal flotation device (PFD); or
(3) Operates a vessel and permits a passenger to ride on the swim
platform or bow while underway; or
(4) Operates a vessel and engages in "teak surfing," "drag surfing" or
otherwise allows someone to physically hang onto the stern,
transom, swim platform or gunnels of a vessel; or
(5) Water-skis without wearing a personal flotation device (PFD); or
(6) Rides or physically hangs onto the stern, bow, transom, swim
platform or gunnels of a vessel while underway.
B. The provisions of this section do not apply to emergency personnel in
the performance of their duties; emergency situations in which this
activity could not be avoided; or the use of approved recreational
equipment designed to be towed behind a vessel as long as the distance
behind the vessel is adequate to prevent injury from moving parts, fuels
and/or carbon monoxide gases.
A. Alcoholic beverages. The consumption or possession of alcoholic
beverages is prohibited on any beach. For the purposes of this section,
any person found within reasonable reach of an alcoholic beverage is
deemed to be in possession.
B. Vehicles prohibited on beach. No motorized or vehicular traffic of any
kind may enter or use the beach for any purpose, with the exception of
public safety vehicles and those City vehicles designated for public
works purposes.
C. Overnight camping on beaches prohibited. No person or group may
camp or otherwise set up temporary, overnight shelter on a beach for
any purpose. "Overnight" is defined as any time following sunset and
before sunrise.
D. Camp fires or burning on beaches prohibited. No person or group may
have a camp fire or otherwise burn on a beach for any purpose.
A. Headway speed only zones shall be established by the Coastal Waters
Commission for the tidal areas of the Saco River and Saco Bay.
§ 118-9 SACO CITY CODE § 118-11
104:276
§ 118-12. Use of dune area.
B. Designated headway speed only zones will be marked appropriately
with buoys, signs or other reasonable markers likely to come to the
attention of boaters. All types and locations of markers or buoys placed
into the river or harbor will be approved by the authority having
jurisdiction over navigable waters.
C. Once approved, buoys will be placed in the designated areas by the
Harbor Master or by an independent contractor hired by the City with
the recommendation of the Harbor Master and Coastal Waters
Commission. Placement of buoys or markers within the areas shall be at
the discretion of the Harbor Master.
D. These zones will be reviewed periodically to ensure that they do not
conflict with state or City law and reflect the needs of the citizens of
Saco.
E. Pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A. § 281, whoever operates any watercraft,
vessel, water skis, surfboard, similar device or motorboat, however
propelled, upon the tidewaters of Saco or upon the offshore waters
within the jurisdiction of the State of Maine at a speed greater than is
reasonable and proper, having due regard for traffic, proximity to
wharves, docks, moorings or shores, and for any other conditions then
existing shall be guilty of a Class E crime. Further pursuant to 38
M.R.S.A. § 285, every law enforcement officer in the State of Maine,
including harbor masters and their deputies, shall have the authority to
enforce these laws, and in the exercise thereof shall have the authority
to stop and board any such watercraft, vessel, or motorboat found in
violation. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any such watercraft,
vessel or motorboat to fail to stop upon hail from any such officer, and a
violation of the same shall be punished as a Class E crime. [Added
2-3-2014; amended 3-17-2014]
A. No traffic of any kind, vehicular or pedestrian, may enter or use any
area of the beach wherein so-called dune grass is growing. It shall also
be a violation of this section to burn, crush, uproot, poison or in any
other manner kill, injure or remove any dune grass or any other
vegetation growing on the beach.
B. For the purposes of this section, subsequent violations will have been
committed for each square foot of dune grass damaged, injured or
destroyed.
§ 118-11 FLEA MARKETS § 118-12
104:277
§ 118-13. Waste and refuse.
No person or vessel shall discharge, deposit, throw, sweep or cause to be
deposited or swept into or upon the waters of Saco or into waters adjacent
thereto any gas, fuel, coolant, oil, bilge water, human waste, ashes, dirt,
stone, gravel, mud, logs, planks or any object or substance tending to
pollute or obstruct the harbor or waters adjacent thereto or to shoal the
depth of said waters. No person or vessel shall discharge, dump or dispose
of any refuse, garbage, offal, gas, oil, fuel, coolant, waste, fish waste, or any
other object or substance tending to pollute upon any shore of the City of
Saco.
§ 118-14. Disorderly conduct.
No person shall conduct him or herself in a manner that disrupts the
enjoyment of the pier and its facilities by other pier users. Such conduct
may result in the forfeiture of pier use permission after:
§ 118-15. Derelict vessels.
An owner, captain or operator of a vessel allows that vessel to become
derelict if:
II.
Enforcement
by
Harbor
Patrol
or
the
Harbor
Master.
A. First instance, a verbal warning by the Harbor Master;
B. Second instance, a written warning by the Harbor Master; and
C. Third instance, revocation of pier use permit.
III.
Enforcement
by
the
Harbor
Master.
A. The vessel lacks any license or registration, the prerequisite of which is
required by state or local authority to allow operation of such vessel in
the harbor;
§ 118-12 SACO CITY CODE § 118-15
104:278
B. The vessel is submerged to a level substantially above its normal water
line and remains so for a period greater than 48 hours;
C. The vessel is damaged to the extent that it cannot be moved under its
own power; or
D. The owner, captain or operator of the vessel has failed or refused to
comply with the lawful orders of the Harbor Master, Assistant Harbor
Master or a law enforcement officer. A violation of this section will have
a mandatory minimum fine of $250 that may not be suspended;
E. The owner of the vessel has failed or refuses to pay any applicable
license fee, excise tax, harbor usage fee, mooring fee, dock or landing
fee or any other service fee imposed by the City or Harbor Master. A
violation of this section will have a mandatory minimum fine of $250
that may not be suspended.
F. Disclosure of vessel ownership. This section requires the disclosure of
ownership of any vessel operating within the statutory limits of the City
of Saco and further requires all corporate, partnerships, trusts and any
other nonindividual, including those persons undisclosed, anonymous
or otherwise unidentifiable principals, responsible for the maintenance
of property and vessels and accountable with respect to violations of
this chapter.
G. Order of disposal; abatement of violation by the City and recovery of
costs.
(1) When the Harbor Master, after notice in writing to the owner of any
derelict vessel by regular mail or by publication in a newspaper in
the county three weeks successively, and after a hearing on such
matter, adjudge that such vessel was or is derelict, dangerous or a
nuisance, they may make and record an order prescribing what
disposal shall be made thereof. The City Clerk shall deliver a copy
of such order to a constable or deputy sheriff, who shall serve such
owner, if the owner is a resident of the state, with an attested copy
thereof, and make return of his or her actions thereon to the Clerk
forthwith. If the owner or part owner is unknown or resides outside
this state, such notice shall be given by publication in a paper
published in the county for three successive weeks.
(2) If no application is made to the superior court, as is provided in this
section, the City Council shall cause such vessel to be abated,
removed or altered in compliance with its order, and all expenses
thereof shall be repaid to the City within 30 days after demand, or
may be recovered of such person by an action for money paid.
(3) Any owner aggrieved by an order made pursuant to this section
may, within 30 days after such order is so made and filed, apply to
the superior court which shall forthwith, after notice and hearing,
affirm, annul or alter such order.
§ 118-15 FLEA MARKETS § 118-15
104:279
§ 118-16. Obstruction of public wharf, dock, landing or pier.
No person shall obstruct a wharf, dock, landing or pier by intentionally or
knowingly:
§ 118-17. Diving, swimming, fishing on or near public wharves,
docks, landings, piers or within channel prohibited.
§ 118-18. Obstruction of channel or inner harbor.
No person, firm, or organization may intentionally, knowingly or recklessly
obstruct a channel or the inner harbor by:
§ 118-19. Operation of vessel without proper safety equipment.
No person shall operate a vessel without meeting current state law.
Operation of a vessel without proper safety equipment, a violation of this
section, shall have a mandatory minimum fine of $150 that may not be
(4) If the court affirms an order made pursuant to this section, costs
shall be recovered by the City; if it wholly annuls such order, the
applicant shall recover costs; and if it alters it in part, the court
may render such judgment as to costs as justice requires.
A. Obstructing, by any means whatsoever, the free use of any public wharf,
dock, landing or pier and is not actively engaged in the loading or
unloading of persons, product or cargo; or
B. Allowing a vessel under that person's control or ownership to remain
tied, moored or affixed to a public wharf, dock, landing or pier without
legal authorization from the City or payment of docking fees.
A. No person shall dive from or swim within 50 feet of any public wharf,
dock, landing or pier. This restriction does not govern or limit special
events sanctioned by the City, nor commercial divers and emergency
personnel or others who have been granted special permission by the
Harbor Master. At no time, other than for emergency purposes, may
anyone swim within the channel.
B. No person shall fish from City wharves.
A. Setting any commercial fishing gear within the inner harbor or a
channel; or
B. Place or set any lobster traps, including buoys, within 100 feet of a
mooring; or
C. Place, stop, or anchor any vessel within a channel without providing for
adequate room for a vessel of any reasonable size to navigate safely
around in both directions simultaneously.
D. Knowingly or willfully obstruct the free use of any channel or waterway
within the harbor.
§ 118-15 SACO CITY CODE § 118-19
104:280
suspended and a citation may be issued for each piece of equipment that is
missing, not in proper working order or in poor condition.
§ 118-20. Storage. [Amended 2-3-2014]
Personal property, such as lobster pots, automobiles, cradles, boats, etc.,
shall not be stored on City wharves or landings or within the Camp Ellis
parking lot. Exemptions to this rule shall be considered on an individual
basis when submitted, in writing, to the Harbor Master. The hauling-out
area at Camp Ellis will be under the jurisdiction of the Harbor Master.
§ 118-19 FLEA MARKETS § 118-20
104:281

ARTICLE III
Rentals and Rental Agents
§ 118-21. Licensing; rental agreement.
§ 118-22. Prohibited acts.
A. Licensing. All rental agents are to acquire and maintain a current
business license through the City of Saco, and secure all pertinent state
and federal licenses as necessary. Furthermore, rental agents must
abide by all requirements or provisions issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer, Planning Board, Zoning Board or other City official.
B. Rental agreement. A rental agent must provide, to any person whom
they know to be operating a canoe, kayak, sailboat, personal watercraft
(PWCs) or motorized watercraft:
(1) The occupant capacity and weight limits of the craft being rented
and operated.
(2) Proper operational instruction and safety education for the craft
being used. The rental agent may use an audio/visual presentation
in lieu of personal instruction; however, the sole use of written
instruction will not satisfy the requirements of this section.
(3) Personal flotation devices (PFDs) of adequate size and proper
working order for all intended occupants of the craft.
(4) Verify, by way of demonstrated ability, the operator's knowledge of
the craft and equipment and ability to control and maneuver the
craft safely. The rental agent may accept a watercraft license
issued from another state or from the United States Coast Guard as
proof of demonstrated ability. The rental agent may also waive the
requirements of Subsection B(4) if the person renting has
previously rented and demonstrated his/her ability, with that type
of equipment, within the last 30 days.
(5) Written information pertaining to local and state laws governing
the body of water in which they will be operating and a brief
description of the so-called rules of the road. For PWCs or
motorized watercraft, the information will also include the laws
pertaining to headway speed violations and a map indicating
"headway speed only" areas.
A. The following violations, in addition to the fines outlined in § 118-28,
will also result in the immediate suspension of all City business licenses
and/or permits.
B. No rental agent may continue to operate until the violations have been
corrected and the City is satisfied with those corrections.
§ 118-21 FLEA MARKETS § 118-22
104:283
§ 118-23. Agent negligence; City's right to recovery of costs.
C. Failing to provide safety instruction: A rental agent is guilty of failing to
provide safety instruction if it fails to comply with all the requirements
of § 118-21, above.
D. Failing to maintain records. The rental agent must maintain written
records showing that the requirements of § 118-21, above, were
followed. If a waiver of § 118-21, Subsection B(4), above, is allowed, a
photocopy of the watercraft license, USCG license or previous rental
agreement and demonstrated ability must be included. Rental agents
may not destroy these records in the event of a watercraft accident,
drowning or other incident involving the rented equipment. Records
may otherwise be destroyed six months following the date of rental.
E. No license/violation of licensing agreement. Any rental agent who fails
to obtain or maintain a current City business license; or, who fails to
abide by the requirements of § 118-21, is guilty of this violation.
A. When a rental agent fails to follow the provisions of this article and an
accident or incident occurs that requires the use of City services, or
requires the City to hire or fund private businesses or other government
agencies as a result of the accident or incident, the rental agent shall be
responsible for reimbursement of all associated costs.
B. These services include, but are not limited to: police, fire, rescue, or
other emergency services; divers; water recovery specialists;
engineers; environmental or hazardous materials specialists or
companies; product inspectors, investigators, private consultants,
attorneys, and/or legal expenses.
§ 118-22 SACO CITY CODE § 118-23
104:284
ARTICLE IV
Camp Ellis Pier, Parking Lot and Public Landing Regulations
§ 118-24. Pier use regulations.
A. No person who owns, leases or operates a commercial or recreational
boat or vessel shall use a public wharf, dock or pier unless they shall
first obtain a permit therefor, as is hereinafter provided. A pier use
agreement must be signed prior to the issuance of a user permit.
B. No person who owns, leases or operates a commercial or recreational
vessel shall store said boat or vessel on any public wharf, dock, pier or
parking lot.
C. All said pier use and mooring fees should be paid to the City of Saco
through City Hall and a receipt for same presented to the Harbor
Master.
D. User fees, mooring fees and parking fees are to be established annually
by the City Council, by resolution, after a public hearing, as
recommended by the Coastal Waters Commission.
E. Commercial pier use permit holders have priority use of the hoists for
loading and unloading perishable products.
F. Use of the beaching piles located adjacent to the public landing will be
available to pier use permit holders. The maximum size boat to use the
piles shall not exceed twenty-thousand-pound displacement. Proper
support must be installed under a berthed boat prior to allowing people
to go into the boat fall area. Boats may only be berthed on the north
side of the piles to maintain access to the public landing at all times.
Berthed boats may remain at beaching piles for one full tide cycle.
G. Exceptions. [Added 2-3-2014]
(1) Noncustomary, short-term exceptions to these regulations may be
allowed at the discretion of the Harbor Master, and may include:
(a) Use of the pump-out station.
(b) Pick-up or discharge of passengers.
(c) Use of the restroom facility.
(2) Short-term exceptions may not exceed 15 minutes. Individuals who
become customary pier users must obtain a pier use permit. For the
purposes of this section, "customary" is defined as a short-term pier
use that is repeated more than twice per month.
H. Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked if the Harbor Master
determines that any portion of a permit holder's application contains
false or misleading information. Any revocation may be appealed as set
forth herein. [Added 2-3-2014]
§ 118-24 FLEA MARKETS § 118-25
104:285
§ 118-25. Camp Ellis Pier and Parking Lot Fund.
§ 118-26. Pier use permits.
§ 118-27. Traffic and parking regulations.
A. Purpose. The City of Saco operates and maintains a parking and
docking facility at Camp Ellis for the benefit of the general public. The
purpose of this section is to create a special revenue fund into which all
the proceeds derived from the pier and parking lot shall be deposited. A
transfer of funds to this account shall be budgeted each year by the
City, in whatever amount is suitable for the maintenance and expansion
of public facilities at the Camp Ellis pier, parking lot, and other marine
related uses as deemed necessary by the Coastal Waters Commission.
B. Source of revenues. All revenues derived from the pier and parking lot,
including but not limited to fees for parking cars and fees for mooring
and docking, shall be deposited into this account.
C. Use of revenues. Funds in the Camp Ellis Pier and Parking Lot account
shall be used for the expansion and maintenance of the Camp Ellis
parking lot, pier, floats, City-owned moorings, waterways and other
marine-related uses, as recommended by the Saco Coastal Waters
Commission and approved by the Director of DPW or the Saco City
Council.
A. There shall be three types of pier use permits.
(1) Commercial vessel pier use.
(2) Charter vessel pier use.
(3) Recreational vessel pier use.
B. Establishment of permit limitations. The Harbor Master will establish
the maximum number of pier use permits to be granted within each
type, described above. A waiting list will be established for persons
desiring a pier use permit when the maximum number has been
reached.
C. Pier use by mooring permit holders. A mooring permit holder who
wishes to maintain a vessel at the pier shall obtain a pier use permit.
D. Charter vessel users shall provide at the time of execution of a pier use
permit a current certificate of insurance showing a minimum liability
coverage of $1,000,000, which policy must name the City of Saco as an
additional insured. [Added 2-3-2014]
A. The City of Saco has constructed a launching ramp and parking lot, for
use by the public, on the shore of the Saco River at Bay Avenue in Camp
Ellis, between the extension of North Avenue and East Avenue. There
are no existing ordinances to control traffic and regulate parking for the
public good and safety of the public which will be using these facilities.
§ 118-25 SACO CITY CODE § 118-27
104:286
The following rules and regulations are hereby adopted, and the Chief
of Police is hereby authorized and directed to erect the proper signs
and controls to enable the enforcement of these rules and regulations.
B. Public lot and public landing rules and regulations shall be: [Added
2-3-2014]
(1) Diagonal parking within marked spaces only.
(2) No parking after 1:00 a.m. until 5:00 a.m. from May 1 through
September 30 and from 10:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. from September 30
through May 1, except for pier user permit holders who are aboard
their vessels and have duly notified the Dock Steward or the
Harbor Master of their intent to be at sea overnight. Crew
members must obtain the proper receipt for overnight parking and
notify the Dock Steward or the Harbor Master. Any other overnight
parking constitutes storage, which is prohibited by § 118-20.
(3) Five-miles-per-hour speed limit.
(4) No parking in front of launching ramp.
(5) Boat trailers are to be parked in designated areas.
(6) Camping is not permissible.
(7) Parking violators shall be towed away at the owner's expense.
(8) All cars and trucks parked in the parking lot shall prominently
display a current pier user sticker or seasonal parking sticker
issued by the City, unless they are paying the daily parking fee. A
seasonal parking permit or the elderly residents permit is only
transferable to other vehicles registered in the City by the resident.
A commercial vessel pier use permit stays with the permit holder
and is transferable to another vehicle.
§ 118-27 FLEA MARKETS § 118-27
104:287

ARTICLE V
Enforcement, Legal Actions and Appeal
§ 118-28. Violations and penalties; manner and method of service;
appeals.
A. Penalties. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is
guilty of a separate offense for each day, or part of a day, during which
the violation is committed or, continued. Unless stated elsewhere, each
offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a civil penalty of not less than
$100 and not more than $2,500 for each offense.
B. Each day, if the offense is repeated, shall constitute a separate violation.
If the violation relates to damages caused, said party, if found
responsible, shall bear reasonable costs of repair in addition to any
fines and fees assessed hereunder.
C. Manner and method of service. Notice to owner or to persons
responsible for a violation of this order shall be made in the following
manner and method:
(1) Unless specifically addressed elsewhere in this chapter, at the
discretion of the acting authority, a warning may be issued verbally
or in writing, so long as such warning is recorded and made
available for future reference.
(2) If, in the discretion of the acting authority, a citation is deemed
necessary, such citation will be issued in the following manner:
(a) The citation shall include the name of the responsible person
and/or owner, the date and time of the violation, a general
reference location for the violation, a description of the
violation and the location of and date of appearance at the local
court having jurisdiction; if such date is required by the Court
system.
(b) The citation used is authorized and accepted by the District
Court of the State of Maine;
(c) Service of the citation is made upon the violator by a person
authorized under law to make such service; and
(d) The completed citation is properly recorded in the District
Court of the State of Maine having jurisdiction over the
violation.
D. Notice as to permit holders shall, in all cases be sent by certified mail to
their address of record on their permit application.
E. Appeals. Any appeal of a decision of the Harbor Master, except as to
citations, herein shall be made to the Coastal Waters Commission as set
out in § 4-39 of this Code, or its successor. Citations shall be solely
addressed and resolved via the Court and as set out under Maine law.
§ 118-28 FLEA MARKETS § 118-28
104:289
Chapter 124
INDUSTRIAL PARK
§ 118-28 SACO CITY CODE § 118-28
104:290
ARTICLE I
Public Loading Area and Rail Turnout
[Adopted 5-1-1995 as Ch. V, Sec. 5-20, of the 1994 Code]
§ 124-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to authorize the Director to enter into license
agreements with users of the public loading area and rail turnout at the
Saco Industrial Park.
§ 124-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The Economic Development Advisory Board established under
Chapter 4, Administrative Code, § 4-35.
DIRECTOR — The Economic Development Director.
FACILITIES — The public loading and unloading area and the rail turnout
leading thereto, located at the Industrial Park.
INDUSTRIAL PARK — The City of Saco Industrial Park.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association or entity
of any kind.
§ 124-3. Authority of Director.
The Director is hereby authorized to enter into licensing agreements under
which persons may enter upon the land in the Industrial Park and utilize the
facilities, subject to the terms of the license and the regulations established
by the Director with the assistance of the Board.
§ 124-4. License fee and term. [Amended 5-15-2000]
The fee for any licensing agreement shall be established by the City Council
after a public hearing.57 All licenses expire one year from the date of
issuance.
§ 124-5. Review and approval of form.
Prior to using any agreement form, the Director shall have the form
reviewed by the City Solicitor. After such review, the City Solicitor shall
present the form to the City Council, with his comments, if any. Upon
approval of the form by the Council, the Director may use the form to enter
into agreements under § 124-3.
57.Editor's Note: Copies of the current fee schedule are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 124-1 FLEA MARKETS § 124-5
104:291

ARTICLE II
License Agreement
[Adopted 5-1-1995 as Ch. V, Sec. 5-21, of the 1994 Code]
§ 124-6. Agreement form.
The license agreement form shall read as follows:
Term of License Agreement for Use of Loading Area and Turnout
at Saco Industrial Park
Agreement made this day between the City of Saco, a municipal
corporation organized under the laws of the State of Maine and having its
usual place of business at 300 Main Street in the City of Saco, hereinafter
called the "licensor," and ________________, hereinafter called the
"licensee."
The parties agree as follows:
A. Grant and permission. In consideration of the licensee's promises
herein and consideration paid by the licensee hereunder, the
licensor hereby gives permission, revocable and terminable as
herein provided, to the licensee to enter upon the land of Saco
Industrial Park and to use and utilize the public loading and
unloading area there and the rail turnout leading into said area for
purposes of the licensee and subject to all of the regulations, terms
and conditions herein set forth with which the licensee promises to
comply and abide. The properties of the licensor that the licensee
is permitted to enter are those portions of the Saco Industrial
Park constituting the public rail turnout and the public loading and
unloading area adjacent thereto. The licensee is permitted to use
the facilities in conjunction with other licensees for all of the usual
loading and unloading purposes.
B. Priority and limits of use.
(1) The licensee shall be assigned a designated area or portion of
said property based on the following priority system:
(a) Businesses in Saco Industrial Park.
(b) Other Saco businesses.
(c) Any other businesses.
(2) This determination shall be made by the City Administrator.
Users which are not businesses in the Saco Industrial Park are
limited to two spaces. This license is for the following area(s):
_______________________________________.
C. Consideration. This permission is given the licensee as an
accommodation to the licensee and in consideration of an annual
license fee of $120, due and payable upon the execution of the lease
agreement.
§ 124-6 FLEA MARKETS § 124-6
104:293
D. No hazardous use or nuisance. The licensee, its agents, employees
and assigns shall not use the premises for any hazardous purpose
and shall not permit the loading or unloading of any freight or
materials that might pose a hazard to other licensees using said
premises, nor shall the licensee perform or permit any disorderly
conduct or commit any nuisance on the premises or use the
premises in any way so as to interfere with the exercise by other
licensees or permittees of their use of the premises, having in mind
at all times the accommodation of other licensees in their use of the
premises.
E. Fire protection, sanitation and other regulations. The licensee shall
comply with all rules and regulations, whether federal, state,
county or municipal, relating to the occupancy and use of the
premises and shall take all reasonable precautions to prevent or
suppress fires and to maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary
condition acceptable to the licensor.
F. Indemnification.
(1) Public liability insurance, to be secured by the licensee, shall
be in the policy amounts and shall insure those risks as may be
required by the licensor and shall include protection against
both personal injury and property damage resulting in any
way from the licensee's exercise of its privilege to use the
public loading area and facilities. The licensee shall secure
insurance for public liability and workmen's compensation
to secure and indemnify the licensor and shall require that
the insurer provide a ten-day notification to the City before
cancellation of the licensee's policy. A copy of that coverage
must be submitted prior to the execution of this leasing
agreement and shall accompany payment of the annual
leasing fee.
(2) The licensee understands that all risk of damage to his
product, materials or handling equipment is at the licensee's
own risk and that it is the licensee's obligation to completely
indemnify the licensor in connection with any use made of the
public loading and unloading area hereunder.
G. Taxes, liens and assessments. The licensee shall pay all taxes, liens
or assessments which may be imposed or levied on the licensee's
property, including any assessments by the state, county or
railroad, and shall pay for all utility and other services furnished to
or for the licensee on the premises.
H. Privilege not assignable. The licensee's privileges hereunder shall
not be assignable in whole or in part.
§ 124-6 SACO CITY CODE § 124-6
104:294
I. Period of license; termination. The license given hereunder shall
commence on ____________________ and expire on
____________________, except that the licensor may, at its election,
terminate the license forthwith at any time that the licensee shall
fail to comply with or abide by each and all of the provisions hereof
or regulations annexed hereto. Waiver by the licensor of any breach
or term of any provisions hereof shall not be deemed a waiver of
any subsequent breach of the same or any other term or provision
hereof.
J. Damage to pavement. The units stored or parked shall have proper
platforms and/or plates under trailer landing gear to minimize
damage to surface pavement. Damages sustained as a result of
oversized loads or carelessness shall be the responsibility of the
operator (licensee), and the City will assess a damage fee for any
losses incurred.
K. Removal of property. On revocation, surrender or other termination
of the permission hereby given, the licensee shall remove all
fixtures, equipment and other things placed by the licensee on said
premises. In the event that the licensee shall fail to do so, the
licensor shall have the right to make such removal at the licensee's
expense, the amount of which expense the licensee shall pay the
licensor on demand, and if the licensor shall so elect to remove the
property of the licensee, it shall have the right to take possession of
or appropriate to itself, without payment therefor, any property of
the licensee then remaining on the premises.
L. Joint licensees. In the event that the licensee is two or more
persons, then the obligation of the licensee shall be their joint
and several obligations, and notice given to one of them shall be
deemed notice to all.
Please provide the phone number and contact person who may be
reached at all times:
Name: Telephone No.
CITY OF SACO
By:
Licensee City Administrator
Street address Date
City, state and zip code
Telephone number
§ 124-6 FLEA MARKETS § 124-6
104:295
Name of trailer and/or plate number
Date
§ 124-6 SACO CITY CODE § 124-6
104:296
Chapter 132
LICENSE AND REGISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cable television — See Ch. 78.
Entertainment — See Ch. 93.
Flea markets — See Ch. 104.
Massage establishments — See Ch. 138.
Mass gatherings — See Ch. 139.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 156.
Petroleum products — See Ch. 159.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 195.
Towers and wreckers — See Ch. 200.
§ 132-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as "Saco Business License and Registration."
§ 132-2. Findings; purpose.
§ 132-3. Registration; license required; exemptions.
A. Over the last several years Saco has seen significant growth in its
population as well as the creation and development of new commercial
enterprises. The City is poised to expand its industrial park, has pushed
its Route 1 sewer line out towards the City's boundary with
Scarborough and has recently completed several important
infrastructure improvements, including the renovation of City Hall and
the building of a new police station.
B. During this same time, commerce itself has changed, particularly with
the advancement of new, exciting technologies. The old mill industries
that dominated Saco's history and landscape have passed, and in their
place are new employers and a new business climate dominated by
many smaller entrepreneurial businesses producing new products, and
particularly providing new services. Many of these businesses are not
corporations registered with the state, and some operate via telephone,
computer line and modem, etc.
C. These changes in Saco's business community can pose problems for
Saco's citizens. Businesses are created and can fail rapidly. Often they
can be difficult to locate in the event of a problem. Agents for service of
process may not exist. It is the City's intent to assure that the public
knows with whom it is dealing when that business operates within the
City of Saco and that each business requiring one has received a
license. These proposals are advanced for the protection of the
residents' health and welfare and to promote stable, lawful business
within the City.
§ 124-6 FLEA MARKETS § 132-3
104:297
§ 132-4. Limitation of activity.
A. All businesses located within the City of Saco which engage in, perform,
conduct or otherwise participate in commerce of any kind, and which
are not otherwise exempt, must register with the City.
B. All businesses located or doing business within the City of Saco which
engage in, perform, conduct or otherwise promote a specified business
activity must secure a license from the City.
C. A "specified business activity" means a trade, service, business, incomegenerating
activity or craft, whether or not intended for profit, which is
set out in § 132-13 as a regulated activity requiring a license from the
City of Saco. Example: Operating a taxicab is a specific business activity
requiring a license and compliance with the other conditions as set
forth in Chapter 195.
D. To "register" means to complete a business registration form with the
Clerk for identification purposes.
E. The following entities are exempt from the requirements of this
chapter:
(1) United States government agencies and departments.
(2) United States Postal Service.
(3) State of Maine agencies and departments.
(4) Nonprofit and charitable entities.
(5) Public schools, school administrative districts, school unions and
private schools.
(6) Churches located within the City.
(7) Any entity or individual not otherwise required to file a federal tax
return.
F. The following are exempt from the registration fee of this chapter but
must still register and show proof of due licensing by the State of
Maine.
(1) Those individuals or entities who secure licenses pursuant to Title
32 of Maine's Revised Statutes (e.g., doctors, lawyers, accountants,
optometrists, etc.).
(2) Maine corporations which are registered with the Secretary of
State and which have an agent for service of process.
A. No person or entity shall engage in, service, practice or operate any
specified business activity without having obtained each and every
license required herein and shall not operate any time that an
applicable license has been suspended or after revocation as provided
§ 132-3 SACO CITY CODE § 132-4
104:298
§ 132-5. Licensing authority.
§ 132-6. Applications.
herein. Any person or entity which engages in, practices, fosters or
operates a specified business activity without a license shall be subject
to the fines set out in Subsection D below.
B. No person or entity located within the City of Saco shall engage in,
perform, conduct or otherwise participate in any business or trade
without having registered with the City.
C. Every registration and/or license shall be exhibited in a conspicuous
place on the premises, whenever the person or entity is open to the
public and/or engaged in business activity.
D. The failure to display at all times a required license and/or registration
is a violation of this chapter. Upon discovering that a business, person
or entity has not displayed its license or registration, the City by and
through its departments and agents shall notice the violation and
request compliance with this chapter. If the business, owner or person
refuses to correct the violation or repeats the violation after notice,
then the business, owner or person shall be subject to a fine of up to
$100 for the first day of the offense occurs, up to $200 for the second
day, and up to $500 for the third and subsequent days of the offenses,
which fines shall be received in a civil action by the City. The violator
will also pay the City Solicitor reasonable attorney fees. [Amended
12-19-2005]
A. All licenses shall be issued, denied, suspended or revoked by the City
Clerk ("the Clerk") except as expressly provided in this Code.
B. All registrations shall be taken, recorded and maintained by the Clerk.
C. In the absence of the City Clerk, the City Administrator will assume all
authority and responsibility of the Clerk as designated herein.
A. All registrations shall be made in writing on a form provided by the
Clerk. Each registration shall state the business name, address,
telephone number, fax number and e-mail and such additional
information as deemed necessary by the Clerk, including each map and
lot number from where the business shall operate.
B. All license applications shall be made in writing on a form provided by
the Clerk. Each application shall state the name and business address,
telephone number, fax number and e-mail of each applicant, the license
desired, the date of the application, including each map and lot number
where the business shall operate, and such additional information as
may be deemed necessary in the relevant specific chapter and useful by
the Clerk in determining whether such license applied for should be
issued.
§ 132-4 FLEA MARKETS § 132-6
104:299
§ 132-7. Fees. [Amended 4-7-2003]
§ 132-8. Investigation of applications.
C. Other papers.
(1) If the applicant is other than a natural person, the names and
addresses of all principal officers and directors, as well as the name
and address of the agent for service of process, shall accompany
the original application.
(2) A statement to the fact that no employee or officer of the City is
beneficially interested in the license.
(3) Any organization claiming status as a bona fide nonprofit
organization shall furnish sufficient evidence of such status.
D. Copies of all registrations and licenses shall, upon completion, be
transmitted to the Code Enforcement Officer for the following
purposes:
(1) Review compliance: that said business is permitted to operate in
each and every location (map and lot number) where specified; and
(2) To record such information into the Code Enforcement
Officer database program ("Code Enforcement Pro") and/or
records for future use and review.
E. The City of Saco will treat all licenses and registration as public records
under Maine law, except no social security numbers or federal tax
identification numbers, if collected, will be made available to the public
at any time, it being the express intent of the City that such information
be kept confidential.
A. The annual registration fee shall be established by the City Council
after a public hearing. Each year, registration holders must renew their
registration. The fee for such renewal shall be established by the City
Council after a public hearing. If a person, business or other entity is
engaged in a specified business activity which requires a license, then
that person or party shall only pay the license fee described below but
shall not be responsible for the registration fee established by the City
Council after a public hearing.
B. Those fees required for a license shall be spelled out in the chapter
regulating the specified business activity, but, if not set forth therein,
then the fee per year is as established by the City Council after a public
hearing. Those parties who must hold licenses will pay a fee as
established by the City Council after a public hearing to renew their
license, unless the chapter regulating such activity says otherwise, in
which case that chapter shall control.
§ 132-6 SACO CITY CODE § 132-8
104:300
§ 132-9. Standards for denial, suspension or revocation.
A. Registration. The Clerk shall accept the registration of a business on its
face and maintain such registration as deemed prudent.
B. Licenses. Upon receipt of an application for any license or a renewal of
license, the Clerk shall inquire of other City departments, as
appropriate, for comments as to whether a license may be granted
consistently with the provisions of the laws and ordinances enforced by
such departments.
C. The Clerk has discretion to determine, depending on the specified
business activity, which departments of the City must review and
comment upon the license application.
D. Only upon satisfaction of the Clerk and after review by any appropriate
departments, and only upon full compliance with any specific ordinance
conditions set forth in the chapter regulating the specified business
activity, shall the Clerk issue a license.
E. The Clerk shall complete his or her review promptly and grant or deny a
license within 21 days.
A. Grounds. A license, registration or renewal of either may be denied,
suspended or revoked upon a determination of the existence of one or
more of the following grounds, provided that there be sufficient and
substantial incidents warranting denial, suspension or revocation:
(1) Failure to fully complete the application forms; knowingly making
an incorrect statement of a material nature on such form; or failure
to supply any additional documentation required or reasonably
necessary to determine whether such license is issuable; or failure
to pay any fee required hereunder;
(2) The business or persons on the premises of the business have
caused one or more significant breaches of the peace;
(3) There is a clear danger to the public if the licensed or registered
activity is permitted;
(4) The business or persons patronizing the business will substantially
and adversely affect the peace and quiet of the neighborhood,
whether or not residential;
(5) The business, owner or entity has violated a provision of this
chapter or other ordinance of the City of Saco, including its Zoning
Ordinance;
(6) The occurrence of any event subsequent to issuance of the license
or registration, which event would have been a basis for denial of
the registration or license, shall be grounds for revocation thereof;
§ 132-8 FLEA MARKETS § 132-9
104:301
§ 132-10. Appeals.
(7) Real or personal property taxes or judgments to the City of Saco
are due and owing to the City and are determined to be in arrears
as of the date of the license request or registration;
(8) The licensee has received more than one public complaint filed
with the Clerk; or
(9) Such other acts or conduct found to be detrimental to the citizens
or community.
B. Hearings.
(1) Except as expressly provided in this chapter, no license or
registration may be revoked or suspended without prior notice to
the individual or entity, and after a hearing.
(2) In the case of the suspension or revocation of a registration license,
a hearing shall be given to the individual or entity and a
generalized statement of the nature of the complaint constituting
the basis for the proposed action shall be included in the notice of
hearing. Failure of the individual or entity to appear at the hearing
shall be deemed a waiver of the rights to said hearing.
(3) All suspensions or revocations shall be upon substantial evidence,
and all hearings shall be conducted with substantial fairness.
C. Fairness. The Clerk shall not arbitrarily deny any applicant a
registration or license to practice or engage in a specified business
activity but must base their decision upon substantial and credible
evidence of one or more of the grounds described above, nor shall the
Council suspend or revoke a license except upon substantial evidence
of violations of the above standards.
D. Complaints.
(1) Any citizen or public official of the City can file and/or initiate a
complaint against a license holder or registered business.
Complaints will be kept and maintained by the City Clerk and may
be considered when and if a licensee seeks a renewal of their
license in the succeeding year.
(2) Complaints for suspension or revocation may be initiated by the
City Council, the City Administrator or the City Clerk if one or more
of the conditions described in § 132-9A exist or if more than one
complaint is filed with the Clerk's office by a member of the public.
A. Procedure. An appeal to the City Council may be taken by any person
aggrieved by the denial, suspension or revocation of a license by the
Clerk by filing a notice of appeal within 30 days of the decision. Every
appeal should be in writing and shall state the basis for the appeal. The
City Council shall hear the appeal within two weeks after the filing of
§ 132-9 SACO CITY CODE § 132-10
104:302
§ 132-11. Notices of hearing.
§ 132-12. Registration and license not transferable.
the appeal and may affirm, reverse or modify the decision appealed
from.
B. Scope of review. On appeal, the hearing officer shall review the decision
of the Clerk and determine whether the decision was based upon
substantial evidence and in compliance with the standards of the
applicable chapters. The hearing officer may take additional evidence
with respect to such decision or action and, if additional testimony or
evidence is taken, shall determine the appeal upon all of the evidence,
except as provided in this section.
C. Status or operations pending municipal appeal. During the pendency of
an appeal to the City Council, the person, business or entity aggrieved
by the decision of the City Clerk may operate without risk of fine if they
have an existing registration or license and the Clerk has suspended,
revoked or denied a renewal of the registration or license. However, if
the person, business or entity has been denied its initial license or
registration, then any operation prior to a decision by the City Council
will be subject to the civil penalties set forth herein.
D. Appeal to the superior court. Any person aggrieved by the decision on
appeal may appeal to the Superior Court in accordance with the
provisions of Maine Rule of Civil Procedure 80B.
A. Content. Whenever a hearing is required, the Clerk shall give notice of
the time and place of the hearing, the type of license involved and the
nature of the hearing and the address or location of the property
involved.
B. Service. Except as expressly provided, whenever notice by mail is
required, such notice shall be mailed by regular United States mail at
least five days in advance of the hearing date.
A. Registration. No registration may be transferred by any person or
entity to any other person or entity.
B. License. No license may be transferred by the licensee to any person,
business or entity, nor shall any license fee be refunded if the business
activity is ceased prior to the expiration of the license.
C. Nature of transfer. In all cases arising out of this section in which the
Clerk, if required to determine the identity or composition of or
ownership interests in an applicant or licensee, or to determine
whether a transfer of an ownership interest in an applicant or licensee
has taken place, the Clerk shall look to the substance rather than the
form of transactions, and any person aggrieved may appeal the Clerk's
determination to the City Council.
§ 132-10 FLEA MARKETS § 132-13
104:303
§ 132-13. Specified activities requiring licenses.
The following is a list of business activities that presently require a license
from the City. A license applicant shall follow and must meet the
requirements in the applicable chapter.
Cable television — See Chapter 79.
Entertainment — See Chapter 93.
Flea Markets — See Chapter 104.
Flea Market Vendors — See Chapter 104.
Massage Parlors — See Chapter 138.
Mass gatherings — See Chapter 139.
Peddling — See Chapter 156.
Petroleum sales — See Chapter 159.
Taxicabs/Drivers — See Chapter 195.
Towers and wreckers — See Chapter 200.
Chapter 135
MARIJUANA, CULTIVATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cultivation and sale of recreational
marijuana — See Ch. 165.
§ 135-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Marijuana Cultivation and Distribution
Ordinance."
§ 135-2. Findings; purpose.
A. The State of Maine has recently enacted laws allowing greater
cultivation, handling, storing, packaging, processing and distribution of
marijuana plants and products. In addition, the citizens of the state in a
recent referendum have voted to allow for and decriminalize personal
or so-called "recreational" use of marijuana. Additional state laws and
regulations are anticipated regarding recreational marijuana. These
are not policy decisions of the City, but the City has become aware of
certain adverse effects from these recent legislative undertakings, and
it proposes to address potential issues that have arisen.
B. Specifically, the City has learned through its Code Enforcement Office,
through its Electrical Inspector, as well as through other public
officials, including its Police and Fire Departments, that individuals are
§ 132-13 SACO CITY CODE § 135-2
104:304
§ 135-3. License required.
rapidly installing throughout the City cultivation facilities without City
knowledge, without proper City inspection and review and in some
cases in areas not zoned for such use. Of particular concern is the
installation of energy-intensive lighting that can pose significant risk
of injury, death and of fires within residential structures. The City
Council has received information regarding structure fires in other
communities caused by heat-intensive lighting used for cultivation and
growing equipment.
C. The Council is also aware that not all states have decriminalized
marijuana, and this community's easy highway access and close
proximity to the border may make Saco an attractive location for those
who intend to traffic marijuana as part of a criminal enterprise.
D. It is evident that businesses and citizens desire to commercialize and
otherwise avail themselves of opportunities presented by these new
laws. However, doing so in an unregulated and, in some cases,
surreptitious fashion poses substantial risk of criminal activity, physical
harm, even death. These conditions have created an emergency for the
community.
E. This emergency ordinance, enacted pursuant to City Charter Provision
2.10, seeks to assure the safety of Saco citizens while allowing properly
reviewed and regulated use as permitted under state law. It is enacted
pursuant to Home Rule Authority under both Maine's Constitution and
30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001 et seq.
A. All persons and parties who grow, cultivate, harvest, manage, process,
transfer, exchange or distribute marijuana, or any marijuana product,
or material or medication derived thereon ("marijuana products"), from
or within the City of Saco, must register with the City and must secure
and maintain a valid license at all times. A license is not required for
personal use of any marijuana within one's own premises, provided
there is no associated growing, cultivating, harvesting, managing,
processing, transferring, exchanging or distributing of marijuana or
marijuana products.
B. All businesses, commercial enterprises, as well as any not-for-profit
entity, that grows, cultivates, harvests, manages, processes, transfers,
exchanges or distributes marijuana, or any marijuana products, from or
within the City of Saco, must register with the City of Saco and must
secure and maintain a valid license at all times.
C. To register means to complete and submit to the City Clerk of Saco the
forms created by that office, and to pay the fees set forth herein. No
registration shall be approved, and no license granted, until the
required fees have been paid, and all applicable reviews and
inspections have been completed.
§ 135-2 FLEA MARKETS § 135-3
104:305
§ 135-4. Permitted locations.
§ 135-5. Violations.
D. Once all applicable reviews have been fully and properly completed,
and the applicant has been found qualified, the Clerk shall thereupon
issue a license to the applicant.
E. All licenses shall run for one year (365 days), and may be renewed as
set forth herein. No license shall be issued, denied, or revoked by the
City Clerk except as expressly provided in this chapter.
F. In the absence of the City Clerk, the City Administrator will assume all
authority and responsibility of the Clerk as designated herein.
A. A resident of a single-family structure who holds a license may grow,
cultivate and harvest marijuana for their own personal use, and for the
personal use of a resident family member, regardless of the zone in
which the structure is located.
B. The limit as to the number of permitted marijuana plants and ounces of
harvested marijuana for each person in single-family structure shall be
set by state law.
C. In no event may any person owning or residing in a single-family
structure increase their home electrical service beyond 200 amps.
D. In no event may a person renting, owning or occupying a single-family
structure grow, cultivate, distribute, harvest, manage, process, transfer,
exchange, or distribute any amount of marijuana or marijuana products
for a third party, except for a resident family member living in the same
structure as permitted in Subsection A above.
E. All parties who grow, cultivate, harvest, manage, process, transfer,
exchange or distribute marijuana or marijuana products for any other
third party may do so provided they operate from a structure or
premises found within the City of Saco's approved zones. No growing,
cultivation, harvesting, managing, processing, transferring, exchanging
or distribution of marijuana or marijuana products shall be allowed
outside the boundaries of these zones of the City. Such activity shall be
a violation of this chapter.
F. No other properties outside of the approved zones may be used or
licensed for growing, cultivation, harvesting, managing, processing,
transferring, exchanging or distributing marijuana or marijuana
products for any party's personal use except for personal use as
permitted in Subsection A above.
G. No license issued by the City may be transferred, sold or assigned by
the license holder to any other person or entity.
§ 135-3 SACO CITY CODE § 135-5
104:306
§ 135-6. Applications.
A. No person or entity shall grow, cultivate, harvest, manage, process,
transfer, exchange or distribute marijuana or marijuana products
without having registered with the Clerk and without having obtained a
valid, in force and effect, license as required herein.
B. Every license holder shall exhibit its license in a conspicuous place on
the premises, visible to the public. The failure to display the issued
license at all times is a violation of this chapter. Upon discovering that a
person, party or entity has not displayed its license, the City shall
deliver a written warning. The failure to display a license after written
warning shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
C. No person, party or entity may sell, transfer or assign its license. Any
attempt to sell, transfer or assign will confer no rights, and will render
the license immediately void. The sale, assignment or transfer of a
license is a violation of this chapter.
D. It is violation of this chapter to grow, cultivate, harvest, manage,
process, transfer, exchange or distribute marijuana, or any marijuana
product, in any structure or zone not otherwise allowed as set out in
§ 135-4A and E.
E. It is a violation of this chapter for any license holder to traffic,
transport, mail, distribute, transfer, or otherwise assist in the
trafficking, transporting, mailing, distribution or transfer of marijuana
or marijuana products outside the boundaries of this state. It is a
violation of this chapter for any agent, employee or officer of the license
holder to do the same.
A. All registrations for personal use shall be made in writing on a form
provided by the Clerk. Each registration shall state the applicant's
name, address, telephone number, and e-mail, and such additional
information as deemed necessary by the Clerk, including the map and
lot number property where the license will be posted.
B. All registrations to grow, cultivate, harvest, manage, process, transfer,
exchange or distribute marijuana or marijuana products for any third
parties shall be made in writing on forms provided by the Clerk. Each
registration shall state the applicant's name, address, telephone
number and e-mail. In addition, the applicant shall:
(1) Identify its estimated yearly production of marijuana;
(2) Whether it will ship or distribute any marijuana outside of the State
of Maine;
(3) Identify all individuals and entities to whom it will contract for
delivery of marijuana and include the amounts expected to be
delivered monthly and annually.
§ 135-5 FLEA MARKETS § 135-6
104:307
C. All registrations submitted by an entity applicant shall contain the
information set out above in Subsection A or B (as applicable) and shall
also include the following:
(1) Federal tax identification number.
(2) Type and state of organization.
(3) Names, addresses and date of birth of all principal officers, owners
and managers.
(4) Whether the entity is for profit or non-profit entity, and
confirmation thereof.
(5) Proof of insurance upon the proposed premises in the name of the
license holder.
(6) Name and address of clerk or registered agent for service of
process.
D. No employee of the City of Saco shall have any beneficial interest in an
issued license, or license holder.
E. Copies of all registrations and materials shall, upon completion, be
transmitted to the Code Enforcement Officer, Electrical Inspector, and
the City of Saco Fire and Police Departments for the following
purposes:
(1) Review compliance: that the applicant license holder is permitted
to operate in each and every location (map and lot number) where
specified; and
(2) To record such information into any existing Code Enforcement
Officer management program ("Code Enforcement Pro") for use
and review; and
(3) Site inspection by Code Officer, Electrical Inspector and Fire
Department at any and all applicable location(s) used for growing,
cultivating, harvesting, managing, processing, transferring,
exchanging or distributing of marijuana or marijuana products; and
(4) To allow inspection of plan drawings detailing nature of site,
location of utilities and how utilities such as electrical power will be
used; and such other factors deemed necessary or advisable by City
staff; and
(5) For a follow-up inspection between 30 and 60 days after issuance of
license to inspect any facilities related to marijuana growing,
cultivating, harvesting, managing, processing, transferring,
exchanging or distributing of marijuana or marijuana products.
(6) To determine if the applicant needs or has a duly issued state
license for the state use/undertaking, and to determine that the
applicant is in compliance with all State of Maine requirements.
§ 135-6 SACO CITY CODE § 135-7
104:308
§ 135-7. Fees.
Fees shall be established annually by the City Council following a public
hearing.
§ 135-8. Investigations.
§ 135-9. Decision; standards for denial.
A. Registration. The Clerk shall accept and maintain an applicant's
registration forms and all supporting material. The Clerk shall submit
all registration materials to City staff for review as set out in § 135-6E.
All findings and conclusions of City staff shall be reported to the Clerk
within 30 days.
B. Licenses. Upon receipt of an application for renewal of license, the
Clerk shall inquire of City officials whether a license may be renewed in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. City staff shall have 30
days to complete their investigation.
C. Only upon satisfaction of the Clerk, and after review by all appropriate
departments, and only upon full compliance with all conditions set forth
in this chapter, shall the Clerk issue a license.
D. The Clerk shall complete his or her review promptly and grant or deny a
license or license renewal subject to the additional terms found in
§ 135-13.
A. Notice. The Clerk shall issue all decisions in writing, and subject to the
same time period set out in § 135-13.
B. Grounds. A license, and the renewal of a license may be denied, or
revoked, upon one or more of the following grounds:
(1) Failure to fully complete the application forms; knowingly making a
false or incorrect statement of a material nature on such form;
failure to supply any requested information reasonably necessary
to determine whether such license may be issued; or failure to pay
any fee required hereunder;
(2) The person, party applicant, license holder, officers, or managers of
license holders have caused a significant breach of the peace; have
been convicted of more than one misdemeanor, or have been
convicted of any felony;
(3) There is a clear danger to the public if the license is issued,
including significant risk of injury or fire;
(4) The parties or persons patronizing the license holder will adversely
affect the peace and quiet of the neighborhood, whether or not
residential;
§ 135-7 FLEA MARKETS § 135-9
104:309
§ 135-10. Appeals.
(5) The person, party or entity has violated a provision of this chapter
or other ordinance of the City of Saco, including its Zoning
Ordinance;
(6) The occurrence of any event subsequent to issuance of the license,
which event would have been a basis for denial of the license, shall
be grounds for revocation thereof;
(7) Real or personal property taxes or legal judgments that are due and
owing to the City and are determined to be in arrears as of the date
of the license request or license renewal; or
(8) Such other acts or conduct found to be detrimental to the citizens
or community, including but not limited to suffering a fire or
significant injury arising from growing, cultivating, harvesting,
managing, processing, transferring, exchanging or distributing of
marijuana or marijuana products after the issuance of a license.
C. Hearings.
(1) Except as expressly provided in this chapter, no license may be
revoked without prior notice to the person, party or entity, and only
after a hearing.
(2) In the case of the revocation of a license, a hearing shall be given to
the individual or entity, and a generalized statement of the nature
of the complaint constituting the basis for the proposed action shall
be included in the notice of hearing. Failure of the person, party or
entity to appear at the hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the
rights to said hearing.
(3) All revocations shall be upon substantial evidence, and all hearings
shall be conducted with substantial fairness. Rules of evidence
shall not apply in such hearing.
D. Fairness. The Clerk shall not arbitrarily deny any registration or license
renewal but must base his or her decision upon substantial and credible
evidence of one or more of the grounds described above.
E. Complaints. Any citizen or public official of the City can file and/or
initiate a complaint against a license holder. Complaints will be kept
and maintained by the City Clerk and may be considered when and if a
licensee seeks a renewal of his or her license in any succeeding year.
A. Procedure. An appeal of the Clerk's decision to the City Council may be
taken by any person aggrieved by the denial or revocation of a license
by filing a notice of appeal within 30 days of the decision with the City
Administrator. Every appeal should be in writing and shall state the
basis for the appeal. The City Council shall hear the appeal within 30
§ 135-9 SACO CITY CODE § 135-10
104:310
§ 135-11. Notices of hearing.
§ 135-12. (Reserved)
§ 135-13. Renewal.
days after the filing of the appeal and may affirm, reverse or modify the
decision appealed from.
B. Scope of review. On appeal, the City Council shall review the decision of
the Clerk and determine whether the decision was based upon
substantial evidence and in compliance with the standards of this
chapter. The Council may take additional evidence with respect to such
decision or action and, if additional testimony or evidence is taken, it
shall determine the appeal upon all of the evidence.
C. Status or operations pending municipal appeal. During the pendency of
an appeal to the City Council, the person, business or entity aggrieved
by the decision of the City Clerk may operate without risk of fine if it has
an existing license and the Clerk has revoked or denied a renewal of the
license. However, if the person, business or entity has been denied its
initial license, then any operation prior to a decision by the City Council
will be subject to the civil penalties set forth herein.
D. Appeal to the Superior Court. Any person aggrieved by the decision of
the City Council may appeal to the Superior Court in accordance with
the provisions of Maine Rule of Civil Procedure 80B.
A. Content. Whenever a hearing is required, the Clerk shall give written
notice of the time and place of the hearing to the license holder and the
City Administrator. Notice shall also be posted in two prominent public
locations.
B. Service. Except as expressly provided, whenever notice by mail is
required, such notice shall be mailed by regular United States mail at
least five days in advance of the hearing date.
A. Each year, a license holder must submit a renewal application on the
forms provided by the Clerk. The required fee set out in § 135-7 must be
provided, or the Clerk will stay review.
B. The Clerk shall submit to City staff the current license and registration
materials in the applicant's file, as well as copies of any complaints and
letters received by the Clerk regarding the renewal applicant.
C. City staff shall conduct those reviews set out in §§ 135-6E and 135-8
except City staff may use their discretion to reduce the scope and depth
of investigation if circumstances of the renewal warrant.
D. The Clerk shall issue his or her decision within 30 days unless City staff
are unable, in good faith, to finalize their investigation and review, but
in no event shall the license renewal decision take more than 60 days.
§ 135-10 FLEA MARKETS § 135-13
104:311
§ 135-14. Retroactivity.
The City Council, due to the importance of life safety to all, and because a
number of individuals are surreptitiously growing, cultivating, harvesting,
managing, processing, transferring, exchanging or distributing marijuana
or marijuana products within its boundaries, expressly intends that this
chapter be applied retroactively to January 1, 2016. Any party who
commenced growing, cultivating, harvesting, managing, processing,
transferring, exchanging or distributing marijuana or marijuana products
after January 1, 2016, but prior to the date of the enactment of this chapter
must register for a license, but fees for its first license will be waived if the
party can substantially establish that it was engaged in growing, cultivating,
harvesting, managing, processing, transferring, exchanging or distributing
marijuana or marijuana products prior to enactment of this chapter.
§ 135-15. Enforcement and penalties.
§ 135-16. Severability.
If any portion of this chapter is held to be invalid, the remainder of the
chapter shall remain in full force and effect, it being the City Council's
E. License holders who do not submit their renewal applications at least
30 days before expiration of their license are at risk in the event the
Clerk is unable to complete his or her review within 30 days, and, in
such case, if the license expires during such review without a renewal
having been yet granted, the license holder must cease growing,
cultivating, harvesting, managing, processing, transferring, exchanging
or distributing of marijuana or marijuana products.
A. Lack of license. Any person or entity that grows, cultivates, harvests,
manages, processes, transfers, exchanges or distributes marijuana or
marijuana products without a valid license shall be subject to the
following fines:
(1) First violation: $2,500.
(2) Second violation: $5,000.
(3) Each subsequent violation: $10,000.
B. The failure to publicly display a license shall be $500 per offense.
C. The fine for selling, transferring or assigning a license in violation of
§ 135-5C shall be $5,000.
D. The fine for violating § 135-5D shall be $2,500 for the first offense and
$5,000 for each occurrence thereafter.
E. Violation of § 135-5E (transporting or trafficking) shall result in
permanent loss of license.
§ 135-13 SACO CITY CODE § 135-16
104:312
intention that these provisions be severable to the greatest extent allowed
by law.
Chapter 138
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult businesses — See Ch. 53.
Entertainment — See Ch. 53.
Licenses — See Ch. 132.
§ 138-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of massage
establishments and massage therapists in order to promote the public
health, safety and general welfare.
§ 138-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MASSAGE — Any method of rubbing, kneading, tapping, vibration,
compression, percussion, application of friction or manipulation of the
external parts of the human body with the hands or other parts of the body
or with the aid of any instrument or device.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any business, including but not limited to
a sole proprietorship, in which the business operation consists of providing
or making available massage in the City for any consideration or gratuity
or with the expectation of any consideration or gratuity, whether or not the
business has a fixed place of business within the City limits.
MASSAGE THERAPIST — Any person who performs massage for any
consideration or gratuity or with expectation of receiving any consideration
or gratuity.
PATRON — Any person who receives a massage in return for the payment
of any consideration or gratuity or with the expectation of paying any
consideration or gratuity.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, corporation or other entity.
RECOGNIZED SCHOOL — Any school or institution of learning which has
as a course of study the teaching of the theory, method, profession or
practice of massage and which is recognized or certified by the State of
Maine or any other state. "Recognized school" shall not include institutions
offering only correspondence courses not requiring actual attendance of
classes.
§ 135-16 FLEA MARKETS § 138-3
104:313
§ 138-3. Exemptions.
The following persons shall be exempt from the operation of this chapter
if duly licensed by the State of Maine: physicians, physician's assistants,
surgeons, osteopaths, nurses, chiropractors, physical therapists, barbers,
cosmetologists, beauticians and other health and hygiene professionals.
§ 138-4. Maintenance; cleaning of supplies.
Each licensed massage establishment shall be kept at all times in a clean
and sanitary condition. All instruments, supplies and devices of any kind
or parts thereof that come into contact with the human body shall be kept
clean by a recognized and approved method of sterilization.
§ 138-5. Prohibited activities.
No licensed massage establishment shall allow and no licensed massage
therapist shall perform any of the following activities:
§ 138-6. Record of employees.
Each massage establishment shall keep a written record of all massage
therapists operating under the massage establishment's license. Such
records shall, at a minimum, consist of the name and address of such
massage therapist and a copy of the license issued to such massage
therapist under this chapter.
§ 138-7. License requirements; fees.
A. Administration of a massage to any patron whose genitals are exposed;
B. Administration of or an agreement to administer a massage to the
genitals or anus of a patron; or
C. Administration of or an agreement to administer a massage unless the
massage therapist is dressed in nontransparent clothing which fully
covers the massage therapist's chest, buttocks and genitals.
A. License required. No person shall operate a massage establishment and
no massage therapist shall perform a massage without a valid license
issued pursuant to this section. A separate license shall be required for
each massage establishment. Licenses issued hereunder shall be
granted by the City Council upon application, as hereinafter provided.
B. Types of licenses.
(1) Massage establishment license. Each massage establishment shall
obtain a license.
(2) Massage therapist license. Each massage therapist shall obtain a
license. A massage therapist may only perform massages in a
licensed massage establishment or with a combined massage
establishment/massage therapist license.
§ 138-3 SACO CITY CODE § 138-7
104:314
§ 138-8. Denial or revocation of license.
(3) Combined massage establishment/massage therapist license. A
sole practitioner who has no licensed massage therapists other
than himself or herself performing massages under his or her
massage establishment license may apply for a combined massage
establishment/massage therapist license.
C. Fees. The following fees shall be submitted with each license
application:
(1) Massage establishment: $100.
(2) Massage therapist: $50.
(3) Combined establishment/therapist: $125.
D. Display of licenses. A valid massage establishment license or combined
massage establishment/therapist license shall be conspicuously
displayed at all times on the premises of the establishment for which it
was issued. Each massage therapist shall have available for immediate
production and inspection, upon request, a valid massage therapist
license.
E. Application for license. Each applicant for a license under this section
shall submit a written application therefor on a form to be provided by
the City Clerk, with the fee herein established.
A. Denial of license. An application for a license under this chapter shall
be denied to the following:
(1) A massage establishment if the owner, any officer, director,
shareholder or manager has or has had, within the five years prior
to the date of application, a criminal conviction for any violation of
the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated, Title 17-A, Chapter 35.
(2) A massage therapist:
(a) If the applicant has or has had, within the five years prior to the
date of the application, a criminal conviction for any violation
of the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated, Title 17-A, Chapter
35;
(b) If the applicant is less than 18 years of age; or
(c) If the applicant fails to demonstrate basic proficiency as
hereinafter provided.
B. Revocation. A license issued hereunder may be revoked, after notice
and opportunity for hearing, for the following reasons:
(1) Violation of any provision of this chapter.
§ 138-7 FLEA MARKETS § 138-8
104:315
§ 138-9. Basic proficiency.
Each applicant for a massage therapist license or combined massage
establishment/massage therapist license shall show proof of basic
proficiency in the field of massage therapy, which may be satisfied by:
§ 138-10. Violations and penalties; declaration of nuisance.
Chapter 139
MASS GATHERINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flea markets — See Ch. 104. Licenses and registration — See Ch. 132.
(2) Any false statement on any license application made under this
chapter.
(3) Any reason which would constitute grounds for denial of a license
under this chapter.
(4) With respect to any massage establishment, allowing any
unlicensed massage therapist to perform massages.
A. Evidence of a diploma or certification of completion of a course in
massage therapy issued by a recognized school;
B. Evidence of successful completion of a certifying examination given by
another municipality or state;
C. Evidence of successful completion of a certifying examination given by
the American Massage Therapy Association or the Maine Massage
Guild;
D. Evidence of satisfaction of such licensing, registration or certification
requirements as may hereafter be enacted by the State of Maine; or
E. Evidence of continuous practice as a massage therapist for at least one
year, accompanied by the written recommendation of at least five
health care professionals holding a valid license or certification within
the State of Maine, including but not limited to physicians, surgeons,
nurses, physical therapists, massage therapists, psychiatrists,
psychologists and counseling professionals.
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter shall subject the violator to
a civil forfeiture in an amount not less than $500 nor more than $1,500.
A second or subsequent violation shall be punished by a civil forfeiture
of not less than $1,000 nor more than $5,000.
B. In addition, any massage establishment not licensed as herein provided
after the effective date of this chapter is declared to be nuisance.
§ 138-8 SACO CITY CODE § 138-10
139:316
§ 139-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Saco Mass Gathering Ordinance."
§ 139-2. Purpose.
It is recognized that mass gatherings attended by 1,000 or more persons
can create hazards to public health and safety. However, many mass
gatherings such as local sporting events, La Kermesse, holiday parades,
etc., are a part of our community, and enhance the quality of City life.
It is the City's purpose by this chapter to promote and permit safe mass
gatherings.
§ 139-3. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to terms used in this chapter. Terms not
defined herein shall have their common meanings.
COUNCIL — Duly elected Councilors for the City of Saco.
COUNCILOR — A duly elected member of the City Council for the City of
Saco.
CITY — The City of Saco, Maine.
M.R.S.A. — The Maine Revised Statutes Annotated.
MASS GATHERING — A gathering on private or public property, other than
a gathering which is held in the daily operation of a business otherwise
licensed or regulated by the City, in which an operator should reasonably
anticipate the simultaneous presence of more than 1,000 unrelated
individuals for a period of time exceeding six hours, but shall not include
parochial school, private school or public school sporting events or school
functions, nor shall it include any hearing or meeting called, organized or
held by a department or agency of the United States, State of Maine or City
of Saco, nor shall it include any Memorial Day, Fourth of July or Veterans
Day parade held in honor of those national holidays.
MASS GATHERING AREA — Any place, public or private, maintained,
operated, leased, controlled or used for a group gathering or assemblage.
NUISANCE —
OPERATOR — Operator shall mean the owner of the property encompassing
the mass gathering area.
A. Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence;
An attractive nuisance known at common law or in equity
jurisprudence; and
B.
Any condition, which violates federal, state or local health, zoning or
environmental laws or regulations.
C.
§ 138-10 MASS GATHERINGS § 139-3
139:317
REFUSE — All combustible or noncombustible, decaying or nondecaying
solid or liquid wastes.
SANITARY FACILITIES — Toilets, privies, lavatories, urinals, drinking
fountains and service buildings or rooms provided for installation and use
of these units.
§ 139-4. License required; violations and penalties.
§ 139-5. Issuance or denial.
§ 139-6. Application procedure; appeals.
A. No person shall permit on his property, or otherwise conduct, a mass
gathering which may reasonably be anticipated to, will or is intended to
attract a continued attendance at such gathering of 1,000 or more
unrelated persons for six or more hours until a license has been
obtained from the City Administrator.
B. Any operator who violates any provision of this chapter or any term of a
permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty.
It is a violation of this chapter and deemed a nuisance herein to hold a
mass gathering within the City of Saco without a license. Operator(s)
found in violation of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not to
exceed a maximum of $50,000, plus any and all costs of the City of Saco,
including the Police and Fire Departments incurred by the City to
terminate the mass gathering, safely disperse those in attendance and
enforce this chapter.
A. Issuance. When considering the issuance of a license, the City
Administrator shall seek advice from the Police Chief, Fire Chief, Code
Enforcement Officer, Health Officer and such other officials or persons
as he or she deems necessary. No license shall issue until the City
Administrator is assured by the department heads that adequate safety,
traffic, sanitation, refuse and water needs for the gathering have been
addressed and satisfied. Upon satisfaction of the City Administrator
that the ordinance standards have been or will be met, a license will be
issued to the operator. In making a decision, the City Administrator will
consider prior performance in holding mass gatherings.
B. Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance or
any term of a permit issued pursuant to this ordinance shall be subject
to a civil penalty payable to the City of Saco in an amount not to exceed
$50,000.
C. Denial. The City Administrator shall deny a license if he or she finds
that one or more of the standards set forth in this chapter have not been
met. The denial shall explain and detail the basis for the action taken by
the City Administrator and may be reviewed and/or appealed as
detailed below.
§ 139-3 SACO CITY CODE § 139-6
139:318
§ 139-7. Contents of application.
The permit application submitted pursuant to § 139-6 shall be on the
application form prescribed by the City Administrator and shall include the
following information:
A. City Administrator's review. A license application to hold one or more
mass gatherings shall be submitted to the City Administrator at least 90
days prior to the mass gathering contemplated. The license application
shall contain the information described in § 139-7. The City
Administrator shall grant or deny said application within 30 days of
submission. In addition, a notice shall be placed in the local newspaper
90 days prior to such mass gathering. Abutters within 1,000 feet of the
property lines shall receive written notice.
B. City council action. Within seven days after the granting or denial of a
license by the City Administrator, an aggrieved party may file for a
review by the City Council. The Council will take up the matter at its
next regularly scheduled meeting and will hear from the applicant, the
City Administrator and any department heads deemed necessary. The
Council may take one of the following steps:
(1) Affirm the City Administrator's denial;
(2) Direct the issuance of a license; or
(3) Deny the license pending the applicant's completion of certain and
stated actions or steps which, if followed by the applicant, will
result in a license being issued.
C. Appeal. A party aggrieved by the decision of the City Council may
appeal under Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
D. Fees shall be determined by Council after a public hearing. [Added
12-18-2000]
A. Description.
(1) The application must include a description of the proposed event. A
statement of the number of persons expected to attend the event,
together with the maximum number of tickets which will be made
available, if tickets are issued. Persons not holding valid tickets for
an event for which tickets have been issued shall not be permitted
to attend.
(2) The application must also provide a site map of the area, at a scale
of no more than 100 feet to the inch, showing the following:
(a) The location and number of all proposed toilets.
(b) The location and number of all lavatory and bathing facilities.
(c) The location and number of water supply sources.
§ 139-6 MASS GATHERINGS § 139-7
139:319
(d) The location and size of the assemblage area(s).
(e) The location of the food service areas.
(f) The location and size of the camping areas, and number of
campsites.
(g) The on-site ingress and egress of pedestrian and vehicular
traffic. (See § 137-7A)
(h) The off-site ingress and egress roads.
(i) The location of refuse disposal facilities and collection
facilities.
(j) The location and size of the parking areas, including the
number of parking spaces.
(k) The location of all traffic control personnel.
(l) The location of the first aid facilities.
(m) A copy of the evacuation plan to be used in an emergency.
(n) Detail list of names of abutters within 1,000 feet of the
property lines.
B. Standards. All facilities required by this chapter shall comply with the
regulations promulgated by Title 22 M.R.S.A. § 1601 pertaining to mass
gatherings and the following standards. When off-site facilities are to be
utilized in order to meet the requirements of this chapter, they shall be
described, and written consents from the property owners providing
the facilities shall be submitted with the application indicating that they
have read the application and understand the scope and nature of the
mass gathering.
C. Access.
(1) Evidence shall be provided to show that provisions for access for
the ingress and egress of pedestrians and vehicular traffic shall be
maintained, and that all public roadways in the proximity of the
mass gathering will be adequately staffed with trained traffic
control personnel to insure safety to all the public for the duration
of the mass gathering.
(2) Evidence shall be provided that sufficient safeguards have been
incorporated into mass gathering plans in order to insure that City
maintained streets and roads will remain accessible to public safety
vehicles (police, fire and rescue) during the proposed mass
gathering.
(3) A detailed plan for controlling traffic must be submitted, which
shall include:
§ 139-7 SACO CITY CODE § 139-7
139:320
(a) A description of the routes which persons attending the event
are likely to take.
(b) The number and assigned location of persons who will be
present to direct traffic at the site both before and after the
event. Under no circumstances shall private citizens be
assigned the duty of directing traffic on public roads.
(c) A description of what means will be available to remove
disabled vehicles from locations where their presence will
obstruct the free flow of traffic, including a written statement
by any private towing agencies that their towing services will
be available.
(d) A description of parking shall be provided, specifying the
location of all roads and parking lots.
[1] Width of service roads shall be at least 12 feet for one
traffic lane, 24 feet for two traffic lanes, and seven feet for
parallel parking lanes.
[2] There shall be at least one parking space for every four
persons and the density shall not exceed 100 passenger
cars or 30 buses per usable acre.
D. Grounds. Each mass gathering area will be well drained, adequately
illuminated, free of refuse and debris and so arranged as to provide
sufficient space, vehicles, sanitary facilities and appurtenant equipment
for the number of persons reasonably anticipated to be assembled, and
adequate on-site parking space will be provided.
E. Water supply.
(1) Evidence must be provided in writing from the operator concerning
the source(s) of potable water. Where water is distributed under
pressure and flush toilets are used, the water system shall deliver
water at normal operating pressure (20 pounds per square inch
minimum to all fixtures at the rate of at least 30 gallons per person
per day).
(2) Where water under pressure is not available, and nonwater toilets
are used, at least three gallons of water per person per day shall be
provided for drinking and lavatory purposes.
(3) If the Biddeford-Saco Water District is to be utilized as a source of
potable water, a written statement from the directors of said Water
District must be submitted to affirm that the District has the
capacity to provide the necessary quantity of water without
adversely affecting the supply to their normal customers.
(4) Transported water shall be obtained from an approved source, and
stored and dispensed in an approved manner. "Approval" as used in
§ 139-7 MASS GATHERINGS § 139-7
139:321
this subsection means in compliance with standards adopted by the
State of Maine Division of Health Engineering.
F. Sanitation. Adequate sanitation facilities will be made available, and
the City will require that one toilet per 150 persons estimated in
attendance. Adequate number of handicap accessible toilets shall also
be provided. Further:
(1) No wastewater will be discharged except in a manner consistent
with the requirements of the State Department of Human Services,
Division of Health Engineering.
(2) Disposal and/or treatment of any excretion or liquid waste will be in
a manner consistent with the requirements of the State
Department of Human Services, Division of Health Engineering.
G. Refuse disposal. A description of the number, type, and location of
refuse facilities, including a statement as to when and how the
accumulated refuse will be picked up, by whom, and to what facility it
will be taken. The operator will provide proof that refuse containers will
be readily accessible throughout the mass gathering area, and that at
least one fifty-gallon refuse container or equivalent will be provided for
each 100 persons expected to attend the mass gathering. The operator
shall be responsible for all fees associated with the cleanup and
disposal of refuse resulting from the mass gathering.
H. Vermin control. Insects, rodents and other vermin shall be controlled by
proper sanitary practices, extermination or other safe and effective
control methods, and, where necessary, animal parasites and other
disease transmitting nuisances shall be controlled.
I. Safety.
(1) Law enforcement.
(a) Evidence must be provided in writing that a sufficient number
of certified law enforcement personnel licensed pursuant to 32
M.R.S.A. §§ 9401 - 9417, will be on duty near and within the
assembly site area and that the City Administrator has
approved the same. A minimum of at least one such certified
security person, (not including persons concerned solely with
traffic control) shall be available for each 1,000 persons in
attendance when alcohol is not present and one for every 500
when alcohol is present on the property.
(b) If he deems it necessary in the interest of public safety, the City
Administrator shall have the authority to require that all
security personnel be certified graduates of the Maine
Criminal Justice Academy.
(2) Fire protection. Evidence must be provided in writing that the Saco
Fire Chief has accepted mass gathering plans as meeting fire
§ 139-7 SACO CITY CODE § 139-7
139:322
protection concerns. If, in his/her judgment, the conditions which
exist at the mass gathering area constitute an unsafe environment,
the Fire Chief shall recommend the City Administrator deny the
issuance of a mass gathering permit. In addition, evidence must
be provided that the Regional Forest Ranger has inspected the site
and assessed the forest fire hazard. If, in his opinion, conditions
warrant, the Forest Ranger shall have the authority to impose a ban
on any and all fires during the mass gathering.
J. Medical. The applicant must demonstrate how emergency medical
services will be provided, and further demonstrate coordination with
the City of Saco Fire Department should their units respond to the site.
All necessary personnel must be licensed by the State of Maine as
physician assistant, registered nurse, or emergency medical technician.
A transporting ambulance, duly licensed by the State of Maine, shall be
available on the site during the entire time of the mass gathering.
Telephone and radio communications shall be provided and kept
available for emergency purposes. The operator of the mass gathering
shall contact area hospitals, advise them that a mass gathering will be
held, and inform them of the expected attendance at the event.
K. Sound. Reasonable precautions will be taken to ensure that the sound
of the assembly will not exceed the Standard Residential Noise Code.
L. There may be overnight assemblage, but all activities must end by
11:00 p.m. and may not recommence before 7:00 a.m.
M. Past history. The operator has prior history that is unsatisfactory.
N. Complete application. The application for permit (including any
required attachments and submissions) must be fully completed and
executed.
O. The applicant has tendered the required application fee with the
application, indemnification agreement, insurance certificate, and
security deposit within the times prescribed by the Code.
P. The application for permit does not contain a material falsehood or
misrepresentation.
Q. The applicant is legally competent to contract or to sue and be sued.
R. The applicant outstanding and unpaid debts to the City of Saco.
S. A fully executed prior application for permit for the same time and
place has been received, and a permit has been or will be granted to a
prior applicant authorizing uses or activities which do not reasonably
permit multiple occupancy of the particular park or part hereof.
T. The use or activity intended by the applicant would conflict with
previously planned programs organized and conducted by the City of
Saco and previously scheduled for the same time and place.
§ 139-7 MASS GATHERINGS § 139-7
139:323
§ 139-8. Insurance.
The operator shall carry public liability insurance in an amount of not less
than $1,000,000 per person for bodily injury and for property damage. Proof
of insurance must be shown to the City Administrator before a license can
issue. The proof of insurance may be reviewed by the City Attorney.
§ 139-8.1. Deposit for City costs.
The operator of the mass gathering shall provide a cash deposit to the
City, which amount shall be determined by the City Administrator, and will
be deposited in an interest-bearing account. The purpose of the account
shall be to allow the City to pay costs related to protecting the public
health and safety. Any interest earned and any remaining balance in this
account shall be returned to the applicant following completion of the mass
gathering, and clean-up by the applicant of the area used for this mass
gathering, compliance by the applicant with any applicable state or local
law or regulation, and payment by the applicant of all proper claims against
the applicant for damage to real or personal property in the municipality
for which the permit is issued and arising out of facts done or omitted to be
done by the applicant, his agents or employees. A permit shall not be issued
until receipt of said deposit.
§ 139-8.2. Liability for City costs.
City costs shall be those incurred by the City in connection with the mass
gathering, which relates to any adverse consequences due to the mass
gathering, and which would not have been incurred by the City if such
mass gathering were not held. Such costs shall include but not be restricted
to road signs, damage to City roads or ditches, or any other adverse
consequences to any public facilities or works, such as the municipal water
supply. City costs shall also include the cost of hiring a constable or
constables to oversee the City's interests in ensuring the public safety and
enforcing the conditions of this chapter. Within 30 days after the mass
gathering, the City costs shall be calculated, and the deposit shall be
refunded to the operator to the extent it exceeds the actual City costs. If the
U. The proposed use or activity is prohibited by or inconsistent with the
classifications and uses of the property pursuant to the City Code.
V. The use or activity intended by the applicant would present an
unreasonable danger to the health or safety of the applicant, or other
users of the property, of City of Saco employees or of the public.
W. The applicant has not complied or cannot comply with application
licensure requirements, ordinances or regulations of the City of Saco
concerning the sale or offering for sale of any goods or services.
X. The use or activity intended by the applicant is prohibited by law, by
this Code or ordinances of the City of Saco.
§ 139-7 SACO CITY CODE § 139-8.2
139:324
actual City costs exceed the amount deposited, the operator shall pay the
excess to the City within 10 days after being so notified.
§ 139-9. Revocation.
The City Administrator may revoke the permit at any time prior to the date
of the scheduled event if the operator has failed to comply with any of the
commitments made in the application, or the requirements of this chapter,
or if the operator has failed to secure any other license or permit required
by the City of Saco or any other government agency in order to hold the
mass gathering on the proposed site. Except in cases of emergency, the City
Administrator shall revoke a permit only after giving notice to the operator
of the reasons for the proposed revocation and providing an opportunity
to be heard with respect thereto. Written notice of the reasons for the
revocation shall be delivered to the operator or his or her agent, personally
or by expedited mail service.
§ 139-10. Limitations on permits.
No more than one permit under this chapter shall be issued to any single
operator or group, within any sixty-day period, for an event for which more
than 1,000 persons are reasonably expected to attend.
§ 139-11. Victualers/vendors.
Chapter 143
MOBILE HOMES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 73.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 87.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 102.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 106.
Recreational vehicles — See Ch. 169.
A. No operator will permit, encourage or suffer any person, firm, business,
family or corporation from selling or merchandising clothes, food,
goods, second-hand merchandise, etc., at a mass gathering unless that
person, firm, business, family or corporation has secured a vendor or
victualer's license as required by City ordinance in Chapter 104; but to
do so is a violation of this chapter.
B. Any vendor or victualer found at a mass gathering without license to so
operate will be removed by the police from the mass gathering, and the
operator will be cited for violation of this chapter.
§ 139-8.2 MOBILE HOMES § 143-1
143:325
§ 143-1. Purpose.
The purpose of these standards is to establish a condition of safety that will
allow the home to perform in a manner that will greatly reduce hazards that
present an imminent and unreasonable risk of death or serious personal
injury.
§ 143-2. Applicability.
These standards shall apply to all manufactured housing built before June
15, 1976, or not built according to the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, United States Code, Title
42, Chapter 70, to be located on an individual lot or in a mobile home park
in the City of Saco after August 20, 1990, the date of passage of this chapter.
§ 143-3. Exit facilities.
A. Exterior doors.
(1) Required egress doors shall be located where a lockable interior
door must be used in order to exit.
(2) Homes shall have a minimum of two exterior doors not less than 12
feet from each other as measured in any straight line direction,
regardless of the length of the travel between doors. One of the
required exit doors must be accessible from the doorway of each
bedroom without traveling more than 35 feet.
(3) All exterior swinging doors shall provide a minimum clear opening
28 inches wide by 74 inches high. All exterior sliding glass doors
shall provide a minimum clear opening 28 inches wide by 72 inches
high. Locks shall not require the use of a key for operation from the
inside.
B. Egress windows and devices. Homes shall have the following
emergency egress facilities:
(1) Every room designed expressly for sleeping purposes, unless it has
an exit door, shall have at least one window or approved exit device.
If an exit window or device is installed, it shall be listed in
accordance with procedures and requirements of AAMA
1704-1985.
(2) The bottom of the window opening shall not be more than 44 inches
above the floor.
(3) Locks, latches, operating handles, tabs and any other window,
screen or storm window devices which need to be operated in order
to permit exiting shall not be located in excess of 54 inches from
the finished floor.
§ 143-1 SACO CITY CODE § 143-4
143:326
§ 143-4. Interior doors.
Each interior door, when provided with a privacy lock, shall have a privacy
lock that has an emergency release on the outside to permit entry when the
lock has been locked by a locking knob, lever, button or other locking device
on the inside.
§ 143-5. Smoke detectors.
§ 143-6. Flame spread.
A. At least one smoke detector (which may be a single-station alarm
device) shall be installed in the home in the following locations: A
smoke detector shall be installed on any wall in the hallway or space
communicating with each bedroom area between the living area and
first bedroom door, unless a door separates the living area from the
bedroom area, in which case the detector shall be installed on the living
area side as close to the door as practical. Homes having bedroom
areas separated by any one or a combination of communication areas,
such as a kitchen, dining room, living room or family room (but not a
bathroom or utility room), shall have at least one detector protecting
each bedroom area.
B. When located in hallways, the detector shall be between the return air
intake and the living area.
C. The smoke detector shall not be placed in a location which impairs its
effectiveness.
D. Smoke detectors shall be labeled as conforming to the requirements of
Underwriters' Laboratory Standard No. 217, Third Edition, 1985, as
amended through October 8, 1985, for single- and multiple-station
smoke detectors.
E. Each smoke detector shall be installed in accordance with its listing.
The top of the detector shall be located on a wall, four inches to 12
inches below the ceiling. However, when a detector is mounted on an
interior wall below a sloped ceiling, it shall be located four inches to 12
inches below the intersection on the connecting exterior wall and the
sloping ceiling (cathedral ceiling). The required detector(s) shall be
attached to an electrical outlet box, and the detector shall be connected
by permanent wiring method into a general electrical circuit. There
shall be no switches in the circuit to the detector between the
overcurrent protection device protecting the branch circuit and the
detector. The smoke detector shall not be placed on the same branch
circuit of any circuit protected by a ground fault circuit interrupter.
A. Ceiling interior finish shall not have a flame-spread rating exceeding
75.
B. Walls and ceilings adjacent to or enclosing a furnace or water heater
shall have an interior finish with a flame-spread rating not exceeding
§ 143-4 MOBILE HOMES § 143-6
143:327
§ 143-7. Kitchen cabinets.
§ 143-8. Carpeting.
Carpeting shall not be used in a space or compartment designed to contain
only a furnace and/or water heater. Carpeting may be installed in other
areas where a furnace or water heater is installed, provided that it is not
located under the furnace or water heater.
§ 143-9. Roofs added after construction.
All homes with roofs added after construction will require a professional
engineer to inspect the roof to determine that the roof and home can
withstand the rigors of a State of Maine winter or wind uplifts that may
occur.
25. Sealants and other trim material two inches or less in width used
to finish adjacent surfaces within this space are exempt if supported
by framing members or by materials having a flame-spread rating not
exceeding 25.
C. Exposed interior finishes adjacent to the cooking range shall have a
flame-spread rating not exceeding 50.
D. Kitchen cabinet doors, countertops, backsplashes, exposed bottoms and
end panels shall have a flame-spread rating not exceeding 200.
E. Finish surfaces of plastic bathtubs, shower units and tub or shower
doors shall not exceed a flame-spread rating of 200.
F. No burner of a surface cooking unit shall be closer than 12 horizontal
inches to a window or an exterior door.
A. The bottom and sides of combustible kitchen cabinets over cooking
ranges to a horizontal distance of six inches from the outside edge of
the cooking range shall be protected with at least five-sixteenths-inchthick
gypsum board or equivalent limited combustible material. Oneinch
nominal framing members and trim are exempted from this
requirement. The cabinet area over the cooking range or cooking tops
shall be protected by a metal hood with not less than a three-inch
eyebrow projecting horizontally from the front cabinet face. The fivesixteenths-
inch-thick gypsum board or equivalent material which is
above the top of the hood may be supported by the hood. A threeeighths-
inch enclosed air space shall be provided between the bottom
surface of the cabinet and the gypsum board or equivalent material.
The hood shall be at least as wide as the cooking range.
B. The metal hood will not be required if there is an oven installed
between the cabinet and the range.
C. Ranges shall have a vertical clearance above the cooking top of not less
than 24 inches to the bottom of combustible cabinets.
§ 143-6 SACO CITY CODE § 143-10
143:328
§ 143-10. Heating and fuel system.
A person holding a master license issued by the State of Maine Oil and
Solid Fuel Examining Board shall inspect and certify that the heating and
fuel system meets the requirements of NFPA 31, Installation of Oil-Burning
Equipment, as adopted by that Board, or other applicable standards.
§ 143-11. Electrical system.
A person holding a master license issued by the State of Maine Electricians
Examining Board shall inspect and certify that the electrical system is safe
and meets the National Electrical Code in effect at the time the home was
constructed.
Chapter 147
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING UNITS
§ 143-10 MOBILE HOMES § 143-11
143:329

ARTICLE I
Registration and Inspections
[Adopted 7-17-2017]
§ 147-1. Purpose.
The City intends to hold owners of multifamily dwellings accountable and
responsible for the maintenance of safe living conditions by establishing
a multifamily dwelling unit registration and inspections program. Many
owners form limited liability companies and other various forms of
proprietorships in order to have undisclosed and unidentifiable principals.
Many individuals no longer have landlines and communicate mainly with
cell phones which are mostly unlisted. This makes the effort to locate
the person(s) who owns the property extremely difficult and very time
consuming. By requiring the disclosure of ownership, it provides a
transparency to the citizens of Saco and enables City officials to perform
their duties. The City intends to improve safety and sanitary living
conditions for the residents of multifamily dwellings by establishing a
program of regular inspections of such properties through its Code
Enforcement Office. The City seeks to assure properties come into
compliance with current life safety codes and standards, and that owners
are alerted to any detrimental conditions that could place tenants at risk.
The City intends to work cooperatively and proactively with owners of
such properties by setting a protocol for regular inspections, as well as
providing owners with clear standards for maintenance of their properties.
The City recognizes the public safety benefits of centrally monitored fire
alarm systems and sprinkler systems by offering discounts for buildings that
contain such systems.
§ 147-2. Findings.
Multifamily properties comprise almost 25% of the housing stock in the City
of Saco, and it is estimated that over 20% of City residents live within one
of these units. Typically, these properties are older and were built prior to
the enactment of today's rigorous life safety codes. In addition, the City
does not currently have a regular inspection program for such properties.
Based on various risk factors such as the age of the existing housing stock,
the housing stock consisting of mainly wood frame construction and the
lack of a proactive inspection program make the residents vulnerable to a
significant life safety event. Fires in nearby communities, where multiple
fatalities have occurred, affirm the importance of periodic safety
inspections for these types of properties.
§ 147-3. Authority.
This proposed article to be adopted pursuant to the City's home rule
authority pursuant to the Maine Constitution and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001 et
seq.
§ 147-1 MOBILE HOMES § 147-4
143:331
§ 147-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. Any portion of a single-family
home, condominium, or apartment that is rented or is available to rent to an
individual or individuals who are not the owners is a rental unit. Dwelling
units, rooming units, and sleeping units as defined in the International
Property Maintenance Code, as referenced in the City of Saco Chapter 163,
are rental units. Dwelling units, rooming units and sleeping units shall be
used synonymously.
LIFE SAFETY INSPECTION — An inspection performed by a Code
Enforcement Officer and/or Fire Official to evaluate the building for
compliance with current life/fire safety standards and compliance with the
International Property Maintenance Code.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A building containing three or more dwelling
units located all within the same structure and under the same ownership.
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT FIRM — Any company responsible for the
management of a multifamily dwelling unit and which has access and
control over the entire premises.
PROPERTY MANAGER — Any individual responsible for the management of
a multifamily dwelling unit and who has access and control over the entire
premises.
§ 147-5. Multifamily dwelling unit ownership/registration.
A. Owner(s) of a multifamily dwelling building shall register their
ownership with the City. Registrations are due October 1 of each
calendar year or within 30 days of purchase of the property. If a new
owner registers for the first time after October 31, the annual
registration fee will be prorated on a monthly basis. If a new owner
registers mid-month, they will not be charged for the month in which
they register. The registration is valid through September 30 of the
following year or September 30 of the year in which they register. All
registrations must be renewed by October 1 of every year. The fee set
forth below is per dwelling unit.
B. Registrations will be done through the Code Enforcement Office. All
fees shall be made payable to the City of Saco and shall be processed at
the submission of the registration.
C. In the event the owner uses a property management firm or has a
property manager, the owner shall provide the property manager's or
property management firm's contact information at the time of
registration. If the property management changes during the twelve-
§ 147-4 SACO CITY CODE § 147-5
143:332
§ 147-6. Inspections.
month registration period, the owner shall renotify the City within 30
days of the date of the change.
D. The annual registration and inspection fee is established in the fee
table.
E. Registration and renewal fee discounts. In recognition that there are
certain actions that owners of rental units may take that reduce the risk
to safety and decrease the financial burden upon the City, one of the
following discounts to the registration fee and renewal fee are
available. Discount shall be cumulative for buildings that have both a
sprinkler system and centrally monitored fire alarm systems.
(1) A discount of $15 for each rental unit within a fully sprinklered
building as verified by a testing report, maintenance report or a
maintenance contract, which shall be provided at the time of
registration and upon each renewal;
(2) A discount of $15 for each rental unit within a building with a
centrally monitored fire alarm system as verified by Fire
Department logs or an alarm contract, which shall be provided at
the time of registration and upon each renewal.
(3) Buildings that are publicly funded and have been subject to and
passed a Housing and Urban Development Uniform Physical
Condition Standard (UPCS) inspection within the preceding year as
verified by the UPCS inspection report, which shall be provided at
the time of registration and upon each renewal; or has been subject
to and passed a Housing and Urban Development Housing Quality
Standard (HQS) inspection within the preceding year as verified by
the HQS inspection report, which shall be provided at the time of
registration and upon each renewal shall pay a registration of $10
per unit.
(4) Newly constructed multifamily dwelling buildings shall be exempt
from inspection requirements for five years from the date of
issuance of the certificate of occupancy and shall pay a yearly
registration fee of $10 per unit for the first five years.
A. Life safety inspections for all multifamilies shall be completed every five
years. The owner will be notified at the time of registration if the
inspection will be completed that year, or a later year. Once a property
has been inspected, it will not be reinspected for five years thereafter
unless there is just cause.
B. Upon two weeks of notice, the owner shall grant the Code Enforcement
Officer full access to the property during the life safety inspection. This
shall include, but not be limited to, each dwelling unit, all common
areas, all basements, all outbuildings, and any other area of the
property the Code Enforcement Officer deems necessary to inspect.
§ 147-5 MOBILE HOMES § 147-7
143:333
§ 147-7. Violations and enforcement.
§ 147-8. When effective.
The provisions of this article shall become effective 30 days after its
enactment.
§ 147-9. Severability.
If any part or provision of this article or the application thereof to any
person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the article,
including the application of such part or provision to other persons or
circumstances, shall not be affected thereby and shall continue in full force
and effect. To this end, provisions of this article are severable.
A. The Code Enforcement Office shall have the primary responsibility for
enforcement of this article. If the Code Enforcement Officer, or his/her
designee(s), determines that a violation of this article has occurred, he
or she shall send a notice to the property owner indicating a violation
exists, and a time frame for remediation shall be established.
Subsequent violations of this article shall be subject to the penalties set
forth below.
B. Violations are as follows:
(1) Failure to register by October 1 shall result in a fee of $250
assessed for each calendar day after that date until such time the
registration fee and all penalty fees are paid in full.
(2) Failure to update property management/owner contact information
shall result in a fee of $250 for each calendar day after the date of
the change until such time the registration fee and all penalty fees
are paid in full.
(3) Providing false information shall result in a fee of $1,000 for each
calendar day after such information was provided until such time
the registration fee and all penalty fees are paid in full.
(4) Renting a unit that has not been registered shall result in a fee of
$250 for each calendar day after the unit was rented until such
time the registration fee and all penalty fees are paid in full.
§ 147-7 SACO CITY CODE § 147-9
143:334
Chapter 149
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 57.
Animals — See Ch. 64.
Building construction — See Ch. 73.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 156.
Recreational vehicles — See Ch. 169.
Solid waste collection — See Ch. 181, Art. I.
Street excavations — See Ch. 186, Art. I.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 211.
§ 149-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that citizens are not disturbed by
loud or annoying noises that prevent the peaceful enjoyment of routine and
normal activities.
§ 149-2. Loud or unusual noises.
No person shall, in any area which includes residential land uses (including
hotels and motels), make, continue or cause to be made or continued any
loud or unusual noises which shall interfere with normal activities or annoy,
disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of
others. Loud or unusual noises shall include but not be limited to:
§ 149-3. Construction and maintenance activities. [Amended
12-1-2008]
A. The sounding of any horn or signaling device, except as a danger
warning.
B. The playing of any machine or device for the production or
reproduction of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet
and comfort of neighboring inhabitants and passersby.
C. The use of any loudspeaker or amplifier for the purpose of commercial
advertising or attraction of the public to a specific building or for the
purpose of communication within a business building.
D. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing.
A. Construction and maintenance activities shall be restricted to the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. within 500 feet of any building used for
residential, hospital or nursing home purposes except as provided in
§ 149-5.
B. Construction activities shall include but not be limited to the following:
§ 147-9 MOBILE HOMES § 149-3
143:335
§ 149-4. Waste collection. [Amended 8-22-2005; 12-1-2008]
§ 149-5. Exemptions. [Added 12-1-200858]
Exemptions are as follows:
(1) The use or operation of power or heavy equipment in connection
with road, street or bridge construction, reconstruction or repair.
(2) The use or operation of power or heavy equipment in connection
with the installation or repair of utility lines, pipes, wires or cables.
(3) The use or operation of power or heavy equipment in connection
with the construction of buildings, including, specifically,
excavations for foundations or landscaping work of any kind.
(4) The renovation, repair, remodeling or demolition of any existing
building or structure.
A. Commercial waste collection shall be restricted to the hours between
6:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
B. Residential waste collection shall be restricted to the hours between
6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
A. Situations where the Public Works Department determines that the
construction activity is of a unique character which cannot reasonably
be completed or performed during the permitted hours and which is not
of a recurring nature, provided that prior to engaging in such activity
the contractor or his representative gives notice to the Director of
Public Works of the time and scope of such proposed activity.
B. Noise generated by private snow plowing and removal equipment.
C. Noise from domestic power equipment, such as but not limited to power
saws, sanders, grinder, lawn and garden tools or similar devices
operated during normal work hours.
D. The noises of safety signals, warning devices, emergency pressure
relief valves, and any other emergency activity.
E. Timber harvesting (felling trees and removing logs from the woods)
during normal work hours.
F. Noise generated by any construction or demolition equipment which is
operated during normal work hours.
G. Emergency construction or repair work by the federal and state entities
or public utilities is exempted.
58.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former §§ 149-5 and 149-6 as §§ 149-6 and
149-7, respectively.
§ 149-3 SACO CITY CODE § 149-5
143:336
§ 149-6. Recreational vehicles. [Amended 12-1-2008]
Use of recreational vehicles, which shall include but not be limited to
all-terrain vehicles, snowmobiles and dirt bikes, in areas which include
residential uses shall be restricted to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
§ 149-7. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Chapter 156
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses — See Ch. 132. Noise — See Ch. 149.
H. Noise created by municipal vehicles or their agents engaged in
municipal operations, including but not limited to plowing, the removal
of snow, street cleaning, and painting activities.
I. Noise generated by the curbside collection of municipal waste and
recycling may be extended beyond 8:00 p.m. with approval of the
Director of Public Works or his or her designee with just cause.
Additionally, the Director of Public Works may allow the start of
collection earlier than 6:00 a.m., during periods of extraordinary
accumulation of curbside waste and recycling material, including, but
not limited to, holiday overflow allowances.
J. Noise created by any recreational activities which are permitted by law
and for which a license or permit has been granted by the City,
including, but not limited to, parades, sporting events, concerts, and
fireworks displays.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer and/or
the Police Department.
B. Violators of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $100 per
occurrence. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a
separate occurrence.
§ 149-5 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 149-7
156:337

ARTICLE I
Home Solicitation Sales
[Adopted 5-1-1995 as Ch. V, Sec. 5-11, of the 1994 Code]
§ 156-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HOME SOLICITATION SALE — A consumer sale or credit sale of goods
other than farm equipment, or services in which the seller or a person
acting for him engages in a personal solicitation of the sale at a residence,
if the buyer's agreement or offer to purchase is there given to the seller or
a person acting for him.
§ 156-2. Permit required.
A seller or any person in his behalf shall not sell or offer for sale goods,
wares and merchandise without a written permit from the Police Chief of
the City. The permit shall be carried by the seller while engaging in home
solicitation sales.
§ 156-3. Application for permit.
A. Applications for permits for home solicitation shall be made to the Chief
of Police, shall be in writing and shall contain the following information:
(1) The name and physical description of the applicant.
(2) The applicant's address.
(3) A brief description of the nature of the business to be conducted
and the goods sold.
(4) If the applicant is employed, the name and address of the employer,
together with credentials establishing exact relationship.
(5) The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
(6) If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with
the Maine state vehicle license number or other means of
identification.
(7) A sample of an agreement informing the buyer of his right to
cancel, as required by 9-A M.R.S.A. § 3.503. A sample of this
agreement is contained in § 156-10.
(8) Such other information as the Chief of Police may deem necessary
for the proper police protection of the City.
B. If the applicant is unknown to the Police Chief, the applicant shall be
fingerprinted and shall supply the Chief of Police with two photographs
of the applicant, which shall be two inches by two inches, showing the
§ 156-1 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 156-3
156:339
§ 156-4. Fees. [Amended 4-7-2003]
§ 156-5. Exceptions.
The following are excepted from the licensing requirement:
§ 156-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to
a fine of not more than $100 for each violation.
§ 156-7. Revocation of permit.
The Police Chief may revoke a permit if the holder of the permit engages
in disorderly conduct, as defined by 17-A M.R.S.A. § 501, or harassment, as
defined by 18-A M.R.S.A. § 506-A, while in the course of his/her business.
§ 156-8. Sample permit application.
Sample Permit Application I, _________________________, do hereby make
application for a permit for home solicitation sales in the City of Saco in
compliance with the ordinances of such City.
Street address: ________________________ City: ______________ State:
Age: ________ Weight: ________ Height: ________ Color of hair: ________ Sex:
Length of time permit is desired:
Name of firm or corporation represented:
head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing
manner.
A. The fee for home solicitation permits per year shall be established by
the City Council after a public hearing.
B. Additional licenses may be issued to employees of a license holder upon
the payment per year for each employee as established by the City
Council after a public hearing and after approval and investigation by
the Chief of Police.
A. Charitable, religious, educational, community, recreational or similar
nonprofit organizations, provided that the following criteria are met:
(1) The person doing the actual selling or soliciting shall not receive
any financial compensation for doing so.
(2) If goods are offered for sale, the price of the goods shall be no more
than $10 retail.
B. Bona fide deliveries of goods, wares, merchandise or food made on a
regular route to regular customers.
C. Persons engaging in the sale of food.
§ 156-3 SACO CITY CODE § 156-8
156:340
Address: __________________ Business phone: ____________ Home phone:
Description of business:
Number of vehicles to be operated:
Description of vehicle(s) to be operated and license plate number(s):
Method of distribution:
Kind of service to be performed:
(Attach 2 x 2 photograph of applicant)
(Signature of applicant)
§ 156-9. Sample permit.
Sample Permit
Date:
__________________________ is authorized to engage in home solicitation
(Name of peddler)
sales in Saco for the year _____________________.
(Chief of Police)
§ 156-10. Sample right-to-cancellation agreement.
Sample Right-To-Cancellation Agreement
Buyer's Right to Cancel
(9-A M.R.S.A. § 3.503)
If this agreement was solicited at your residence and you do not want the
goods or service, you may cancel this agreement by mailing a notice to
the seller. The notice must say that you do not want the goods or service
and must be mailed before midnight of ___________________________________
(stated date three days from date of sale), when cancellation right lapses.
The notice must be mailed to:
(Name and mailing address of seller)
If you cancel by this date, the seller may not keep any of your cash down
payment.
(Signature of buyer)
§ 156-8 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 156-10
156:341

ARTICLE II
Tag Days
[Adopted 5-1-1995]
§ 156-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
IDENTIFICATION — Persons securing the permit shall produce means of
identification that proves some form of association with the organization,
as well as place of residency. Each team or organization shall receive
permission from a business owner to stand in front of his or her
establishment.
SEASON — The calendar period of May 1 through October 15 of each year.
TAG — Each group soliciting donations shall provide a tag, sticker, pin or
some other marker to individual givers as a means of identification and
recognition.
TAG DAY — A single day, preferably Saturday, set aside for fund-raising
activities. Each day shall be designated and reserved for an organization,
sponsored recreation team or groups representing a particular sport or
league. A maximum of 10 days may be assigned by the City Clerk. Saco
youth organizations shall have preference in choosing dates.
§ 156-12. Permit required; fee. [Amended 4-7-2003]
Each organization, group or team wishing to hold a fund-raising event or
activity for the purpose of soliciting donations shall first obtain from the
City a special Tag Day permit. The fee for this permit for all residents/
organizations and nonresidents/organizations shall be established by the
City Council after a public hearing. The special permit shall be issued for
a particular calendar date and shall only be valid for that single day. The
scheduling shall be done by the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall notify the
Police Department upon issuance of the special Tag Day permit.
§ 156-13. Suspension or revocation of permit.
The City Clerk may suspend or revoke any Tag Day permit if the
municipality receives repeated citizen complaints of permit violations.
Future requests for special permits may also be denied for a period of 30
days in cases where persons or organizations misrepresent their eligibility.
§ 156-14. Annual review.
The City Council shall review and establish permit fees on an annual basis.
Additional modifications, such as the length of the season and maximum
days designated as Tag Days, shall be reviewed annually by the City
Council.
§ 156-11 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 156-14
156:343
Chapter 159
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 102. Licenses — See Ch. 132.
§ 159-1. Permit required for sale and storage; hearing.
§ 159-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which engages in this business or in
the erection of such tanks without first obtaining the permit herein provided
for or, upon the granting of the permit, engages in the business in any other
manner than as provided by the conditions and regulations attached thereto
shall be punished by a fine of not less than $20 nor more than $100 for each
day so engaged in business.
Chapter 160
PROHIBITED PRODUCTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 181.
A. Any person, firm or corporation about to engage in the sale of gasoline,
naphtha, benzine or other explosive petroleum products in the City in
which it is desired to erect tanks for the storage of such product shall,
before engaging in said business and before locating said tanks to be
used in the storage of such products, make written application to the
City Council for a permit to engage in this business and to erect the
tanks.
B. Upon the filing of the application, the City Council shall fix upon a time
for a hearing thereon and shall give notice thereof to all persons
interested by posting copies of the notice attested by the City Clerk
seven days, at least, before the day of the hearing; one at the City
building, one at the post office and one at the fire station, being three
public places in the City of Saco that any person may appear and object
thereto if he shall have cause; and after hearing the applicant and all
persons objecting thereto, the City Council shall determine whether or
not the permit shall be granted and, if granted, shall attach thereto
such conditions and regulations as in the judgment of the City Council
shall be deemed proper.
§ 156-14 SACO CITY CODE § 159-2
156:344
ARTICLE I
Polystyrene Foam Containers
[Adopted 9-19-2016]
§ 160-1. Definitions.
As used in this article the following terms have the following meanings:
FOOD PACKAGER — Any person who places meat, eggs, bakery products,
or other food in packaging materials for the purpose of retail sale of those
products.
POLYSTYRENE FOAM — Includes blown polystyrene and expanded and
extruded foams (sometimes referred to as "Styrofoam®," a Dow Chemical
Company trademarked form of polystyrene foam insulation) which are
thermoplastic petrochemical materials utilizing a styrene monomer and
processed by any number of techniques, including, but not limited to,
fusion of polymer spheres (expandable bead polystyrene), injection molding,
foam molding, and extrusion blow molding (extruded foam polystyrene).
Polystyrene foam is generally used to make cups, bowls, plates, trays,
clamshell containers, meat trays, and egg cartons. For the purposes of this
chapter, the term "polystyrene" shall not include clear polystyrene known
as "oriented polystyrene."
PREPARED FOOD — Food or beverages that are served at the food vendor's
location having been previously prepared elsewhere or are prepared at the
vendor's location by cooking, chopping, slicing, mixing, brewing, freezing
or squeezing. "Prepared food" does not mean raw, uncooked meat or eggs.
Prepared food may be eaten either on or off premises.
RETAIL VENDOR — Any person, restaurant, store, shop, sales outlet or
other establishment, including, without limitation, a grocery store,
convenience store, or a delicatessen.
§ 160-2. Prohibitions.
A. No retail vendor shall serve or sell prepared food or drinks in
polystyrene foam containers and shall not package consumable liquids,
meat, eggs, bakery products or other food or food products in
polystyrene foam containers.
B. No party shall package consumable liquids, meat, eggs, bakery
products or other food or food products in polystyrene foam containers
for sale or use in the City.
C. No retail vendor that sells food products or consumable liquids at retail
shall use polystyrene foam food or beverage containers.
D. The City shall not use polystyrene foam food or beverage containers at
any City facility or City-sponsored event.
E. No City department or facility shall purchase or acquire polystyrene
foam food or beverage containers.
§ 160-1 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 160-2
156:345
§ 160-3. Exemptions.
§ 160-4. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Officer or his/her designee(s), or other official
designated by the City Administrator shall have the primary responsibility
for enforcement of this chapter. If the Code Enforcement Officer or his/
her designee(s), or other official designated by the City Administrator,
determine(s) that a violation of this article has occurred, he/she shall issue
a written warning notice to the food vendor that a violation has occurred.
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be as set forth in the Master
Schedule of Revenues, Charges, Fees and Fines, Appendix A to this
Municipal Code of Ordinances.59
§ 160-5. Effective date.
Enforcement of this article shall begin on October 19, 2016.
§ 160-6. Severability.
If any part or provision of this article or the application thereof to any
person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this article,
including the application of such part or provision to other persons or
F. All parties who contract with the City are prohibited from using
polystyrene foam food and beverage containers in, on, or within City
facilities and projects.
A. The sale and packaging of raw and live seafood is exempt from the
provisions of this chapter.
B. Retail vendors and food packagers that are currently existing or are
established in the City by the effective date of this article will be
exempted from the provisions of this article prohibiting the use of
polystyrene foam for one year, absent a showing of undue hardship.
Undue hardship includes, but is not limited to, situations unique to the
food vendor and not generally applicable to other persons in similar
circumstances. In no event may a hardship extension run longer than
two years in total.
C. Retail vendors, food packagers, City departments, City facilities, and
contractors shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter in a
situation deemed by the City Administrator to be an emergency for the
preservation of the public peace, health, or safety.
D. Retail vendors that receive items prepackaged in polystyrene foam food
or beverage containers that have been packaged outside the City of
Saco may resell such items without repacking those items and such use
or sale shall not constitute a violation of this article.
59.Editor's Note: The current schedule is on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 160-2 SACO CITY CODE § 160-6
156:346
circumstances, shall not be affected thereby, and shall continue in full force
and effect. To this end, provisions of this article are severable.
§ 160-6 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 160-6
156:347
Chapter 161
PROPERTY ASSESSED CLEAN ENERGY PROGRAM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building energy conservation — See Ch. 74.
§ 161-1. Purpose; statutory authority.
§ 161-2. Title; definitions.
A. By and through this chapter, the City of Saco declares as its public
purpose the establishment of a municipal program to enable its citizens
to participate in a property assessed clean energy (PACE) program so
that owners of qualifying property can access financing for energysaving
improvements to their properties located in the City The City
declares its purpose and the provisions of this chapter to be in
conformity with federal and state laws.
B. Enabling legislation. The City enacts this chapter pursuant to 35-A
M.R.S.A. § 10151, et seq.
A. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Saco
Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) Ordinance" (the Ordinance).
B. Definitions. Except as specifically defined below, words and phrases
used in this chapter shall have their customary meanings; as used in
this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENERGY-SAVING IMPROVEMENT — An improvement to qualifying
property that is new and permanently affixed to qualifying property and
that:
Will result in increased energy efficiency and substantially reduced
energy use and:
Meets or exceeds applicable United States Environmental
Protection Agency and United States Department of Energy,
Energy Star program or similar energy efficiency standards
established or approved by the Trust; or
(a)
Involves air sealing, insulating, and other energy efficiency
improvements of residential, commercial or industrial property
in a manner approved by the Trust; or
(b)
(1)
Involves a renewable energy installation or an electric thermal
storage system that meets or exceeds standards established or
approved by the Trust.
(2)
§ 160-6 SACO CITY CODE § 161-2
156:348
§ 161-3. Program established.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Saco.
PACE AGREEMENT — An agreement between the owner of qualifying
property and the municipality that authorizes the creation of a PACE
mortgage on qualifying property and that is approved in writing by all
owners of the qualifying property at the time of the agreement, other
than mortgage holders.
PACE ASSESSMENT — An assessment made against qualifying
property to repay a PACE loan.
PACE DISTRICT — The area within which the municipality establishes
a PACE program hereunder, which is all that area within the
municipality's boundaries.
PACE LOAN — A loan, secured by a PACE mortgage, made to the
owner(s) of a qualifying property pursuant to a PACE program to fund
energy-saving improvements.
PACE MORTGAGE — A mortgage securing a loan made pursuant to
a PACE program to fund energy-saving improvements on qualifying
property.
PACE PROGRAM — A program established under state statute by the
Trust or a municipality under which property owners can finance
energy-savings improvements on qualifying property.
QUALIFYING PROPERTY — Real property located in the PACE District
of the municipality.
RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATION — A fixture, product, system,
device or interacting group of devices installed behind the meter at
a qualifying property, or on contiguous property under common
ownership, that produces energy or heat from renewable sources,
including, but not limited to, photovoltaic systems, solar thermal
systems, biomass systems, landfill gas to energy systems, geothermal
systems, wind systems, wood pellet systems and any other systems
eligible for funding under federal qualified energy conservation bonds
or federal clean renewable energy bonds.
TRUST — The Efficiency Maine Trust established in 35-A M.R.S.A.
§ 10103 and/or its agent(s), if any.
A. Establishment; funding. The City of Saco hereby establishes a PACE
program allowing owners of qualifying property located in the PACE
District who so choose to access financing for energy-saving
improvements to their property through PACE loans. PACE loan funds
may come from a variety of sources. To the extent that PACE loan funds
are made available from the Trust, these are made available in
municipalities that:
(1) Adopt a PACE ordinance;
§ 161-2 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 161-3
156:349
§ 161-4. Conformity with other requirements.
§ 161-5. Program administration; municipal liability.
(2) Adopt and implement a local public outreach and education plan;
(3) Administer the functions of a PACE program, including, but not
limited to, entering into PACE agreements with owners of
qualifying property and collecting PACE assessments, all in
accordance with the PACE Act and the Trust's rules and
regulations; and
(4) Require that participants in the PACE program comply with
requirements for the Home Energy Savings Program administered
by the Trust.
B. Amendment to PACE program. In addition, the City of Saco may from
time to time amend this chapter to use any other funding sources made
available to it or appropriated by it for the express purpose of its PACE
program, and the municipality shall be responsible for administration of
loans made from those other funding sources.
A. Standards adopted; rules promulgated; model documents. If the Trust
or other state or federal agency adopts standards, promulgates rules, or
establishes model documents subsequent to the City's adoption of this
chapter and those standards, rules or model documents substantially
conflict with this chapter and/or with the City's manner of participation
in the PACE program, the City shall take necessary steps to conform
this chapter and/or its manner of participation in the PACE program to
those standards, rules, or model documents.
A. Program administration.
(1) PACE administration. The municipality will administer its PACE
program pursuant to and consistent with the PACE Act, 35-A
M.R.S.A. § 10151, et seq. The City's administration of its PACE
program shall include the following:
(a) The City will enter into PACE agreements with owners of
qualifying property in the City's PACE District;
(b) The City, or its agent, will create and record a notice of the
PACE agreement in the appropriate County Registry of Deeds
to create a PACE mortgage;
(c) The City, or its agent, will disburse the PACE loan to the
property owner;
(d) The City, or its agent, will send PACE assessment statements
with payment deadlines to the property owner;
(e) The City, or its agent, will be responsible for collection of the
PACE assessments;
§ 161-3 SACO CITY CODE § 161-5
156:350
(f) The City, or its agent, will record any lien, if needed, due to
nonpayment of the PACE assessment;
(g) The City, or its agent on behalf of the City, promptly shall
record the discharges of PACE mortgages upon full payment of
the PACE loan.
(2) PACE program.
(a) The City's PACE program shall be consistent with any terms
and conditions the Trust may establish by rule under 35-A
M.R.S.A. § 10154(4).
(b) As required by 35-A M.R.S.A. § 10155(3), federal laws and
regulations regarding the privacy of consumer information
apply to all consumer financial information obtained by the
Trust or municipality in implementing its PACE program.
(3) PACE agreement.
(a) As required by 35-A M.R.S.A. § 10155(1), a PACE agreement
entered into by the municipality pursuant to its PACE program
must comply with underwriting requirements established by
rule by the Trust.
(b) As required by 35-A M.R.S.A. § 10155(2), a PACE agreement
entered into by the municipality pursuant to its PACE program
must provide consumer disclosure consistent with the
principles of truth in lending as specified in rules adopted by
the Trust.
(c) As required by 35-A M.R.S.A. § 10157(2), a PACE agreement
entered into by the municipality pursuant to its PACE program
shall provide that all rights related to carbon emissions
reductions resulting from those improvements are deemed to
be assigned by the property owner to the Trust and are held by
the Trust.
(4) Adoption of education and outreach program. In conjunction with
adopting this chapter, the municipality shall adopt and implement
an education and outreach program so that citizens of the
municipality are made aware of home energy-saving opportunities,
including the opportunity to finance energy saving improvements
with a PACE loan.
(5) Assessments not a tax. PACE assessments do not constitute a tax
but may be assessed and collected by the municipality in any
manner allowed under the PACE program and consistent with
applicable law.
(6) PACE mortgages and PACE assessments. PACE mortgages shall be
recorded and PACE assessments shall be assessed and collected as
provided in 35-A M.R.S.A. § 10156.
§ 161-5 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 161-5
156:351
Chapter 163
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 73.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 102.
Solid waste — See Ch. 181.
§ 163-1. Title. [Amended 5-3-2004; 3-5-2012]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "International Property
Maintenance Code/2009 Edition."
§ 163-2. Adoption of standards by reference. [Amended 5-3-2004]
B. Liability of municipal officials; liability of municipality.
(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary,
municipal officers and municipal officials, including, without
limitation, tax assessors and tax collectors, are not personally liable
to the Trust or to any other person for claims, of whatever kind or
nature, under or related to a PACE program, including, without
limitation, claims for or related to uncollected PACE assessments.
(2) Other than the fulfillment of its obligations specified in a PACE
administration contract with the Trust entered into under
Subsection A(1) above, a municipality has no liability to a property
owner for or related to energy savings improvements financed
under a PACE program.
A. Adoption of the International Property Maintenance Code. An
ordinance establishing the minimum regulations governing the
conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by
providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other
physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are
safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of
buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the
demolition of such structures; known as the "Property Maintenance
Code"; be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Saco as follows;
B. A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk of the City of Saco, being marked and designated as “The
International Property Maintenance Code, 2009" as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of the City of Saco, in the State of Maine; for control
of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property
Maintenance Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part
§ 161-5 SACO CITY CODE § 163-2
156:352
§ 163-3. Additions, insertions and changes. [Amended 5-3-2004;
3-5-2012]
Additions, insertions and changes to the International Property
Maintenance Code/2009 are set out below:
hereof, as if fully set out in the chapter, with the additions, deletions and
changes prescribed in § 163-3 of this chapter. [Amended 3-5-2012]
A. Section 101.1, Title (page 1, second line): insert: "The City of Saco."
B. Section 103.5, Fees (page 2): Delete the entire section.
C. Section 106.4, Penalties (page 3): delete everything after the word
"Penalty" and insert "See Code of the City of Saco, Chapter 163,
§ 163-6."
D. Section 111.2, Membership of board (page 6): Delete "a minimum of
three members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on
matters pertaining to property maintenance and who are not employees
of the jurisdiction." and replace with "the same body that makes up the
Saco City Council and shall operate under the same rules of order it has
adopted. The Chair of the Board shall be the Mayor, or, in his absence, a
member of the Council selected by its own membership." Delete
Sections 111.2.1 through 111.2.5 in their entirety and replace with "See
Code of the City of Saco, Chapter 163, § 163-5."
E. Section 302.4, Weeds (page 11): Insert "12 inches."
F. Section 304.14, Insect screens (page 13): insert "May 1" after ” the
period from" and insert "October 1" after "to."
G. Sections 502.5 and 505.1 (page 19): Delete the words "International
Plumbing Code" and insert the words "State of Maine Internal
Plumbing Rules, 144A CMR Chapter 238."
H. Section 602.3, Heat supply (page 21): insert the words “September 1 to
May 15." Add to the end of this section the following: “For all dwellings
covered by the scope of this section, the building owner or designated
agent shall maintain and provide an adequate source of fuel for the
heating equipment required by Section 602.1, unless otherwise
provided for in a written lease."
I. Section 602. 4, Occupiable workspaces (page 21): insert "September 1"
after "the period from" and insert "May 15" after "to."
J. Insert new Section 602.6 on page 21 as follows: "Failure of owner to
provide fuel: In the event of the failure of the owner or his designated
agent to comply with Section 602.3, upon determination of the Code
Enforcement Officer that an emergency exists, the City shall be entitled
to supply the necessary maintenance or fuel. The City shall, in such
case, in addition to the penalties provided for herein for violation of this
code, be entitled to recover amounts expended hereunder in an action
§ 163-2 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 163-3
156:353
§ 163-4. Supervisory official.
The Building Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer or his/her representative
is herewith designated as the City official to supervise and enforce this
chapter.
§ 163-5. (Reserved)60
§ 163-6. Violations and penalties.
The following provisions shall apply to violations of the laws and ordinances
set forth in this chapter, and all monetary penalties shall be civil penalties.
against the owner or agent, together with costs, including reasonable
attorney fees."
K. Chapter 8, Referenced Standards (page 27) delete the following
references: "IPC-09 ICC International Plumbing Code" and replace with
the following reference: "State of Maine Internal Plumbing Rules, 144A
CMR Chapter 238." Delete "IZC-09 ICC International Zoning Code"
without replacement. Delete NFPA 70-08 and insert "NFPA-70 National
Electric Code 2011" in the last line.
A. The minimum penalty for starting construction or undertaking a land
use activity without a required permit shall be $100 and the maximum
penalty shall be $2,500.
B. The minimum penalty for a specific violation shall be $100 and the
maximum penalty shall be $2,500.
C. The violator may be ordered to correct or abate the violations. Where
the court finds that the violation was willful, the violator shall be
ordered to correct or abate the violation, unless the abatement or
correction will:
(1) Result in a threat or hazard to public health or safety;
(2) Result in substantial environmental damage; or
(3) Result in substantial injustice.
D. If the City of Saco is the prevailing party, it shall be awarded reasonable
attorney fees, expert witness fees and costs, unless the court finds that
special circumstances make the award of these fees and costs unjust. If
the defendant is the prevailing party, the defendant may be awarded
reasonable attorney fees, expert witness fees and costs as provided by
court rule.
E. The maximum penalty may exceed $2,500 but shall not exceed $25,000
when it can be shown that there has been a previous conviction of the
same party within the past two years of the same law or ordinance.
60.Editor's Note: Former § 163-5, Appeals, was repealed 3-5-2012.
§ 163-3 SACO CITY CODE § 163-6
156:354
Chapter 165
RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA, CULTIVATION AND SALE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cultivation and distribution of
marijuana — See Ch. 135.
§ 165-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to impose a ban on the operation of
recreational marijuana cultivation, retail marijuana establishments, and
retail marijuana social clubs in the City of Saco ("City").
§ 165-2. Findings.
§ 165-3. Authority.
This proposed chapter to be adopted pursuant to the City's home rule
authority pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001 et seq.
§ 165-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RETAIL MARIJUANA — Cannabis that is cultivated, manufactured,
distributed or sold by a licensed retail marijuana establishment or retail
marijuana social club.
RETAIL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FACILITY — An entity licensed to
cultivate, prepare and package retail marijuana and sell retail marijuana to
retail marijuana establishments and retail marijuana social clubs.
F. All proceedings arising under the provisions of locally administered
laws and ordinances shall be brought in the name of the City of Saco,
and fines shall be paid to the City of Saco.
A. The Maine State Legislature's Marijuana Legalization Implementation
Committee is drafting new law(s) regarding recreational marijuana
cultivation and sale in response to the citizens' initiative; these laws are
expected by February of 2018.
B. Until those laws and regulations are established by the state, and this
chapter of the City Code expires, is repealed and replaced, or is
reauthorized, the City will continue to prohibit the cultivation and sale
of recreational marijuana in manners that are outlined in § 165-5.
§ 163-6 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 165-4
156:355
RETAIL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT — Retail marijuana store, a retail
marijuana cultivation facility, a retail marijuana products manufacturing
facility or a retail marijuana testing facility.
RETAIL MARIJUANA PRODUCT — Concentrated retail marijuana and retail
marijuana products that are composed of retail marijuana and other
ingredients and are intended for use or consumption, including, but not
limited to, edible products, ointments and tinctures.
RETAIL MARIJUANA SOCIAL CLUB — An entity licensed to sell retail
marijuana and retail marijuana products to consumers for consumption on
the licensed premises.
RETAIL MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY — An entity licensed and certified
to analyze and certify the safety and potency of retail marijuana and retail
marijuana products.
§ 165-5. Prohibitions.
The operation of retail marijuana establishments, which includes retail
marijuana stores, retail marijuana cultivation facilities, retail marijuana
products manufacturing facilities, and retail marijuana testing facilities;
and the operation of retail marijuana social clubs are prohibited within
the City, and therefore all activities related to the above-mentioned retail
uses such as, but not limited to, cultivation, possession, extraction,
manufacturing, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling,
transporting, delivering, dispensing, transferring, and distributing
recreational marijuana are expressly prohibited within the City.
§ 165-6. (Reserved)
§ 165-7. Violations and enforcement.
A. Any designated City Code Enforcement Officer ("CE Officer") or City of
Saco Police Officer ("Officer") is authorized and shall have the authority
to enforce all provisions of this chapter. A CE Officer or Officer may
issue a written cease-operations order directing the occupancy, use,
and other activities prohibited under this chapter to cease immediately,
and that the premises be vacated. Upon notice of the cease-operations
order, all occupancy, use, or other activity subject to the ceaseoperations
order shall stop immediately, and the premises shall be
vacated and closed.
B. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may be liable for the
penalties set forth below:
(1) First violation. The maximum penalty for undertaking an activity
related to retail marijuana establishments or retail marijuana social
clubs is $2,500.
(2) Multiple. The penalty for undertaking an activity related to retail
marijuana establishments or retail marijuana social clubs is
§ 165-4 SACO CITY CODE § 165-7
156:356
§ 165-8. When effective; expiration.
The provisions of this chapter shall become effective 30 days after its
enactment. This chapter automatically expires one year after the effective
date unless it is repealed or reauthorized by the City Council.
§ 165-9. Severability.
If any part or provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any
person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter,
including the application of such part or provision to other persons or
circumstances, shall not be affected thereby and shall continue in full force
and effect. To this end, provisions of this chapter are severable.
Chapter 169
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Mobile homes — See Ch. 143.
Noise — See Ch. 149.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 211.
§ 169-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare, provide for the protection and maintenance of public ways and
ensure that waste is adequately disposed of.
§ 169-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CAMPER — A separate vehicle designed for human habitation and which
can be attached or detached from a motor vehicle.
CAMPER-TRAILER — A vehicular, portable dwelling structure designed
to be used for recreational purposes. This includes a travel trailer, so
identified by the manufacturer; a pickup camper; a folding tent trailer; and
a motorized camper where the camping portion is an integral part of the
self-propelled vehicle.
MOTOR HOME - A self-contained vehicle, designed for human habitation,
with its own motive power and with a passageway from the body of the
$25,000 when it is shown that there has been a previous conviction
of the same person within the past five years for a violation of this
chapter.
§ 165-7 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES § 169-2
169:357
home to the front seat. OCCUPY FOR LIVING PURPOSES — Includes, but
is not limited to:
TRAILER — A vehicle, without motive power, designed for carrying persons
or property on its own and to be drawn by a vehicle with motive power. The
term "trailer" shall include, but shall not be limited to, horse trailers, boat
trailers and skimobile trailers.
§ 169-3. Limitations on parking and storage.
No person shall park or store a boat, trailer, motor home, camper-trailer
or camper upon any roadway, sidewalk, street or highway within any area
in the city where residential dwelling units are permitted by law for longer
than 24 hours during any one-week period or in any manner which creates
a hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic by interfering with line of sight
or by projecting into the traveled way or in any other manner.
§ 169-4. Occupation prohibited; exception. [Amended 4-7-2003]
A. Sleeping;
Connecting to electricity, water, gas or a sanitary sewer to make ready
for habitation; and
B.
Using as a dwelling place, as a substitute for or in addition to a
customary dwelling unit.
C.
A. It shall be unlawful to occupy any camper-trailer or motor home for
living purposes anywhere within the City except in a trailer park which
is duly licensed under applicable law and maintained in accordance
with applicable law.
B. Notwithstanding Subsection A, when a building permit has been issued
for the construction or alteration of a building, the Building Inspector
may issue a temporary permit, valid for six months, for the placement
and occupation of one camper-trailer, camper or motor home in
connection with the construction or alteration of such building, if he/
she finds that the standards in Subsection C will be met. He/she may
extend the permit for an additional six-month period if he/she finds that
construction or alteration has been diligently pursued and that
justifiable circumstances require the extension.
C. Standards for permits under Subsection B are as follows:
(1) The applicant has submitted a plan showing the specific proposed
location and has paid a fee established by the City Council after a
public hearing.
(2) The proposed location is on the same lot as the building being
constructed or altered.
(3) The proposed location will not violate any lot yard provision of the
Saco Zoning Ordinance.
§ 169-2 SACO CITY CODE § 169-4
169:358
Chapter 171
PLASTIC BAGS, SINGLE-USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Prohibited products: polystyrene foam
containers — See Ch. 160, Art. I.
§ 171-1. Purpose.
It is in the best interest of the residents of the City of Saco ("City") to
protect the environment and natural resources of Maine by prohibiting
the distribution and use of single-use plastic bags. This chapter intends to
encourage the use of degradable resin bags and/or reusable shopping bags
in businesses.
§ 171-2. Findings.
Single-use plastic bags have an adverse effect on the environment. Because
the City is an oceanside community with a river as a natural border, both
aquatic and wild life are affected by the environmentally hazardous plastic
bags. Research has shown that production and disposal of petroleum-based
(4) Adequate provision is made for disposal of all waste.
D. Notwithstanding Subsection A, a recreational vehicle may be occupied
outside of an approved RV park for up to 48 hours if it meets the
following standards and obtains a permit from the Code Enforcement
Office based on standards (1) through (5) below. A permit may be
denied or revoked if any of the standards have not been complied with.
(1) The recreational vehicle has self-contained sewage disposal,
potable water and electrical service. The recreational vehicle must
be currently registered for over-the-road travel by any state
government of the United States or provincial government of
Canada.
(2) The recreational vehicle is accessory to and is located on the same
property as a duly-permitted "enclosed sports facility" (as defined
in the Zoning Ordinance).
(3) The occupation of the recreational vehicle occurs only during the
exhibition, or the day before or after it.
(4) No more than 20 such vehicles shall be permitted on any one lot at
a time.
(5) External electrical generators used in association with the
recreational vehicles permitted under this section are prohibited.
§ 169-4 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES § 171-2
169:359
products can injure or poison animals, disrupt habitats, and leach into
groundwater. Additionally, chemical byproducts can cause harm to humans,
pets, and livestock.
§ 171-3. Authority.
This proposed chapter to be adopted pursuant to the City's home rule
authority pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001 et seq.
§ 171-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASTM INTERNATIONAL — The former American Society for Testing and
Materials. It is now called ASTM International.
ASTM STANDARDS — The standards related to single or reusable bags.
BUSINESS — Any business that has or requires a business license with the
City.
DEGRADABLE — A compound that breaks down into simpler compounds by
stages.
DEGRADABLE RESIN — A solid or highly viscous substance that is typically
convertible into polymers.
EMERGENCY FOOD OR OTHER GOODS PROVIDER — A facility operated
by a nonprofit or governmental agency that provides goods to residents for
no charge.
PLASTIC — An organic or petroleum-derived synthetic organic solid that is
moldable.
RETAIL BUSINESS — Any business that sells consumers goods and has or
requires a retail business license with the City.
REUSABLE BAG — A bag with consumer carrying handles that is
specifically designed and manufactured for multiple reuse and is made of
ASTM 5208 is the standard for UV exposure of photodegradable
plastics.
A.
ASTM 5272 is the standard practice for outdoor exposure testing of
photodegradable plastics.
B.
ASTM 5338 is the standard for determining aerobic biodegradation of
plastic materials (requiring oxygen).
C.
ASTM 5511 is the standard for determining anaerobic biodegradation
of plastic materials (does not require oxygen).
D.
ASTM 6400 is the standard for labeling of plastics designed to be
aerobically composted.
E.
§ 171-2 SACO CITY CODE § 171-4
169:360
cloth, fiber or other machine washable fabric or regularly disinfected but
not plastic film less than one mil in thickness.[Amended 4-17-201861]
SINGLE-USE PLASTIC BAG — A bag with consumer carrying handles made
from plastic, which also may or may not be intended for a one-time use.
These bags fall under the category of plastic film.
§ 171-5. Regulations.
§ 171-6. Exemptions.
§ 171-7. Violations and enforcement.
A. A business, as defined above, may not provide single-use bags made of
plastic for any purpose. A business may provide a non-petroleum-based
bag that meets one or more of the aforementioned ASTM standards,
such as:
(1) A paper bag;
(2) A reusable bag, as defined;
(3) A bag made from degradable resin compounds.
B. If a retail business chooses to not provide a bag of any kind, a sign that
measures at least three inches by five inches near the point of sale and
at least 10 inches by 14 inches at the entrance door must be posted
stating bags will not be provided.
C. Customers are allowed to bring into a business and use their own bags,
including plastic bags, without the business being in violation hereof.
A. Exemption from these limitations herein is made for emergency food or
goods providers.
B. The City Administrator may exempt other businesses during major City
emergencies or disasters. The exemption will end when the emergency
or disaster has ended per the City Administrator.
A. The City Administrator, or his/her designee(s), shall have the primary
responsibility for enforcement of this chapter. If the City Administrator
or his/her designee(s) determines that a violation of this chapter has
occurred, he or she shall issue a written warning to the business that a
violation was found. Subsequent violations of this chapter shall be
subject to the penalties set forth below.
B. A violation of this chapter is based on the availability of plastic bags in a
business.
C. Violations of this chapter shall be punishable by fines as follows:
61.Editor's Note: This amendment provided an effective date of 5-18-2018.
§ 171-4 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES § 171-7
169:361
§ 171-8. When effective.
The provisions of this chapter shall become effective 30 days after its
enactment. Notwithstanding the preceding, the City Administrator is
authorized to delay any enforcement of these provisions for up to a period
of six months so that local businesses may cost-effectively eliminate existing
inventory of plastic bags, and secure replacement of an acceptable
biodegradable alternative.
§ 171-9. Severability.
If any part or provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any
person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter,
including the application of such part or provision to other persons or
circumstances, shall not be affected thereby and shall continue in full force
and effect. To this end, provisions of this chapter are severable.
Chapter 172
REGISTRATION INCENTIVE PLAN
§ 172-1. Findings and purpose.
(1) A fine not exceeding $250 for the first violation in a one-year
period;
(2) A fine not exceeding $500 for the second and each subsequent
violation in a one-year period.
D. Each day that a violation occurs will be considered a subsequent
violation.
A. Findings. The City Council has taken note that a significant portion of
Saco's economic activity and growth has occurred along the Route 1
corridor, a portion of which is commonly called the "Saco Auto Mile."
Substantial numbers of people (many from outside Saco, and even some
from outside of Maine) come to Saco to see cars and shop at the Auto
Mile. These visitors can and do spend money throughout the
community, and the economic effect of the Auto Mile is both significant
and beneficial to the City. The Corridor provides jobs for citizens,
results in direct taxes paid to the City, and promotes income for other
businesses located in the area. The Council finds that an economic
cluster has been created here around the automobile industry,
including establishments involved in sales, repair, parts sales, rental,
transportation, and other aspects of the automotive industry. The
Council also finds that auto-related businesses located within the Auto
Mile have little if any detrimental impact upon the City. The Council
finds that the business of car sales and car leasing is particularly
beneficial to Saco.
§ 171-7 SACO CITY CODE § 172-1
169:362
§ 172-2. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the meanings defined below:
EXCISE TAX — That fee paid by the owner of a motor vehicle to the City of
Saco for the yearly registration of said vehicle as required by 36 M.R.S.A.
§ 1482, as amended from time to time.
INCENTIVE PAYMENT — A figure calculated and based upon the actual
excise tax fees paid on vehicles registered in Saco by the applicant.
OFFICE — A place of business open to the public during regular hours,
staffed by two or more persons, with a working, advertised telephone
number.
VEHICLE — Truck, car or other motor vehicle which is held out to the
public for use, sale, or for lease by the day, week or month, or that is
otherwise based, stored and operated out of Saco as part of the enterprise's
businesses operations.
§ 172-3. Incentive program established.
An enterprise with a place of business or operations in Saco will be eligible
for, and may apply for, an incentive payment for a vehicle kept, stored
or based in Saco, Maine, provided that the conditions set forth below in
§ 172-5 are met. The Finance Office of the City shall be authorized and
empowered to effectuate this incentive program, and it shall report each
year to the City Administrator as to those funds received, and the funds
appropriated hereunder.
§ 172-4. Amount of incentive.
The amount of the incentive will be as follows:
§ 172-5. Qualification.
Applicants that have registered at least 10 vehicles in Saco may qualify
for an incentive payment if they meet the conditions found below in both
Subsections A and B, provided that:
B. Purpose. The Council establishes this chapter for the express purpose
of encouraging businesses to expand their operations and/or locate
within Saco, and all other businesses, by promoting the number of
vehicle registrations within Saco.
A. Two percent on the first 500 vehicles registered in Saco.
B. Three percent on the next 500 vehicles registered in Saco.
C. Four percent on the next 500 vehicles registered in Saco.
D. Five percent on each vehicle thereafter registered in Saco.
§ 172-1 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES § 172-5
169:363
§ 172-6. Payment.
The City shall calculate the incentive program June 30 of each year by
reviewing those registrations paid by the applicant between July 1 of the
prior year and June 30 of the then current year. If the conditions set forth
in § 172-5A and B are both met, the City shall pay the incentive fee 30 days
thereafter from a designated fund.
Chapter 173
SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 73.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 102.
Licenses and registration — See Ch. 132.
§ 173-1. Purposes and findings.
A. The party can conclusively establish that it has for the course of the
prior year maintained a business or office in Saco, Maine. Said business
or office must be open during regular business hours and must have an
advertised working telephone number; and
B. The party has increased its employment at its Saco office by at least one
half-time position over the prior year, or 2) that it has increased the
number of vehicles it registered in Saco by 5% over the prior year, or 3)
that it has registered at least 100 vehicles over the course of the year,
or 4) that it has expanded its operations and physical facilities within
Saco by $25,000 in new property value.
A. The City of Saco has been blessed with a beautiful beach and
beachfront residential community. Running from Camp Ellis to the
border of Old Orchard Beach at Kinney Shores, Saco's beachfront is an
historic, vibrant and diverse community. The area, bounded by the Saco
River, a wildlife refuge of national significance, a state park, as well as
the Goosefare Brook estuary, is an ecological marvel. It is one of the
most desirable places in the City to both live and visit. Many people visit
summer after summer, enjoying the opportunity to live, even
temporarily, in this wonderful beachfront community.
B. Comprehensive zoning and wetlands rules protect this area by limiting
growth and development. Presently this is the City's most restrictive
zone, in part so that its beauty and unique residential atmosphere is
adequately preserved. The City recognizes, however, that many
properties in the area have a long history of being rented for the
summer season. Moreover, many property owners in the beachfront
area have come to depend on the supplemental income generated by
§ 172-5 SACO CITY CODE § 173-1
173:364
§ 173-2. Applicability.
these seasonal rentals. Thus while such rentals are beneficial to
particular property owners, they are simultaneously a burden upon the
residential character of the area and produce an impact on a sensitive
environment.
C. Of particular concern to the City is that seasonal rentals are occurring
in properties which were designed and built as single-family homes not
as transient rental units. Further, many of these properties were built
years before life safety and building codes came into enactment. The
City believes and has found that seasonal rentals, no matter where
found, pose a substantial safety risk to our visitor-guests. No City
official has ever inspected those properties for adequate ingress/
egress, for fire extinguishers, for smoke detectors, for adequate
electrical systems, etc. The City presently inspects every multiunit
building, hotel, motel, bed-and-breakfast in the City but has never
inspected seasonal rentals. The Council believes that the mere fact that
properties in our community rented only for a short season does not
mean that fire safety review and compliance is unnecessary. On the
contrary, given the age and date of construction of many of these
homes, inspection is of great import, and should begin as soon as
possible.
D. Finally, the Council has found that not only are there more seasonal
rentals occurring than previously believed, but no limitations on
occupancy are in place. In one recent case, the City learned of a singlefamily
home being advertised as sleeping 14. Such overburdening of
properties places lives in jeopardy and affects surrounding residences
adversely. The Council believes such use of property, regardless of
location within the City, poses a risk to our visitor-guests.
E. Therefore, the Council has found and determined that the welfare of
visitor-guests to our community requires the City license, review and
inspect lawful nonconforming properties offered for seasonal rental.
Therefore, pursuant to the City's home rule authority, 30-A.M.R.S.A.
§ 3001, as well its inherent powers to protect the health, safety and
welfare of those within its borders, the City enacts the following
ordinance provisions.
A. Those covered. Any person, entity, business, partnership, corporation,
etc., which offers for lease or rents any single-family, two-family and
multifamily dwelling units for periods of six days to four months in
duration shall secure a seasonal rental license from the Code
Enforcement Officer. This chapter applies to all properties, whether
that portion of time is broken into a monthly, weekly or other rental
period of time. Only single-family, two-family and multifamily dwelling
units within the area east of Seaside Avenue and Camp Ellis Avenue and
areas within 400 feet to the west of the center line of these streets may
be rented or leased as a seasonal dwelling.
§ 173-1 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 173-2
173:365
§ 173-3. Standards for issuance and renewal.
B. Those excluded. Those motels, hotels and bed-and-breakfasts already
regulated by other parts of the City's ordinances are exempt from the
conditions of this chapter. Rental of dwelling units for longer than four
months is not considered a seasonal rental and is not regulated by this
chapter. Both the renting of dwelling units as part of a house swap, and
the renting of a dwelling unit for caretaking purposes at a rent which is
substantially below market rent are not considered a seasonal rental
and are not regulated by this chapter.
C. Daily rentals prohibited. Unless the subject property is permitted as a
bed-and-breakfast or motel or hotel, no property owner may rent any
seasonal property on a per-day basis. Such rental is a violation of this
chapter and shall subject the violator to a fine of no less than $100 per
day nor more than $1,000 per day for each violation. Rentals of
dwelling units for periods shorter than six days are prohibited.
A. Review by Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall review all applications for seasonal rental licenses. When granting
a license, the Code Enforcement Officer shall determine the occupancy
level permitted in the dwelling unit and include it in the license. No
license shall be granted by the Code Enforcement Officer until the
owner-applicant has satisfied the following conditions:
(1) All requests for information required by the Code Enforcement
Officer have been completed.
(2) All personal property taxes are current and paid.
(3) All other City fees or charges such as sewer user fees, etc., are
current and paid.
(4) The application is for a lawful use in the zone, including a lawful
nonconforming use.
(5) A first-time applicant has satisfactorily complied with all Fire Code,
Building Code and Life-Safety Code requirements required by the
Fire Department and Code Enforcement Office, including Life
Safety Code 101 and the BOCA Property Maintenance Code.
Renewal applicants shall not need to meet this condition unless
§ 173-5C applies and it is a fifth-anniversary renewal.
(6) The applicant has not violated license conditions in the past
without adequate cause or explanation.
(7) The City has received less than three documented complaints
regarding the premises within the prior year.
(8) The Assessor has inspected the premises and properly assessed the
property as income-producing for personal property tax purposes.
§ 173-2 SACO CITY CODE § 173-3
173:366
(9) Any dwelling unit rented as a seasonal dwelling shall be occupied
by only one family and shall not be sublet or subrented in whole or
in part to another party.
(10) Properties approved by the City as seasonal dwellings shall not
include facilities and accommodations that would serve to
circumvent this ordinance by creating independent or semiindependent
suites of rooms that might be rented separately. Such
facilities and accommodations might include but are not limited to
kitchen facilities or partial kitchen facilities, microwave ovens, hot
plates or other cooking devices, multiple laundry facilities,
additional cable television connections or independently metered
utilities, additional sinks and other plumbing, additional entrances
beyond those customary in a dwelling unit and entrances which are
separate from common areas of the dwelling unit and allow a room
or suite of rooms to be occupied separately from the unit as a
whole.
B. Fee and license form. The fee for the first license shall be established by
the City Council after a public hearing. Said fee is to recover the cost of
review and inspection by the Fire Department and Code Enforcement
Office. The fee each year thereafter shall be established by the City
Council after a public hearing. The license shall bear the name, address
and telephone number of the property owner, similar information for
the owner's agent or representative (if any), the address of the property
or properties covered, the permitted period of seasonal rentals and the
maximum number of guests permitted to remain overnight in the
subject premise(s). The license form shall be uniform among applicants
and shall be determined by the Code Enforcement Officer. [Amended
4-7-2003]
C. Standards for denial. If the Code Enforcement Officer finds substantial
and credible evidence that one or more of the above conditions
(Subsection A above) have not been met by the applicant or have been
violated, then the Code Enforcement Officer shall deny the applicant a
license. However, the applicant may request a re-review and
reinspection after an initial denial of license. If the applicant
subsequently corrects, abates, meets or otherwise satisfies the above
conditions, the Code Enforcement Officer shall then issue the applicant
a license for seasonal rentals. If the City reinspects or reviews the
applicant's facilities, an additional charge of $50 shall be paid upon
issuance of the license. Under all circumstances, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall provide to the applicant all material supporting the
decision to deny a license.
D. Time for review. The Code Enforcement Officer shall make a
determination under Subsection A of this section in a period of 21 days.
Only if the Fire Department or Codes Officer is unable to complete their
inspection within 21 days may the Code Enforcement Officer issue a
conditional license.
§ 173-3 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 173-3
173:367
§ 173-4. Revocation or suspension of license.
E. Rentals without a license. Any person, entity, business, partnership or
corporation which leases or rents any property for any portion of a
calendar year less than four months in duration, whether said period is
broken into monthly, weekly or other rental periods, without a license
shall be in violation of this chapter, punishable by a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $1,000 per day for each violation.
F. Safety inspections. The City through its Fire Department and Code
Enforcement Office shall inspect every application. The City shall
assure compliance with those codes set forth below in Subsection G. If a
property has one or more deficiencies, those shall be cited, and the
owner given an adequate and defined period of time to correct or abate
the defect. If the owner-applicant fails to correct or abate the defect,
the property owner shall not lease or rent the property thereafter until
compliance has been secured. The City shall charge a fee established by
the City Council after a public hearing for the cost of reinspections
conducted under this section. [Amended 4-7-2003]
G. Incorporation by reference. This chapter incorporates by reference the
following life-safety codes of the City already in force and effect and any
successor to said codes:
(1) Life Safety 101 (See Chapter 102, Article II).
(2) BOCA Property Maintenance Code (see Chapter 73).
A. Grounds. A license for seasonal rental may be suspended or revoked
upon a determination of the existence of one or more of the following
grounds, provided that there are serious and substantial incidents
warranting suspension or revocation:
(1) Knowingly making an incorrect or false statement of a material
nature on the application form or failure to supply any additional
documentation required or reasonably necessary to determine
whether such license is issuable or failure to pay any fee required
hereunder.
(2) The license holder has caused or suffered more than two or more
documented and serious breaches of the peace on the premises.
(3) The premises presents a clear danger to the public.
(4) The license holder has willfully violated a provision of this chapter
or other ordinance of the City of Saco.
(5) Personal property taxes, sewer user, access or hook-up fees are due
and owing to the City, and are determined to be in arrears as of the
date of the license request.
§ 173-3 SACO CITY CODE § 173-4
173:368
§ 173-5. Term of license.
§ 173-6. Appeals.
(6) The license holder has repeatedly violated and/or failed to correct
and comply with standards set forth in the City's Fire and Life
Safety Codes and Ordinances as described in § 173-3F.
(7) The licensee or the licensees agent has permitted, caused or
suffered more guests in the premises than permitted by the license
on more than one occasions.
(8) The license holder has allowed, suffered, permitted or encouraged
an over occupancy of the property (occupancy greater than
permitted by license) on more than two occasions.
B. Complaints. Any individual or City official can file and/or initiate a
complaint against a license holder. All complaints received shall be
promptly forwarded to the property owner at their address of record,
and any response from said owner or their agent shall be kept and
maintained by the Code Enforcement Officer for future consideration
along with the underlying complaint when and if the owner seeks to
renew their license.
C. Standards for suspension or revocation. If the Code Enforcement
Officer finds substantial and credible evidence that one or more of the
conditions described in § 173-4A have been met, then the Code
Enforcement Officer shall notice the license holder of the problem and
they shall have seven days to correct or abate the situation. The City
shall reinspect the premises at the end of seven days. If the license
holder has failed to correct or abate the problems cited by the City, then
the Code Enforcement Officer shall suspend the license. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall provide all materials supporting the decision
to the aggrieved party.
A. Expiration. All licenses shall expire on December 31 each year.
B. Renewals. License holders may renew their licenses each year but must
reapply to the Code Enforcement Officer per § 173-3. The fee for a
license renewal shall be $10. The applicant seeking renewal must meet
all of the qualifying conditions set forth in § 173-3. In processing
applications, the Code Enforcement Officer shall give precedence to
license renewals over the issuance of new licenses.
C. Five-year inspections. At five-year intervals from the fire/life safety
inspection, the City shall conduct a follow-up fire/life safety inspection
as described in § 173-3F. The fee for such reinspection shall be
established by the City Council after a public hearing. [Amended
4-7-2003]
A. Time period. An appeal to the City Council may be taken by any person
aggrieved by the denial, suspension or revocation of a license by the
§ 173-4 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 173-6
173:369
§ 173-7. Assignment of licenses.
§ 173-8. Display.
§ 173-9. Enforcement.
Code Enforcement Officer by filing a notice of appeal within 30 days of
the final decision. Every appeal should be in writing and shall state the
basis for the appeal. The City Council shall hear the appeal within two
weeks after the filing of the appeal and may affirm, reverse or modify
the decision appealed from.
B. Evidence. On appeal, the Council shall review the decision of the Code
Enforcement Officer to determine whether the decision was based upon
substantial evidence and in compliance with the standards of the
chapter. The Council may take additional evidence with respect to such
decision or action and, if additional testimony or evidence is taken, shall
determine the appeal upon all of the evidence presented.
C. Appeal from City Council. Any person aggrieved by the Council's
decision on appeal may appeal to the Superior Court in accordance with
the provisions of Maine Rule of Civil Procedure 80B.
A. Assignment. A license for seasonal rental may not be assigned, pledged,
sold or otherwise transferred by the license holder to any other person,
business or entity. The license belongs solely to the original applicant
and shall remain in the applicant's name for the duration of the license.
B. Violation of chapter. If any person, business or entity transfers or
attempts to transfer their license, such act shall result in an immediate
termination of the license. All subsequent rental after said termination
shall be a violation of this ordinance, punishable by a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $1,000 per day for each violation.
A. Display. The license holder shall display at all times their license in a
place and manner visible to those individuals renting, leasing or
occupying the premises. A copy of the license shall be kept in a window
visible from the street for inspection by the Codes Officer and the
Assessor.
B. Violation. The failure to display a license for seasonal rentals is a
violation of this ordinance punishable by a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $1,000 per day for each violation.
A. By summons. The City shall enforce this ordinance by civil citation and
summons deliverable by the Saco Police Department or the Code
Enforcement Officer.
B. Fines. Any and all fines or penalties secured as a result of violations of
this ordinance shall be payable to the City's general fund.
§ 173-6 SACO CITY CODE § 173-10
173:370
§ 173-10. Registration.
Those persons, businesses, corporations or entities who or which require a
seasonal rental license pursuant to this chapter need not secure a business
registration as required under Chapter 132 of this Code. A license issued
pursuant to this chapter shall constitute registration as required by Chapter
132, and compliance with the terms of this chapter shall constitute
compliance with the terms of Chapter 132.
Chapter 176
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 73.
Sludge — See Ch. 181, Art. V.
Street excavations — See Ch. 186, Art. I.
§ 173-10 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 173-10
173:371

Part 1
Sewer Use And Connections
ARTICLE I
Terminology
§ 176-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT — The Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), as amended.
BOD (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20º C., expressed in
milligrams per liter (mg/l).
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the
Environmental Protection Agency in accordance with Section 307(b)
and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1347) which applies to a specific category
of industrial dischargers.
CITY — The City of Saco.
COD (denoting "chemical oxygen demand") — The amount of oxygen
required for the chemical oxidation of carbonaceous (organic) materials
in wastewater, using inorganic dichromate as oxidants, in a two-hour
test.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both surface runoff and
sewage.
COMMERCIAL USER — All retail stores, restaurants, office buildings,
laundries and other private business and service establishments.
DEVELOPMENT — An area of land improved to include residential
dwelling units, streets, landscaping, commercial buildings and services
such as water and sewer.
DISCHARGER or INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGER — Any nonresidential
user who discharges into City-owned wastewater facilities by means of
pipes, conduits, pumping stations, force mains, constructed drainage
ditches, surface water intercepting ditches, intercepting ditches and all
constructed devices and appliances appurtenant thereto.
§ 176-1 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-1
173:373
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling,
storage and sale of produce.
GOVERNMENTAL USER — Includes legislative, judicial, administrative
and regulatory activities of federal, state and local governments.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge or the introduction of
nondomestic pollutants from a source regulated under Section 307(b)
or (c) of the Act into a City-owned wastewater facility.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Includes any nongovernmental, nonresidential
user of publicly owned treatment works which is identified in the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual 1972, Office of Management
and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the following
divisions: Division A, Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing; Division B,
Mining; Division D, Manufacturing; Division E, Transportation,
Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary; and Division I, Services.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Solid, liquid or gaseous waste resulting from
any industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or from the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources. Industrial
waste is distinct from sanitary sewage.
INSTITUTIONAL USER — Includes social, charitable, religious and
educational activities such as schools, churches, hospitals, nursing
homes, penal institutions and similar institutional users.
INTERFERENCE — The inhibition or disruption of a City sewer system,
treatment process or operation which contributes to a violation of any
requirement of its NPDES permit or prohibits or otherwise limits sludge
disposal options.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake
or other body of surface or groundwater.
NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER — Wastewater that has BOD
concentration of not more than 200 mg/l and a suspended solids
concentration of not more than 200 mg/l and a COD concentration of
not more than 500 mg/l.
NPDES — The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit
program of the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
O AND M — Operation and maintenance.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE — Those functions that result in
expenditures during the useful life of the treatment works for materials,
labor, utilities and other items which are necessary for managing and
which such works were designed and constructed. The term "operation
and maintenance" includes "replacement" as defined in this section.
OTHER WASTES — Decayed wood, sawdust, shavings, bark, lime,
refuse, ashes, garbage, offal, oil, tar, chemicals and all other substances
except sewage and industrial wastes.
§ 176-1 SACO CITY CODE § 176-1
173:374
OWNER — The person or persons having title to the pumping station
and may include the person or persons having title to the land upon
which the pumping station is located.
PASS-THROUGH — The discharge of pollutants through the City's
wastewater facilities into navigable water in quantities or
concentrations which are a cause of or significantly contribute to a
violation of any requirement of the City's NPDES permit.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT — Any dredges, spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and
agricultural waste discharged into water, which enters City-owned
facilities.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a City-owned
wastewater facility.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2
inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer, gravity-flow, in which all owners of abutting
properties have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority.
PUMPING STATION — Equipment designed to provide for the proper
flow of sewage from a lower elevation to a higher elevation for eventual
entry into the public sewer system.
REPLACEMENT — Expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during
the useful life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and
performance for which such works were designed and constructed.
RESIDENTIAL USER — Any contributor to the City's treatment works
whose lot, parcel or real estate or building is used for domestic dwelling
purposes only, but not including hotels, motels, boardinghouses, tourist
homes or bed-and-breakfast establishments.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer, gravity-flow, which carries sewage and
to which storm-, surface and ground waters are not intentionally
admitted.
§ 176-1 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-1
173:375
SEASONAL USER — A user who has the Water Company remove a
water meter for any period during the year.
SEWAGE — Water-carried human wastes or a combination of watercarried
wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and
industrial establishments, together with such ground-, storm-, surface
or other waters as may be present.
SEWAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds
for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times
the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flow during normal
operation.
SLUG LOAD — Any substance released in a discharge at a rate and/
or concentration which causes interference to a City-owned wastewater
facility.
STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed "storm sewer") — A sewer which
carries storm- and surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage
and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.62
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or are
in suspension in water, wastewater, sewage or other liquids and that
are removable by a standard laboratory filtering procedure.
TOXIC POLLUTANTS — Those substances listed in Appendix B herein.
TREATMENT WORKS — Any devices and systems for the storage,
treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic
sewage or liquid industrial wastes. These include intercepting sewers,
outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, pumping, power and other
equipment and their appurtenances; extensions, improvements,
remodeling, additions and alterations thereof; elements essential to
provide a reliable recycled supply, such as standby treatment units and
clear-well facilities; and any works, including site acquisition of the land
that will be an integral part of the treatment process or is used for
ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment (including
land for composting sludge, temporary storage of such compost and
land used for the storage of treated wastewater in land treatment
systems before land application); or any other method or system for
preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating or
disposing of municipal waste or industrial waste, including waste in
combined stormwater and sanitary sewer systems.
UPSET — An exceptional incident in which a discharger unintentionally
and temporarily is in a state of noncompliance with the standards set
62.Editor's Note: The former definition of "Superintendent," as amended, which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 1-22-2013.
§ 176-1 SACO CITY CODE § 176-1
173:376
forth in this chapter due to factors beyond the reasonable control of
the discharger and excluding noncompliance to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance or careless or
improper operation thereof.
USEFUL LIFE — The estimated period during which a treatment work
will be operated.
USER CHARGE — That portion of the total wastewater service charge
which is levied in a proportional and adequate manner for the cost
of operation, maintenance, replacement and debt service of the
wastewater treatment works.
WASTEWATER — Industrial waste or sewage or any waste, including
that which may be combined with any groundwater, surface water or
stormwater, that may be discharged to the City's wastewater facilities.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES — Any sewage treatment works and the
sewers and conveyance appurtenances discharging thereto, owned and
operated by the City.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
WATER COMPANY — The Biddeford-Saco Water Company.
WATER METER — A device for measuring and recording water volume
furnished and/or installed by a user and approved by the Water
Company or the Superintendent.
B. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
§ 176-1 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-1
173:377

ARTICLE II
Mandatory Connections
§ 176-2. Deposit of waste.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
City or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
§ 176-3. Discharge of sewage or other polluted waters.
It shall be unlawful to discharge in any natural outlet within the City or in
any area under the jurisdiction of the City any sewage or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance
with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
§ 176-4. Privies, privy vaults, septic tanks and cesspools.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain
any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used
for disposal of sewage.
§ 176-5. Connection to public sewer required.
A. Required connections.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection B, the owner of all new houses,
new construction or newly improved houses, buildings or other
properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or
other purposes situated and abutting any street, alley or right-ofway
in which there is now located a public sanitary or combined
sewer of the City is hereby required, at his expense, to install
suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities
directly with the proper sewer in accordance with the provisions of
this Part 1 if the house, building or portion of the property used for
human occupancy, recreation, employment or other purposes is
within 150 feet of the public right-of-way in which the sewer is
located. The sewer connection shall be made at the time of
construction and no occupancy permit shall be issued for the
property until such sewer connection is made and ready for use.
(2) When a new sewer is constructed, except as provided in Subsection
B, the owner of all houses, buildings and properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated and
abutting any street, alley or right-of-way where a new public
sanitary sewer is built is hereby required, at his expense, to install
suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities
directly with the proper sewer in accordance with the provisions of
this Part 1 within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so,
provided that said public sewer is within 150 feet of the right-of-
§ 176-2 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-5
173:379
§ 176-6. Estimate and assessment of costs; notice; hearing.
The provisions of 30 M.R.S.A. § 4451 are hereby adopted for enactment by
reference and are as follows:63
way in which the sewer is located. Official notice shall be provided,
in writing and by appropriate service or mailing, by the City
Administrator after certification by the Superintendent that the
sewer may be connected to.
B. When gravity flow cannot be obtained from an existing residential
building, the connection to a public sewer is not required. Private
sewage disposal systems serving properties exempted under this
subsection shall not be replaced without connection to the public sewer
unless the proposed replacement system meets all provisions of the
Maine State Plumbing Code rules for subsurface wastewater disposal
without the granting of a variance.
63.Editor's Note: Said section was repealed by Chapter 737 of the Laws of 1987. See now 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 3442.
§ 176-5 SACO CITY CODE § 176-6
173:380
Municipal officers shall after construction of a public drain or common
sewer, determine what lots or parcels of land are benefited by such drain
or sewer and shall estimate and assess upon such lots and parcels of
land and against the owner thereof or person in possession or against
whom the taxes thereon shall be assessed, whether the person to whom
the assessment is so made shall be the owner, tenant, lessee or agent
and whether the same is occupied or not, such sum not exceeding such
benefit as they may deem just and equitable toward defraying the expenses
of constructing and completing such drain or sewer, together with such
sewage disposal units and appurtenances as may be necessary. The whole
of such assessment not to exceed 1/2 the cost of such sewer and sewage
disposal units and such drain or sewer shall forever be maintained and
kept in repair by the City. The municipal officers shall file with the City
Clerk the location of such drain or sewer and sewage disposal unit, with
a profile description of the same and a statement of the amount assessed
upon each lot or parcel of land so assessed and the name of the owner
of such lots or parcels of land or person against whom said assessment
shall be made and the City Clerk shall record the same in a book kept for
that purpose and within 10 days after filing such notice, each person so
assessed shall be notified of such assessment by having an authentic copy
of said assessment, with an order of notice signed by the Clerk of said City,
stating the time and place for a hearing upon the subject matter of said
assessments, given to each person so assessed or left at his usual place of
abode in said City. If he has no place of abode in said City, then such notice
shall be given or left at the abode of his tenant or lessee, if he has one in
said City; if he has no such tenant or lessee in said City then by posting the
same notice in some conspicuous place in the vicinity of the lot or parcel of
land so assessed, at least 30 days before said hearing or such notice may be
given by publishing the same three weeks successively in any newspaper
published in said County, the first publication to be at least 30 days before
said hearing. A return made upon a copy of such notice by any constable
in said City or the production of the paper containing such notice shall be
conclusive evidence that said notice has been given and upon such hearing
the municipal officers shall have power to revise, increase or diminish any
of such assessments and all such revisions, increase or diminution shall
be in writing and recorded by such Clerk. Farmland will be exempt from
assessment as provided in Section 4451.2 of Title 30 M.R.S.A. Force Main
Connections Prohibited.
a. Force Main Connections Prohibited. No person shall connect
wastewater discharges to a City-owned force main unless the force
main and pumping station have been specifically designed to
accommodate multiple pump stations.
Low pressure force main connections would not be prohibited.
§ 176-6 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-6
173:381
b. Definitions:
"Force main" shall mean a pressurized line delivering wastewater
from a pump station to a point where gravity flow is possible.
"Low Pressure Force Main" shall mean a pressurized line designed
to accommodate individual building pump stations. A low pressure
force main would not have a single pump station responsible for
transferring the wastewater to the gravity point.
§ 176-7. Arbitration.
Any person not satisfied with the amount for which he is assessed under
§ 176-6 may within 10 days after such hearing, by request, in writing,
given to such Clerk, have the assessment upon his/her lot or parcel of land
determined by arbitration. The municipal officers shall nominate six persons
who are residents of the City, two of whom shall be elected by the applicant,
with a third resident person selected by the two persons, and shall fix the
sum to be paid by him/her, and the report of such referees made to the City
Clerk and recorded by him/her shall be final and binding upon all parties.
Said reference shall be had and their report made to the City Clerk within
30 days from the time of hearing before the municipal officers as provided
in § 176-6.
§ 176-8. Collection of assessments.
All assessments and charges made under this article shall be certified by
municipal officers and filed with the Tax Collector for collection. If the
person assessed, within 30 days after written notice of the amount of such
assessments and charges, fails, neglects or refuses to pay the City the
expense thereby incurred, a special tax in the amount of such assessment
and charges may be assessed by the City Assessors upon each and every
lot or parcel of land so assessed, and buildings upon the same and such
assessment shall be included in the next annual warrant to the Tax Collector
for collection and shall be collected in the same manner as state, county and
municipal taxes are collected.
§ 176-6 SACO CITY CODE § 176-8
173:382
ARTICLE III
Waivers
§ 176-9. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to allow property owners an opportunity to
request a waiver of § 176-5, which requires the connection of habitable
structures within 150 feet of the City sewer to that sewer. Waivers can be
made on the basis of engineering, topographic or undue hardship on the
property owner as determined by the Sewer Connection Waiver Committee.
§ 176-10. Sewer Connection Waiver Committee.
The Sewer Connection Waiver Committee shall consist of the following
officials: the Superintendent of the Wastewater Treatment Facility, Director
of Public Works, Building Inspector and Finance Director.
§ 176-11. Waiver requests.
§ 176-12. Rules of procedure.
A. Upon notification by the City Administrator's office requiring
connection within 90 calendar days, the resident must file an appeal
with the City Administrator's office within 30 calendar days of the date
of notification.
B. Waiver requests based on a physical problem with connecting the
structure to the service connection installed by the City shall include a
plot plan showing the installed stub, home and any natural or
geographic obstacles which would interfere or prohibit connection to
the stub. A waiver shall not be granted if relocation of the service
connection at the owner's expense will remove the undue hardship. The
applicant will also include a written description of reasons for which a
connection to the stub would cause a hardship. The applicant should
include any documentation from engineering or architectural firms or a
contractor which may support the claim of undue hardship.
C. Waiver requests based on financial hardships shall include any items
which support the applicant's claim, such as federal or state income tax
records, bank statements and other pertinent financial documentation
which may be needed for the committee to reach a decision. It shall be
the applicant's obligation to show a total lack of financial resources,
including but not limited to refusals from financial institutions.
A. Upon receiving the application, the Waiver Committee will notify the
applicant of the time and date of hearing.
B. The Waiver Committee shall adopt its own rules of procedure for the
reviewing of the requests and waivers.
§ 176-9 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-12
173:383
§ 176-13. Decision.
§ 176-14. Request for City Council hearing.
C. The Committee may accept any written or oral testimony supporting
the applicant's request, provided that the testimony is not irrelevant,
immaterial or unduly repetitious.
D. The Waiver Committee may conduct such cross-examination as may be
required for a full and true disclosure of the facts. The Waiver
Committee shall confine its decision to the information and material
gathered at the hearing.
E. All meetings shall be open to the public, and only those materials and
testimony introduced at the hearing shall be used as the basis for
decisions. Correspondences and other material in the possession of the
City shall be made record.
F. The Waiver Committee may adjourn a meeting and visit the site for
which a waiver is being requested. Site visits by the Committee shall be
arranged with the property owner, who shall have an opportunity to be
present or be represented.
A. The Waiver Committee shall forward its decision on the appeal to the
City Administrator's office for final dispensation.
B. The applicant shall be notified by the City Administrator of the Waiver
Committee's decision.
A. The applicant may request a hearing before the City Council if he/she
disagrees with the decision of the Waiver Committee.
B. The applicant must request a hearing within 30 calendar days of the
notification of decision from the City Administrator.
C. The City Administrator's Office will then notify the applicant of the date
and time of the hearing.
§ 176-12 SACO CITY CODE § 176-14
173:384
ARTICLE IV
Private Disposal Systems
§ 176-15. Use permitted when public sewer unavailable.
When a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of § 176-5, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this article.
§ 176-16. Permit required prior to construction.
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system,
the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Superintendent.
The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the
City, which the applicant shall supplement with any plans, specifications
and other information as are deemed necessary by the Superintendent. A
permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the Plumbing Inspector at rates
as established by the state.
§ 176-17. Effective date of permit; inspection.
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
He/she shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction,
and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
Superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection and before any
underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 24
hours of the receipt of notice by the Superintendent.
§ 176-18. Construction standards.
The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system
shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of Public Health
of the State of Maine. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage
disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities which do not
comply with state health regulations. No septic tank or cesspool shall be
permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
§ 176-19. Availability of public sewer.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a
private sewage disposal system, as provided in § 176-5, a direct connection
shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this Part 1, and any
septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall
be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
§ 176-20. Operation and maintenance.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities
in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the City.
§ 176-15 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-21
173:385
§ 176-21. Additional requirements.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with
any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer.
§ 176-22. Time limit for connection; private system to be cleaned
and filled.
When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be
connected to the sewer within 90 days, unless the building is exempted
under Subsection B of § 176-5, and the private sewage disposal system shall
be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank gravel or dirt.
§ 176-21 SACO CITY CODE § 176-22
173:386
ARTICLE V
Building Sewers and Connections
§ 176-23. Permit required.
§ 176-24. Classes of permits; application; fees.
§ 176-25. Costs and expenses; indemnification of City.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned
by the installation of the building sewer.
§ 176-26. Separate sewers required; exception.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on
an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one building sewer.
A. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Director of
Public Works.
B. Any person proposing a new discharge into the system or a substantial
change in the volume or character of pollutants that are being
discharged into the sewer shall notify the Superintendent at least 45
days prior to the proposed change or connection.
A. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
(1) For residential and commercial service.
(2) For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
B. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a
special form furnished by the City. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the Superintendent. A permit
and inspection fee for a residential or commercial sewer permit per
each additional day of estimated required inspection services, and for
an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the City at the time
the application is filed as established by the City Council after a public
hearing. [Amended 4-7-2003]
§ 176-23 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-27
173:387
§ 176-27. Use of old building sewers. [Amended 6-25-2007]
Old building sewers shall not be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found on examination and test by the Superintendent to meet
all requirements of this article.
§ 176-28. Construction standards.
The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building sewer
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, joining,
testing and regulations of the City. In the absence of code provisions or in
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) and
Water Pollution Control Federation (WPCF) Manual of Practice No. 9 shall
apply.
§ 176-29. Use of gravity flow.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at
an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
§ 176-30. Prohibited connections.
No person shall make connections of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater
to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
§ 176-30.1. Repairs within right-of-way. [Added 6-25-2007]
The City shall assume responsibility for the repair and/or replacement
of the failed residential house connections within the City right-of-way,
provided that the failure was not a result of negligence on the part of
the owner, owner’s agent, or tenant. The City shall not be responsible for
private pressure sewers (forcemains) residing within the right-of-way or for
negligent use of the sewer system. The cost of initial installation shall be
borne by the resident as provided in § 176-25. See also the Building Sewer
Repairs in the City Right-of-Way Policy, Section 86.
§ 176-31. Connection specifications.
The connection of the building sewer to the public sewer shall conform to
the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code64 or other applicable
rules and regulations of the City or the procedure set forth in appropriate
specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such
connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the
64.Editor's Note: See Ch. 73, Building Construction.
§ 176-27 SACO CITY CODE § 176-31
173:388
prescribed procedures and material must be approved by the Director of
Public Works before installation.
§ 176-32. Inspection; supervision of connection.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Superintendent
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Director
of Public Works or his representative.
§ 176-33. Safety precautions.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of
the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City.
§ 176-34. Sewer connection charge. [Amended 6-5-1995; 1-20-1998]
A. Every person seeking to make connection with the City of Saco public
sewer system shall make such connection at his/her own expense after
securing a proper permit under this section and paying the charge
under Subsection B. Every user of the sewer system who increases his/
her use of the system shall pay the charge required under Subsection C.
"User" means the owner of real estate serviced by the sewer system.
B. The connection charge is established based on the number of flow units
which any particular use can be anticipated to produce and which will
impact on the sewer treatment system. A single flow unit is based on an
anticipated load of 300 gallons per day. Appendix A, attached hereto
and a part hereof,65 sets forth a schedule of the flow units for those uses
listed. The rate shall be established by the City Council after a public
hearing.66 [Amended 5-15-2000]
(1) The Superintendent shall provide an annual report to the City
Council concerning the administration of this section and the
collection of the charge created by this section. In his/her annual
report, and at such other times as he deems necessary, he shall
suggest whatever changes he thinks appropriate to the schedule
contained in Appendix A. The City Council may make amendments
to Appendix A, by order.
(2) When any commercial or industrial use exceeds, or will exceed, the
anticipated load described by the number of low units set forth on
Appendix A, the City Council may set the connection charge under
this section based on the actual load or the load which can be
reasonably estimated.
65.Editor's Note: Appendix A is located at the end of this chapter.
66.Editor's Note: Copies of the current fee schedule are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 176-31 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-34
173:389
(3) Any person seeking to make connection shall fill out an appropriate
form provided by the Building Inspector. No building permit or
occupancy permit, whether for new use or construction or
structural change or change of use, may be issued until the charge
under this section has been paid.
C. Any single-family residence and any building, structure or use,
completed and in existence on April 1, 1986, and not then connected to
the sewer system, will be subject to an impact fee at the time of
connection as established by the City Council after a public hearing. For
such structures or uses, the Superintendent shall determine a sewer
use base level, expressed in flow units, for any flow impacting the sewer
system on that date. For structures or uses connecting to the system
after April 1, 1986, the sewer use base level shall be established at the
time of connection and shall be subject to the full impact fee per flow
unit as established by the City Council after a public hearing. For any
change of use, or any structural expansion or alteration, or any change
which results in an increase of flow or pollutant loading above the
sewer use base level as determined by the Superintendent, the user
shall pay a charge per additional flow unit as established by the City
Council after a public hearing. [Amended 4-7-2003]
D. All charges generated by this section shall be placed in a nonlapsing
fund, to be known as the "Wastewater Treatment Facilities Fund," to be
used only for improvements to the existing wastewater treatment
facilities or construction of additional treatment facilities.
§ 176-34 SACO CITY CODE § 176-34
173:390
ARTICLE VI
Regulation of Discharges
§ 176-35. Sanitary sewers.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to
any sanitary sewer.
§ 176-36. Storm sewers, combined sewers and natural outlets.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers
or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent. Industrial cooling
water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the
Superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet.
§ 176-37. Prohibited discharges.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
§ 176-38. Discharges prohibited on opinion of Superintendent.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of
the Superintendent, that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process or equipment; can have an adverse effect on the
A. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas.
B. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or
create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment
plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two mg/l as CN
in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
C. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
D. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works, such as, but not limited to,
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and flashings, entrails, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc.,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
§ 176-35 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-38
173:391
receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb or public property or
constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these
wastes, the Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the
quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers,
materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment
process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of
wastes in the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent factors. The
substances prohibited are:
A. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150º F. (65º C.).
B. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which
may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32º and 150º
F. (Oº and 65º C.).
C. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/4
horsepower (0.76 horsepower metric) or greater shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Superintendent.
D. Any waters or wastes containing strong-acid iron-pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
E. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances or wastes exerting an
excessive chlorine requirement to such degree that any such material
received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works
exceeds the limits established by the Superintendent for such
materials.
F. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odorproducing
substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which
may be established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment
of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal
or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the
receiving waters.
G. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as
may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.
H. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
I. Materials which exert or cause:
(1) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and
sodium sulfate).
(2) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
§ 176-38 SACO CITY CODE § 176-38
173:392
§ 176-39. Powers and duties of Superintendent.
§ 176-40. Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes,
sand or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not
be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors
shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Superintendent and shall be
located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(3) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements
in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage
treatment works.
(4) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
slugs as defined herein.
J. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or
which are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other
agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
A. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances
or possess the characteristics enumerated in § 176-38 and, in the
judgment of the Superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon the
sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters or otherwise
create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
Superintendent may:
(1) Reject the wastes;
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
(4) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes.
B. If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent and subject to
the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
§ 176-38 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-41
173:393
§ 176-41. Preliminary treatment and flow-equalizing facilities.
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for
any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at his/her expense.
§ 176-42. Control manholes.
When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances, in
the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of
the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense
and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
§ 176-43. Measurements, tests and analyses.
§ 176-44. Acceptance of unusual wastes.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any industrial
A. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the
American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the
control manhole provided or upon suitable samples taken at the control
manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the
control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted
methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and
to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. (The
particular analyses involved will determine whether a twenty-four-hour
composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab
sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and
suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty-four-hour
composites of all outfalls, whereas pH's are determined from periodic
grab samples.)
B. All industries discharging into a public sewer shall perform such
monitoring of their discharge as the Superintendent and/or other duly
authorized employees of the City may reasonably require, including
installation, use and maintenance of monitoring equipment, keeping
records and reporting results of such monitoring to the Superintendent.
Such records shall be made available upon request by the
Superintendent to other agencies having jurisdiction over discharges to
the receiving waters.
§ 176-41 SACO CITY CODE § 176-44
173:394
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may
be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the
industrial concern, provided that such agreement does not contravene any
requirement of existing federal laws and is compatible with any user charge
and industrial cost recovery system in effect.
§ 176-44 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-44
173:395

ARTICLE VII
Protection from Damage
§ 176-45. Damage to facilities; violations and penalties.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct.
§ 176-45 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-45
173:397

ARTICLE VIII
Inspectors
§ 176-46. Right of entry.
The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. The
Superintendent or his/her representatives shall have no authority to inquire
into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic,
paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the
kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for
waste treatment.
§ 176-47. Safety rules; indemnification.
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in § 176-46, the Superintendent or duly authorized employees of the City
shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the
company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to
the City employees and the City shall indemnify the company against loss
or damage to its property by City employees and against liability claims
and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the
company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except
as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain
safe conditions as required in § 176-30.
§ 176-48. Easements.
The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement
for purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works
lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said
easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
§ 176-46 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-48
173:399

ARTICLE IX
Private Sewage Pumping Stations
§ 176-49. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to set out a procedure under which the City
may accept sewage pumping stations constructed by private persons and
existing on private property. These pumping stations permit the entry of
sewage into the Saco sewer system from private residences. The public
welfare demands that proper maintenance of these pumping stations be
provided for. This section will ensure that proper maintenance will be
provided after a private developer completes development work.
§ 176-50. Scope.
This article applies to pumping stations constructed after the effective date
hereof,67 as well as existing pumping stations.
§ 176-51. Procedure for acceptance.
A. The owner of land proposed for a development which will require a
pumping station may make application to the Superintendent for City
Council acceptance for any pumping station.
B. The application shall include:
(1) A copy of the owner's deed to the property.
(2) A plan, drawn to scale, showing the location of the pumping station.
(3) Specifications and plans of the pumping station, signed and
approved by a registered engineer.
C. The Superintendent shall review the application with the City Engineer
to determine, among other things, whether the pumping station
conforms with standards of the industry or standards established by
him and the City Engineer or both, and he shall forward a copy of the
application to the City Council along with his recommendations, if any.
D. After reviewing the material submitted by the Superintendent under
Subsection C, the City Council may:
(1) Agree with the owner to accept a conveyance of the title to the
pumping station upon its completion, subject to the following
conditions:
(a) The owner shall have retained any necessary easement or
right-of-way providing the City with reasonable access to the
pumping station, which he shall convey to the City along with
title to the pumping station.
67.Editor's Note: This article was originally adopted by ordinance on March 4, 1985.
§ 176-49 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-51
173:401
(b) The instrument of conveyance shall contain a warranty of title
to the pumping station and warranties, common to the trade,
for all moving parts of the pumping station, which may be
made as valid assignments of warranties from manufacturers.
(c) Certification by both the Superintendent and City Engineer
that the pumping station has been constructed according to
plan shall be provided.
(2) Reject the application.
§ 176-51 SACO CITY CODE § 176-51
173:402
ARTICLE X
User Charges
§ 176-52. Purpose.
§ 176-53. Disposition and use of revenue.
§ 176-54. Rates.
A. It is the purpose of this article to establish proportionate user charges
that place the cost of abatement directly on the sources of pollution,
conserve potable water and maintain financial self-sufficiency.
B. It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the
protection of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the
City to collect charges from all users who contribute wastewater to the
City's treatment works. The proceeds of such charges so derived will be
used for the purpose of operating and maintaining the public
wastewater treatment works and providing for future needs.
A. The revenues collected which were collected as a result of the user
charges levied shall be deposited in a separate nonlapsing fund known
as the "Sewer System Operation, Maintenance and Replacement Fund
and Debt Retirement Fund" (or "fund").
B. Fiscal year-end balances in the fund shall be used for no other purposes
than those designated. Moneys which have been transferred from other
sources to meet temporary shortages in the fund shall be returned to
their respective accounts upon appropriation adjustment of the user
charge rates for operation, maintenance, replacement and debt
retirement. The user charge rates shall be adjusted such that the
transferred moneys will be returned to their respective accounts within
six months of the fiscal year in which the moneys were borrowed.
A. Each user shall pay for the services provided by the City based on his
use of the treatment works as determined by his water consumption
according to methods recommended by the Superintendent. The cost of
treating inflow and infiltration shall be shared by all users as part of the
user rate.
B. For residential, institutional and commercial users, quarterly user
charges will be based on actual water usage as determined by the
Water Company's meter readings. Any user who obtains water from the
Biddeford-Saco Water Company but is a flat-rate customer shall be
billed at a consumption rate of 9,000 cubic feet of water per dwelling
unit per year. If a sewer discharges water into the City collection system
which has been obtained from a source other than the Water Company,
the user shall install and maintain a meter to measure such discharge.
All such meters must be inspected and approved by the Superintendent
and must be available for inspection during the year by the City. If a
residential, commercial, industrial or institutional user has a
§ 176-52 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-54
173:403
§ 176-55. Billing and collection.
consumptive use of water or, in some other manner, uses water which
is not discharged into the collection system, the user charge for that
contributor may be based on readings of a wastewater meter(s) or a
separate water meter(s) installed and maintained at the user's expense.
C. Seasonal users shall be billed for a minimum of 6,000 cubic feet per
year at the current rate authorized by the City Council. Consumption in
excess of 6,000 cubic feet will be billed at the rate authorized by City
Council.
D. For those users whose wastewater has a greater strength than normal
domestic sewage, a surcharge, in addition to the normal user charge,
will be collected. The surcharge for operation and maintenance,
including replacement, will be established by the City Council pursuant
to § 176-56.
E. Any user who discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase
in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge, or, any user who
discharges any substance which, singly or by interaction with other
substances, causes identifiable increases in the cost of operation,
maintenance or replacement of the treatment works, shall pay for such
increased costs. The charge to each such user shall be as determined by
the appropriate financial personnel and approved by the City Council.
F. If, in the opinion of the Superintendent, the usage as determined by the
Water Company is suspect, then the Superintendent shall notify the
owner, in writing, of the problem. The Superintendent shall arrange for
a certification of the meter. If the meter is found to be inaccurate, then
the City will require that an appropriate meter be installed at the
owner's expense. Until such time as the suspect meter is replaced,
consumption values for the billing period in question and future billings
shall be based on typical or anticipated usage as determined by the
Superintendent. [Added 1-6-1997]
G. The user charge rates established in this article apply to all users of the
City's treatment works.
A. All users shall be billed quarterly. Billings for any particular quarter
shall be made within 10 days after the end of a quarter. Any payment
not received within 30 days after the end of the quarter is delinquent.
B. A late payment penalty of 1% of the user charge bill will be added to
each delinquent bill for each 30 days or portion thereof of delinquency.
C. When any bill (including interest and penalty) remains unpaid for one
year after the date due, such bill is subject to lien proceedings under
law. If any such lien (including interest and penalty) remains unpaid for
a period of one year after the date of recordation, such property shall be
subject to sale procedures authorized by law.
§ 176-54 SACO CITY CODE § 176-55
173:404
§ 176-56. Waste of unusual strength.
All users contributing more than 750,000 gallons per month and whose
waste strength is greater than 200 milligrams BOD per liter or 200
milligrams suspended solids per liter shall prepare and file with the
Superintendent a report that shall include pertinent data relating to the
wastewater characteristics, including the methods of sampling and
measurement to obtain these data, and these data shall be used to calculate
the user charge for the user. The City may inspect the waste stream and
take its own samples. Should the City do so and should the results be
substantially different, as determined by the Superintendent, from the data
submitted by the user, the user charge for that user shall be revised for the
next billing cycle/period.
§ 176-57. Review of user charge; abatements.
§ 176-58. Review of rates.
§ 176-59. Fee for discharge of septic tank waste. [Amended
10-18-1995]
The contents from septic tanks located on property within the City may
be discharged at the City of Saco Treatment Plant upon approval by the
D. The City may recover any outstanding balance by any other method
authorized by law. As part of the costs of recovering any outstanding
balance, the City is entitled to an award of reasonable attorney fees.
E. For purposes of this article, "user" means the owner of real estate
served by the sewer system or the person against whom taxes on that
real estate are assessed.
A. Any user who feels his/her user charge is unjust and inequitable may
make written application to the Superintendent, requesting a review of
his user charge. The written request shall, where necessary, show the
actual or estimated average flow and/or strength of wastewater in
comparison with the values upon which the charge is based, including
how the measurements or estimates were made.
B. The Superintendent shall determine abatements based on the
abatement policy approved by the City Council. [Amended 1-6-1997]
A. The City Council shall review and revise the user charges semiannually
and revise the rates as necessary to ensure that adequate revenues are
generated to pay the costs of operation and maintenance, including
replacement and debt retirement, and that the system continues to
provide for the proportional distribution of such costs among users and
user classes.
B. The City will notify each user at least annually of the rate being charged
under this article.
§ 176-55 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-59
173:405
Superintendent. A septic waste discharge fee, as determined by the City
Council, shall be assessed to the septic hauler. The City Council shall review
and revise septic tank discharge rates annually to ensure that adequate
revenues are generated to pay the cost of the septic tank waste treatment.
§ 176-59 SACO CITY CODE § 176-59
173:406
ARTICLE XI
Enforcement
§ 176-60. Notice of violation.
Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter except
§ 176-45, Damage to facilities, and Part 2, Industrial Pretreatment, shall be
served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently
cease all violations.
§ 176-61. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided
for in § 176-60 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction thereof,
shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $100 for each violation. Each
day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate
offense.
§ 176-62. Liability.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the City by
reason of such violation.
§ 176-60 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-62
173:407

Part 2
Industrial Pretreatment
ARTICLE XII
General Provisions
§ 176-63. Purpose and objectives.
This Part 2 sets forth uniform requirements for discharges into the City of
Saco's wastewater facilities and enables the City to protect public health in
conformity with all applicable state and federal laws relating thereto.
A. The objectives of this Part 2 are to:
(1) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the City's wastewater
facilities that will interfere with the normal operation of the
facilities or contaminate or otherwise limit sludge disposal options.
(2) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the City's wastewater
facilities that do not receive adequate treatment in the City's
wastewater facilities and that will pass through the facilities into
receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible
with the facilities.
(3) Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and
sludge from the facilities.
B. This Part 2 provides for the regulation of discharge into the City's
wastewater facilities through the enforcement of administrative
regulations. This section does not provide for the recovery of operation,
maintenance or replacement costs of the City's wastewater facility.
Also, it does not attempt to recover proportional capital costs
associated with the construction of the treatment facility or collection
systems that are the subject of separate ordinances. It does, however,
provide for the collection of the actual administrative costs associated
with compliance, monitoring, enforcement and permitting.
§ 176-63 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-63
173:409

ARTICLE XIII
Regulations
§ 176-64. Prohibited discharges.
No discharger shall discharge or cause to be discharged directly or
indirectly any of the following described substances into the City's
wastewater facilities:
A. Any liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of their nature or quantity,
are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction, to cause fire or
explosion or be injurious in any other way to the operation of the City
wastewater facilities.
B. Solid or viscous substances which will or may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interference with the wastewater facilities
operation.
C. Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
or personnel of the wastewater facilities.
D. Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either
singly or by interaction, to injure or interfere with any wastewater
treatment process or constitute a hazard to humans or animals.
E. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which, either singly
or by interaction, are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to
life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their
maintenance and repair.
F. Any substance which may cause the City's wastewater facilities effluent
or residues, sludges or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and
reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process.
G. Any substance which will cause the City's wastewater facilities to
violate its NPDES permit or State of Maine waste discharge license
certificate.
H. Any substance with objectionable color not removed in the wastewater
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions.
I. Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the City's wastewater treatment works resulting in
interference; but in no case wastewater with a temperature, at the
introduction into the City wastewater treatment works, which exceeds
40º C (104º F).
J. Any slug, which shall mean any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding
pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a single extraordinary discharge
episode of such volume or strength as to cause interference to the City's
wastewater facilities.
§ 176-64 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-64
173:411
§ 176-65. Pretreatment standards.
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards as promulgated by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the Act shall be
met by all affected dischargers. The City shall notify all affected dischargers
of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. The City
may consider applying to the regional administrator for authority to modify
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards when the City's wastewater
treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants as defined by 40
CFR 403.7.
§ 176-66. Compliance required; conflicting standards.
All dischargers shall meet all state, federal or City limitations and
requirements to which they are subject. In the case of conflicting standards,
the discharger shall conform to the most stringent limitation or
requirement.
§ 176-67. Amendments.
The City reserves the right to amend this Part 2 to provide for more
stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the City's wastewater
facilities where deemed necessary to comply with the objectives set forth in
Article XII, § 176-63.
§ 176-68. Increased use of water for dilution prohibited.
No discharger shall increase the use of potable or process water in any way
for the purpose of diluting a discharge as a partial or complete substitute
for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the standards set forth
in this Part 2.
K. Any unpolluted water including, but not limited to, noncontact cooling
water.
L. Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such
half-life or concentration as exceed limits established by the City in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
M. Any flow that, by the nature and duration of its discharge, would cause
hydraulic overloading conditions in the treatment plant or collection
systems.
N. Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public
nuisance.68
68.Editor's Note: A City may apply to the approval authority for permission to set a lower
discharge limit in the event that its system is specifically designed to accommodate such
wastewater.
§ 176-64 SACO CITY CODE § 176-69
173:412
§ 176-69. Protection from accidental discharge.
Each discharger shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
materials or substances prohibited or regulated by this Part 2. Where
deemed necessary by the City, facilities to prevent accidental discharge of
prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the discharger's
expense. Each existing discharger shall complete its plan and submit
accidental discharge protection procedures to the City within 90 days of the
effective date of this Part 2.
§ 176-69 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-69
173:413

ARTICLE XIV
Fees
§ 176-70. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this Part 2 to provide for the payment of fees from
dischargers to the City wastewater disposal system to compensate the City
for the cost of administration of the pretreatment program established
herein. A schedule of fees is contained in Appendix C.
§ 176-71. Costs covered in charges and fees. [Amended 4-7-2003]
The City shall adopt charges and fees as established by the City Council
after a public hearing, which shall include:
A. Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures.
B. Fees for permit applications permits only.
C. Fees for the recovery of costs associated with the City's hiring of
consultants to review and/or draft permits.
D. Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction.
§ 176-70 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-71
173:415

ARTICLE XV
Administration
§ 176-72. Compliance required.
It shall be unlawful to discharge sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes
to any sewer outlet within the jurisdiction of the City and the City's
wastewater facilities without having first complied with the terms of this
Part 2.
§ 176-73. Industrial discharge permit required.
All industrial dischargers proposing to connect to or to discharge sewage,
industrial wastes and other wastes to the City's wastewater facilities shall
apply for an industrial discharge permit within 30 days after the effective
date of this Part 2.
§ 176-74. Permit application and fee.
Industrial dischargers shall complete and file with the City a permit
application in the form prescribed by the City and accompanied with the
appropriate fee. Existing industrial dischargers shall file permit
applications within 30 days after the effective date of this Part 2, and
proposed new dischargers shall file permit applications at least 90 days
prior to connecting with the City's wastewater facilities.
A. The application to be made by the discharger shall be made on written
forms provided by the City and shall cover and not be limited to the
following information:
(1) The name, address and location of the discharger.
(2) The Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) number according to
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the
Budget, 1972, as amended.
(3) Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not
limited to those mentioned in this Part 2, as determined by bona
fide chemical and biological analysis. Sampling and analysis shall
be performed in accordance with procedures established by the
United States EPA and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended.
(4) The number of employees, normal hours of operation and time and
duration of discharges.
(5) Average daily and instantaneous peak wastewater flow rates, in
gallons per day, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if
any. All flows shall be measured, unless other variable techniques
are approved by the Superintendent due to cost or nonfeasibility.
(6) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and pumping plans and details
to show all sewers, sewer connections, inspection manholes,
§ 176-72 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-74
173:417
sampling chambers and appurtenances by size, location and
elevation. All sources of discharge should be numbered and
identified as being process flow or sanitary flow or combinations
thereof.
(7) The description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials which are or may be discharged to
the sewer or works of the City.
(8) The nature and concentration of any pollutant materials prohibited
by this Part 2 in the discharge, together with a statement regarding
whether or not compliance is being achieved with this Part 2 on a
consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operations and
maintenance activities and/or additional pretreatment are required
for the discharger to comply with this Part 2.
(9) Where additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance
activities will be required to comply with this Part 2, the discharger
shall provide a declaration of the shortest schedule by which the
discharger will provide such additional pretreatment and/or
implementation of additional operational and maintenance
activities.
(a) The schedule shall contain milestone dates for the
commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment
required for the discharger to comply with the requirements of
this Part 2, including but not limited to dates relating to hiring
an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final
plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing
construction, completing construction and all other acts
necessary to achieve compliance with this Part 2.
(b) Under no circumstances shall the City permit a time increment
for any single step directed toward compliance which exceeds
nine months.
(c) Not later than 14 days following each milestone date in the
schedule and the final date for compliance, the discharger shall
submit a progress report to the Superintendent including no
less than a statement as to whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress represented by that milestone date and,
if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this
increment of progress, the reason for the delay and the steps
being taken by the discharger to return the construction to the
approved schedule. In no event shall more than nine months
elapse between such progress reports to the City.
(10) Each product produced, by type, amount, process or processes and
rate of production.
§ 176-74 SACO CITY CODE § 176-74
173:418
§ 176-75. Review of application.
Upon formal acceptance of the completed application, the City shall review
the application and shall make a determination to issue the applicant a
discharge permit, issue a permit with conditions or deny the applicant a
discharge permit. The determination of the permit parameters or denial of
a discharge permit shall be based upon the following criteria:
§ 176-76. Amendments.
The City reserves the right to amend this Part 2 and the terms and
conditions hereof in order to assure compliance by the City. The City shall
adopt the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards by reference.
Where a discharger subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard has not previously submitted a permit application as required by
§ 176-74, the discharger shall file an application with the City within 180
days. The discharger shall be informed of any proposed changes in this Part
(11) The type and amount of raw materials utilized (average and
maximum per day).
B. All permit applications shall be signed by the principal executive officer
of the discharger and a qualified engineer.
C. The Superintendent will evaluate the completed permit application and
data furnished by the discharger and may require additional
information.
A. The characteristics and volume of the applicant's proposed discharge
and its potential interaction with present or anticipated flow
characteristics at the City's facilities.
B. The extent to which the applicant is employing the best economically
achievable waste minimization technology and resulting effluents and
sludges. Based on the quantity and toxicity of the proposed discharge,
the City may require a comprehensive waste minimization audit by an
independent engineering firm (consultant) of the City's choice and at
the applicant's expense, as set forth in Article XIV, § 176-71.
(1) The consultant shall conduct a comprehensive waste minimization
audit, including but not limited to a review of wastewater treatment
and recycling options for the applicant's facility, and shall submit a
written report for the City's evaluation of the economic feasibility
and extent of waste reduction achievable by each option.
(2) Based on the consultant's report, the City shall make a
determination whether to require waste minimization measures as
conditions of the permit in order to best protect health, the
environment and jobs.
C. Determinations made under Subsection B may be appealed to the City
Council by the applicant or any interested party.
§ 176-74 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-76
173:419
2 at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or
new conditions in this Part 2 shall include a reasonable time schedule for
compliance.
§ 176-77. Reports.
§ 176-78. Inspection and monitoring equipment.
All sewers shall have an inspection and sampling manhole or structure, with
a minimum opening of 24 inches diameter and an internal diameter of no
less than 36 inches, containing flow measuring, recording and sampling
equipment. All structures and equipment shall conform to specifications
prepared by the Superintendent of the wastewater treatment facility. City
employees shall have unrestricted access and use to monitoring points and
equipment therein.
§ 176-79. Information available to the public; exceptions.
A. Any discharger subject to standards set forth in this Part 2, after the
compliance date of such standard or, in the case of a new discharger,
after commencement of the discharge to the City, shall submit to the
City during the months of June and December, unless required more
frequently by the City, a report indicating the nature and
concentrations of prohibited or regulated substances in the effluent
which are limited by the standards hereof.
B. Reports of dischargers shall contain all results of sampling and analyses
of the discharge, including the flow and nature and concentrations or
production and mass where required by the City. The frequency and
type of monitoring shall be prescribed in the industrial discharge
permit. All analyses shall be performed in accordance with 40 CFR, Part
136, and amendments thereto.
A. Information and data furnished to the City shall be available to the
public or other governmental agency without restriction, unless the
discharger specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Superintendent that the release of such information
would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled
to protection as trade secrets or proprietary information of the
discharger.
B. When requested by a discharger furnishing a report, the portions of a
report which may disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be
made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available
upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this
Part 2, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit, the state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment
programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be
available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or
enforcement proceedings involving the discharger furnishing the
§ 176-76 SACO CITY CODE § 176-79
173:420
report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be
recognized as confidential information.
C. Information accepted by the City as confidential shall not be
transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the
City until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the discharger.
§ 176-79 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-79
173:421

ARTICLE XVI
Enforcement
§ 176-80. Suspension of wastewater treatment service.
The Superintendent may, for good cause shown, suspend the wastewater
treatment service to a discharger when it appears to the Superintendent
that an actual or threatened discharge presents or may present an imminent
or substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons, present
substantial danger to the environment, interfere with the operation of
the City's wastewater facilities or violate any pretreatment limits imposed
by this Part 2. Any discharger notified of the suspension of the City's
wastewater treatment service shall cease or eliminate all discharges. In the
event of failure of the discharger to comply voluntarily with the suspension
order, the City shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize
damage to the City's system or endangerment to any individuals. The City
shall reinstate the wastewater treatment service and terminate judicial
proceedings pending upon proof by the discharger of the elimination of the
noncomplying discharge or conditions creating the threat of imminent or
substantial danger as set forth above.
§ 176-81. Termination of service.
The City may seek to terminate wastewater services to any discharger
which:
§ 176-82. Notice of violation.
Whenever the City finds that any discharger has engaged in conduct which
justifies termination of wastewater treatment services pursuant to § 176-81
hereof, the City shall serve or cause to be served upon such discharger a
written notice, either personally or by certified or registered mail, return
receipt requested, stating the nature of the alleged violation. Within 30
days of the date of receipt of the notice, the discharger shall respond
personally or in writing to the City, advising of its position with respect to
the allegations. Thereafter, the parties shall meet to ascertain the veracity
A. Fails to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics
of its discharge;
B. Fails to report significant changes in wastewater constituents or
characteristics;
C. Refuses reasonable access to the discharger premises by
representatives of the City for the purpose of inspection or monitoring;
D. Fails to submit accidental discharge protection procedures to the City
by the specified date; or
E. Violates the conditions of this Part 2 or any final judicial order entered
with respect thereto.
§ 176-80 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-82
173:423
of the allegations and, where necessary, establish a plan for the satisfactory
correction thereof.
§ 176-83. Discharger to show cause; notice; hearing.
Where the violation of § 176-81 is not corrected by timely compliance, the
Superintendent may order any discharger which causes or allows conduct
prohibited by § 176-81 to show cause, before the City Council or its duly
authorized representative, why the proposed service termination action
should not be taken. A written notice shall be served on the discharger,
by personal service, certified or registered, return receipt requested,
specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the City Council
or its designee regarding the violation, the reasons why the enforcement
action is to be taken and the proposed enforcement action and directing the
discharger to show cause before the City Council or its designee why the
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing
shall be served no less than 10 days before the hearing. Service may be
made on any agent, officer or authorized representative of a discharger.
§ 176-84. Action for legal or equitable relief.
Following the entry of any order by the City with respect to the conduct of
a discharger contrary to the provisions of § 176-81, the City Attorney may,
following the authorization of such action by the City Council, commence an
action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the appropriate local
court.
§ 176-85. Publication of list of violators.
A list of all significant dischargers which were the subject of enforcement
proceedings pursuant to this article during the 12 previous months shall be
annually published by the City in the largest daily newspaper published in
the area in which the City is located, summarizing the enforcement actions
taken against the dischargers, during the same 12 months, whose violations
remained uncorrected 45 or more days after notification of noncompliance
or which have exhibited a pattern of noncompliance over that twelve-month
period or which involve failure to accurately report noncompliance.
§ 176-86. Request for interpretation.
Any discharger or any party shall have the right to request, in writing,
an interpretation or ruling by the City on any matter covered by this
Part 2 and shall be entitled to a prompt written reply. In the event that
such inquiry is by a discharger and deals with matters of performance or
compliance with this Part 2 for which enforcement activity relating to an
alleged violation is the subject, receipt of a discharger's request shall stay
all enforcement proceeding pending receipt of the aforesaid written reply.
Appeal of any final judicial order entered pursuant to this Part 2 may be
taken in accordance with local and state law.
§ 176-82 SACO CITY CODE § 176-87
173:424
§ 176-87. Report of noncompliance.
Any discharger which experiences an upset in operations which places
the discharge in a temporary state of noncompliance with this Part 2
shall inform the City thereof immediately upon first awareness of the
commencement of the upset. Where such information is given orally, a
written follow-up report thereof shall be filed by the person with the City
within five days. The report shall specify:
A. The description of the upset, the cause thereof and the upset's impact
on a discharger's compliance status.
B. The duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of
noncompliance and, if the noncompliance continues, the time by which
compliance is reasonably expected to occur.
C. All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent
recurrence of such an upset or other conditions of noncompliance. A
documented and verified bona fide operating upset shall be an
affirmative defense to any enforcement action brought by the City
against a discharger for any noncompliance with this Part 2 which
arises out of violations alleged to have occurred during the period of the
upset.
§ 176-87 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-87
173:425

ARTICLE XVII
Violations and Penalties
§ 176-88. Fine established.
Any discharger who is found to have violated an order of the City or who
has failed to comply with any provisions of this Part 2 and the regulations
or rules of the City or orders of any court of competent jurisdiction shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction thereof, shall be fined in an
amount of not less than $5,000 per day of violation.
§ 176-89. Liability for damages.
Any discharger violating any of the provisions of this Part 2 or who
discharges or causes a discharge producing a deposit or obstruction or
causes damage to or impairs the City's wastewater facilities shall be liable
to the City for any expense, loss or damage caused by such violation or
discharge. The City shall bill the discharger for the costs incurred by the
City for any cleaning, repair or replacement work caused by the violation or
discharge. Refusal to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation of
this Part 2 enforceable under the provisions of this article.
§ 176-90. False statement or misrepresentation.
Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or
certification in the application, record, report, plan or other document
filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this Part 2 or who falsifies,
tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or
method required under this Part 2 shall, upon conviction, be punished by
the imposition of a civil penalty of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment
for not more than six months, or by both.
§ 176-88 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-90
173:427

ARTICLE XVIII
Records Retention
§ 176-91. Preservation of records.
All dischargers subject to this Part 2 shall retain and preserve, for no
less than three years, any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports,
correspondence and any and all summaries thereof relating to monitoring,
sampling and chemical analyses made by or in behalf of a discharger in
connection with its discharge. All records which pertain to matters which
are the subject of enforcement or litigation activities brought by the City
pursuant hereto shall be retained and preserved by the discharger until
all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with
respect to any and all appeals have expired.
§ 176-91 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-91
173:429

ARTICLE XIX
Removal Credits; Adjustment of Standards
§ 176-92. Program of removal credits.
Where applicable, the City may elect to initiate a program of removal
credits as part of this Part 2 to reflect the City's wastewater facilities' ability
to remove pollutants in accordance with 40 CFR 403.7.
§ 176-93. Adjustment of pretreatment standards.
The City may elect to adjust National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
to reflect the presence of pollutants in the discharger's intake water, in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.14.
§ 176-92 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-93
173:431

Part 3
Sewer Abatement
ARTICLE XX
Abatement Regulations
[Added 9-29-1997]
§ 176-94. Wastewater which did not enter sewer system.
If, in the opinion of the Superintendent, the wastewater did not enter
the collection system, then the City will abate the difference between
the current consumption value and the average of the last two year's
consumption for the same billing period. In the event that the previous
billing consumption values are unrealistic or are suspect, then the
Superintendent shall substitute representative consumption values.
§ 176-95. Wastewater which did enter sewer system.
If, in the opinion of the Superintendent, the wastewater did enter the
collection system, then partial abatements may be given based on the
following criteria:
A. Billing errors. The City may issue a make-up bill for services that the
user received but that were previously unbilled.
(1) If the make-up bill is for the service that was unbilled because of an
error made by the City or the Biddeford Saco Water Company or a
meter failure that could not reasonably have been detected by
either the City, the Water Company or the user, then the City may
bill or collect for services that occurred for one year prior to the
issuance of the make-up bill for a period not to exceed one year
from the issuance of the make-up bill.
(2) If the make-up bill is for service that was previously unbilled
because of unauthorized use or fraud by the user, then the City may
bill for service that occurred up to 10 years before the issuance of
the make-up bill.
(3) In all cases where actual flow data is unavailable, the
Superintendent shall estimate the water usage on historical usage,
comparable facilities or engineering estimates.
B. Leaking fixtures. If, in the opinion of the Superintendent, water entered
the sewer system from a leaking fixture, then the Superintendent can
abate 50% of the consumption above the highest consumption value for
the billing period over the previous three years.
Abatement Amount = (Disputed consumption - highest consumption)
X 50%
§ 176-94 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-95
173:433
C. Criminal activity. If a person, other than the owner of the property,
intentionally causes fixtures to discharge to the sewer system, then the
Superintendent may abate a reasonable portion of the consumption,
provided that the owner:
(1) Prosecutes the person committing the criminal activity.
(2) Shows proof that a claim to the owner's insurance company was
filed and denied.
D. Council appeal. Any user who feels that his/her abatement as
determined by the Superintendent is unfair or unjust shall have the
right to appeal to the City Council. Appeals shall be limited to
consumption value determinations only. The user shall provide written
testimony detailing why the abatement was not fair and evidence
supporting his/her claim of actual consumption.
§ 176-95 SACO CITY CODE § 176-95
173:434
ARTICLE XXI
CSO Impact Fees
[Added 10-20-1997]
§ 176-96. Applicablity.
The combined sewer overflow (CSO) impact fees established by this article
shall apply to all new construction or any change of use which results in
a new or increased discharge of wastewater to the City of Saco collection
system.
§ 176-97. Wastewater volume.
The wastewater volume upon which the CSO impact fee is computed shall
be the same volume as is used for the sewer impact fee established by the
City of Saco in the Sewer Ordinance, Chapter 176, Appendix A.
§ 176-98. CSO impact fee computation. [Amended 5-15-2000]
The CSO impact fee shall be computed as follows:69
CSO impact fee = wastewater discharge gal/day x sewer impact rate
ratio x rate/gallon established by the City Council
after a public hearing.
§ 176-99. CSO impact rate. 70 [Amended 5-15-2000]
A. The CSO impact rate shall be established by the City Council after a
public hearing. The basis of the CSO impact rate shall be as follows: The
CSO impact rate shall be based upon the cost to remove one to three
gallons of stormwater from entering the combined sewer system. For
new lots, the CSO impact fee shall be based on a ration of 3 to 1.
B. The rate shall also be adjusted annually based on the cost of
construction index established by the Engineering New Record (ENR),
an established national publication. The index adjustment shall be
based on the index established for July of each year.
C. The Engineering New Record Index value for cost in the CSO Master
Plan shall be established based on the current month index at the time
the ordinance is enacted. Therefore, the rate at the time an impact fee
is paid shall be:
Actual CSO impact fee rate =
base CSO impact fee rate
x current ENR Index
initial ENR Index
The rate shall be established by the Council after a public hearing.
69.Editor's Note: Copies of the current fee schedule are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
70.Editor's Note: Copies of the current fee schedule are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 176-96 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-100
173:435
§ 176-100. Payment of fee.
§ 176-101. Alternatives to impact fee.
§ 176-102. Assessment appeal.
Any person or entity not satisfied with the CSO impact fee assessment
under § 176-99 may request to have his/her CSO impact fee assessment
reviewed by the Impact Fee Assessment Committee. All requests shall be
in writing to the City Administrator within 10 days of notification of the
CSO impact fee assessment by the City of Saco. Requests shall be based on
differences in flow determinations. Written requests shall include complete
documentation supporting the applicant's position.
§ 176-103. Impact Fee Assessment Committee.
The Impact Fee Assessment Committee shall consist of the following
officials:
A. The CSO impact fee shall be paid at the time the building permit is
obtained. Commercial and industrial applicants may request an
assessment of the fee to be made in installments through a written
request to the City Administrator.
B. The City Administrator shall have the authority to approve or deny a
request for installment payments. In the event of denial of the request
for installment, the applicant shall pay the CSO impact fee in full at the
time a building permit is obtained.
A. Commercial and industrial applicants may propose alternatives, which
will mitigate the impact of new flows entering the wastewater systems.
Such options shall be presented by the applicant, in writing, to the City
Administrator. Options could include:
(1) Off-line storage and pumping. The applicant may propose methods
for off-line storage during all precipitation, including snowmelt
events by the use of off-line storage and pumping. The applicant's
control systems must be compatible with the City of Saco's current
control system.
(2) Use of City CSO credits. The City shall maintain an account of
stormwater gallons removed in separation or mitigation projects
conducted by the City. At the City's discretion and with the
approval of the City Council, the City may issue credits in gallons
per day to reduce all or part of the CSO impact for commercial and
industrial projects.
B. The City shall review the applicant's proposed alternative within 60
days. Alternative application review expenses incurred by the City shall
be paid by the applicant. The City Council shall approve or disapprove
the request for the alternative.
§ 176-100 SACO CITY CODE § 176-103
173:436
§ 176-104. Rules of procedure.
§ 176-105. Decision notification.
§ 176-106. Request for City Council hearing.
A. The Superintendent of the Wastewater Treatment Facility.
B. The Director of Public Works.
C. The Building Inspector.
D. The Finance Director.
E. Two citizens of Saco appointed by the Mayor.
A. Upon receiving the application the Impact Fee Assessment Committee
will notify the applicant of the time and date of hearing.
B. The Impact Fee Assessment Committee shall adopt its own rules of
procedure for the reviewing of the requests and adjustments.
C. The Impact Fee Assessment Committee may accept any written or oral
testimony supporting the applicant's request, provided that the
testimony is not irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious.
D. The Impact Fee Assessment Committee may conduct such crossexamination
as may be required for a full and true disclosure of the
facts. The Impact Fee Assessment Committee shall confine its decision
to the information and material gathered at the hearing.
E. All meetings shall be open to the public and only those materials and
testimony introduced at the hearing shall be used as the basis for
decisions. Correspondences and other material in the possession of the
City shall be made record.
F. The Impact Fee Assessment Committee may adjourn a meeting and visit
the site for which an adjustment is being requested. Site visits by the
Committee shall be arranged with the property owner who shall have
an opportunity to be present or be represented.
A. The Impact Fee Assessment Committee shall forward its decision on the
appeal to the City Administrator's office for final dispensation.
B. The applicant shall be notified by the City Administrator of the Impact
Fee Assessment Committee's decision.
A. The applicant may request a hearing before the City Council if he/she
disagrees with the decision of the Impact Fee Assessment Committee.
B. The applicant must request a hearing within 30 calendar days of the
notification of decision from the City Administrator. The City
§ 176-103 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-106
173:437
§ 176-107. Use of funds.
All fees generated by this article shall be placed in a nonlapsing, interestbearing
fund to be known as the "CSO Impact Fee Fund," to be used only
for improvements to the existing wastewater collection system or additional
treatment facilities for the purpose of treating combined storm and sanitary
flows.
§ 176-108. When effective; review.
This article shall be effective within 30 days after the adoption by the City
Council. The CSO Impact Fee Ordinance shall be reviewed by the Council
every two years.
Administrator's office will then notify the applicant of the date and time
of the hearing.
§ 176-106 SACO CITY CODE § 176-108
173:438
ARTICLE XXII
Subsurface Disposal Impact Fee
[Added 5-24-2004]
§ 176-109. Fee imposed; disposition of funds; use.
A. All building units or building expansions requiring the installation of a
subsurface disposal system or expansion to an existing subsurface
disposal system shall be subject to a subsurface disposal impact fee.
B. The subsurface disposal impact fee is based on the number of
equivalent dwelling units (EDU) any particular use can be anticipated
to produce and which will impact the wastewater treatment plant. An
EDU is based on an anticipated load from a single-family home (1.0
EDUs = a single-family residential unit). Appendix A, attached hereto
and a part hereof,71 sets forth a schedule of the EDUs for those uses
listed. The rate shall be established by the City Council after a public
hearing.
C. The Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall provide an
annual report to the City Council concerning the administration of this
section and the collection of the charge created by this section. In his/
her annual report, and at such other times as he deems necessary, he
shall suggest whatever changes he thinks appropriate to the schedule
contained in Appendix A. The City Council may make amendments to
Appendix A, by order.
D. Any person seeking to install or expand a subsurface disposal system
shall fill out an appropriate form provided by the Code Enforcement
Officer or his/her designee. No building permit or occupancy permit,
whether for new use or construction or structural change or change of
use, may be issued until the fee under this section has been paid.
E. All charges generated by this section shall be placed in a non-lapsing
fund, to be known as the "Wastewater Treatment Facilities Fund," to be
used only for improvements to the existing wastewater treatment
facilities or construction of additional treatment facilities.
F. All impact fees collected pursuant to this article shall be used to
develop, design, construct, expand, improve and/or install municipal
wastewater treatment facilities and associated capital improvements
for the handling, disposal and treatment of septic waste. The impact
fees collected and retained by the City in the account described in
Subsection E above must be spent, not later than 10 years after
collection, pursuant to a facilities plan developed by the Director of
Public Works. The facilities plan shall be reviewed maintained and
revised every five years.
71.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the City offices.
§ 176-109 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-109
173:439
G. Those impact fees collected but which are not used within the ten-year
limit set forth above shall be refunded to the parties that paid them.
Further, if the costs associated with any facilities or capital
improvement are less than the impact fees collected for such
improvements, then any savings incurred shall be refunded to the
parties that paid the impact fees on a pro-rata basis.
§ 176-109 SACO CITY CODE § 176-109
173:440
Part 4
Non-S[tAodrdmewda1t-e3r- 2D0is0c5h]arges
ARTICLE XXIII
Regulation of Discharges
§ 176-110. Purpose; objectives.
§ 176-111. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Part 4, the following shall mean:
CLEAN WATER ACT — The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq., also known as the "Clean Water Act"), and any subsequent
amendments thereto.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS OR HIS/HER DESIGNEE — The person(s)
or department authorized under § 176-113 of this Part 4 to administer and
enforce this Part 4.
DISCHARGE — Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emptying,
dumping, disposing or other addition of pollutants to waters of the state.
"Direct discharge" or "point source" means any discernible, confined and
discrete conveyance, including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel,
tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated
animal feeding operation or vessel or other floating craft, from which
pollutants are or may be discharged.
EXEMPT PERSON OR DISCHARGE — Any person who is subject to a
multisector general permit for industrial activities, a general permit for
construction activity, a general permit for the discharge of stormwater from
the Maine Department of Transportation and the Maine Turnpike Authority
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems, or a general permit for the
discharge of stormwater from state or federally owned authority municipal
separate storm sewer system facilities; and any non-stormwater discharge
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Non-Stormwater Discharge Ordinance
(the "Ordinance") is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the City of Saco through the regulation of nonstormwater
discharges to the municipality's storm drainage system as
required by federal and state law. This Part 4 establishes methods for
controlling the introduction of pollutants into the City's storm drainage
system in order to comply with requirements of the federal Clean Water
Act and state law.
B. Objectives. The objectives of this Part 4 are to:
(1) Prohibit unpermitted or unallowed non-stormwater discharges to
the storm drainage system; and
(2) Set forth the legal authority and procedures to carry out all
inspection, monitoring and enforcement activities necessary to
ensure compliance with this Part 4.
§ 176-110 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-111
173:441
permitted under a NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge license or
order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA") or the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection ("DEP").
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activity or activities subject to NPDES industrial
permits as defined in 40 CFR 122.26 (b)(14).
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Saco.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM or MS4 — Conveyances
for stormwater, including, but not limited to, roads with drainage systems,
municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made
channels or storm drains (other than publicly owned treatment works and
combined sewers) owned or operated by any municipality, sewer or sewage
district, fire district, state agency or federal agency or other public entity
that discharges directly to surface waters of the state.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the EPA or by
the DEP that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United
States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general
area-wide basis.
NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to an MS4 that is not
composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation, municipality, quasimunicipal
corporation, state agency or federal agency or other legal entity, which
creates, initiates, originates or maintains a discharge of storm water or a
non-stormwater discharge.
POLLUTANT — Dredged spoil, solid waste, junk, incinerator residue,
sewage, refuse, effluent, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemicals,
biological or radiological materials, oil, petroleum products or by-products,
heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, dirt and industrial,
municipal, domestic, commercial or agricultural wastes of any kind.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips,
located within the municipality from which discharges into the storm
drainage system are or may be created, initiated, originated or maintained.
REGULATED SMALL MS4 — Any small MS4 regulated by the State of
Maine "General Permit for the Discharge of Stormwater from Small
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems" dated June 3, 2003 ("general
permit"), including all those located partially or entirely within an urbanized
area (UA) and those additional small MS4s located outside a UA that, as
of the issuance of the general permit, have been designated by the DEP as
"regulated small MS4s."
SMALL MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM or SMALL MS4
— Any MS4 that is not already covered by the Phase I MS4 stormwater
program, including municipally owned or operated storm sewer systems,
state or federally owned systems, such as colleges, universities, prisons,
§ 176-111 SACO CITY CODE § 176-111
173:442
Maine Department of Transportation and Maine Turnpike Authority road
systems and facilities, and military bases and facilities.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM — The municipality's regulated small MS4 and
all premises.
STORMWATER — Any stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface
runoff and drainage; "stormwater" has the same meaning as "storm water."
URBANIZED AREA (UA) — The areas of the State of Maine so defined by
the latest decennial (2000) census by the U.S. Bureau of the Census.
§ 176-112. Applicability.
This Part 4 shall apply to all persons discharging stormwater and/or nonstormwater
discharges from any premises into the storm drainage system.
§ 176-113. Responsibility for administration.
The Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this Part 4.
§ 176-114. Prohibition of non-stormwater discharges; exceptions.
A. General prohibition. Except as allowed or exempted herein, no person
shall create, initiate, originate or maintain a non-stormwater discharge
to the storm drainage system. Such non-stormwater discharges are
prohibited notwithstanding the fact that the municipality may have
approved the connections, drains or conveyances by which a person
discharges unallowed non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage
system.
B. Allowed non-stormwater discharges. The creation, initiation,
origination or maintenance of the following non-stormwater discharges
to the storm drainage system is allowed:
(1) Landscape irrigation; diverted stream flows; rising groundwaters;
uncontaminated groundwater infiltration [as defined at 40 CFR
35.2005(20)]; uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
uncontaminated flows from foundation drains; air conditioning and
compressor condensate; irrigation water; flows from
uncontaminated springs; uncontaminated water from crawl space
pumps; uncontaminated flows from footing drains; lawn watering
runoff; flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; residual street
wash water (where spills/leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have
not occurred, unless all spilled material has been removed and
detergents are not used); hydrant flushing and fire-fighting activity
runoff; water line flushing and discharges from potable water
sources; and individual residential car washing;
(2) Discharges specified in writing by the Director of Public Works or
his/her designee as being necessary to protect public health and
safety; and
§ 176-111 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-114
173:443
§ 176-115. Suspension of Access to small MS4.
The Director of Public Works or his/her designee may, without prior notice,
physically suspend discharge access to the storm drainage system to a
person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened
non-stormwater discharge to the storm drainage system which presents
or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or
to the health or welfare of persons, or to the storm drainage system, or
which may cause the municipality to violate the terms of its environmental
permits. Such suspension may include, but is not limited to, blocking pipes,
constructing dams or taking other measures, on public ways or public
property, to physically block the discharge to prevent or minimize a nonstormwater
discharge to the storm drainage system. If the person fails to
comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the Director of
Public Works or his/her designee may take such steps as deemed necessary
to prevent or minimize damage to the storm drainage system, or to minimize
danger to persons, provided, however, that in taking such steps the Director
of Public Works or his/her designee may only enter upon the premises that
is the source of the actual or threatened non-stormwater discharge to the
storm drainage system with the consent of the premises' owner, occupant
or agent.
§ 176-116. Monitoring of discharges.
In order to determine compliance with this Part 4, the Director of Public
Works or his/her designee may enter upon and inspect premises subject to
this Part 4 at reasonable hours with the consent of the premises' owner,
occupant or agent; to inspect the premises and connections thereon to the
storm drainage system; and to conduct monitoring, sampling and testing of
the discharge to the storm drainage system.
§ 176-117. Enforcement; violations and penalties; appeals.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of or to fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this Part 4. Whenever the Director
of Public Works or his/her designee believes that a person has violated this
Part 4, the Director of Public Works or his/her designee may enforce this
Part 4, in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
(3) Dye testing, with verbal notification to the Director of Public Works
or his/her designee prior to the time of the test.
C. Exempt person or discharge. This Part 4 shall not apply to an exempt
person or discharge, except that the Director of Public Works or his/her
designee may request from exempt persons and persons with exempt
discharges copies of permits, notices of intent, licenses and orders from
the EPA or DEP that authorize the discharge(s).
A. Notice of violation.
§ 176-114 SACO CITY CODE § 176-117
173:444
(1) Whenever the Director of Public Works or his/her designee believes
that a person has violated this Part 4, the Director of Public Works
or his/her designee may order compliance with this Part 4 by
written notice of violation to that person indicating the nature of
the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it,
including, without limitation:
(a) The elimination of non-stormwater discharges to the storm
drainage system;
(b) The cessation of discharges, practices, or operations in
violation of this Part 4;
(c) At the person's expense, the abatement or remediation (in
accordance with best management practices in DEP rules and
regulations) of non-stormwater discharges to the storm
drainage system and the restoration of any affected property;
and/or
(d) The payment of fines, of the municipality's remediation costs
and of the municipality's reasonable administrative costs and
attorneys' fees and costs.
(2) If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
abatement or restoration must be completed.
B. Penalties; fines; injunctive relief. Any person who violates this Part 4
shall be subject to fines, penalties and orders for injunctive relief and
shall be responsible for the municipality's attorney's fees and costs, all
in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452. Each day such violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation. Moreover, any person
who violates this Part 4 also shall be responsible for any and all fines,
penalties, damages and costs, including, but not limited to, attorneys'
fees and costs, incurred by the municipality for violation of federal and
state environmental laws and regulations caused by or related to that
person's violation of this Part 4; this responsibility shall be in addition to
any penalties, fines or injunctive relief imposed under this section.
C. Consent agreement. The Director of Public Works or his/her designee
may, with the approval of the municipal officers, enter into a written
consent agreement with the violator to address timely abatement of the
violation(s) of this Part 4 for the purposes of eliminating violations of
this Part 4 and of recovering fines, costs and fees without court action.
D. Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation
or suspension notice may request reconsideration by the City
Administrator within 30 days. Following reconsideration by the City
Administrator or his/her designee, any person may appeal the decision
of the City Administrator or his/her designee to Superior Court in
accordance with Maine Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 80B. [Amended
1-18-2005]
§ 176-117 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-117
173:445
§ 176-118. Severability.
The provisions of this Part 4 are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this Part 4 or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions, clauses, sentences, or
paragraphs or application of this Part 4.
§ 176-119. Statutory authority; basis for adoption.
The City of Saco enacts this Non-stormwater Discharge Ordinance (the
"Ordinance") pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001 (municipal home rule
ordinance authority), 38 M.R.S.A. § 413 (the "Wastewater Discharge Law"),
33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. (the "Clean Water Act"), and 40 CFR Part 122
[U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's regulations governing the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System ("NPDES")]. The Maine
Department of Environmental Protection, through its promulgation of the
"General Permit for the Discharge of Stormwater from Small Municipal
Separate Storm Sewer Systems" dated June 3, 2003, has listed the City of
Saco as having a regulated small municipal separate storm sewer system
("small MS4"); under this general permit, listing as a regulated small MS4
necessitates enactment of this Part 4 as part of the municipality's
stormwater management program.
E. Enforcement measures. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant
to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of
an appeal, within 45 days of the decision of the City Administrator
upholding the decision of the Director of Public Works or his/her
designee, then the Director of Public Works or his/her designee may
enforce this Part 4 in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
[Amended 1-18-2005]
F. Ultimate responsibility of discharger. The standards set forth herein are
minimum standards; therefore this Part 4 does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no
contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants into
waters of the U.S. caused by said person. This Part 4 shall not create
liability on the part of the municipality, or any agent or employee
thereof for any damages that result from any person's reliance on this
Part 4 or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
§ 176-117 SACO CITY CODE § 176-119
173:446
Chapter 177
SEX OFFENDERS
§ 176-119 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 176-119
173:447

ARTICLE I
Residency Restrictions
[Adopted 10-19-2015]
§ 177-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "City of Saco Sex Offender Residency
Restriction Ordinance."
§ 177-2. Findings and purpose.
The City promotes and strives to create a safe environment for its citizens
to live and raise families in and considers the promotion of the safety and
welfare of children to be of paramount importance. The City recognizes that
sex offenders who prey upon children may have a high rate of recidivism,
and for this reason extra protective measures are beneficial to the
community and its children. Notwithstanding the fact that certain persons
convicted of sex offenses or sexually violent offenses are required to
register pursuant to the Maine Sex Offender Registration and Notification
Act of 1999, 34-A M.R.S.A. § 11201 et seq., as may be amended from time
to time, the City finds that further protective measures are necessary and
warranted to safeguard places where children play and congregate. The
purpose of this article is to provide such further protective measures while
balancing the interests and residential needs of sex offenders.
§ 177-3. Authority.
This article is adopted in accordance with the provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 3001 and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3014, as may be amended from time to time.
§ 177-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DESIGNATED SEX OFFENDER(S) — Person(s) convicted of Class A, B or
C sex offenses committed against persons who had not attained 14 years
of age at the time of the offense, regardless of whether the offense was
committed in the State of Maine or another jurisdiction.
RESIDENCE — The temporary or permanent occupation or use of a place,
including, but not limited to, a domicile, for the purpose of living, residing
or dwelling.
RESTRICTED PROPERTY —
The real property comprising a public or private elementary, middle or
secondary school; and
A.
The real property comprising a municipally owned property or stateowned
property that is leased to a nonprofit organization for purposes
B.
§ 177-1 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 177-4
173:449
SETBACK — A radius of 750 feet surrounding restricted property.
§ 177-5. Restricted Property Map; restrictions.
of a park, athletic field or recreation facility that is open to the public
where children are the primary users.
A. The Public Works Department, with the assistance of the Police
Department, shall prepare and file with the City Clerk and Police
Department an official map showing restricted property (to be called
the "Restricted Property Map"), as defined by this article. Said map is
hereby incorporated herein and made a part of this article. The Police
Department shall, by July 1 of each year, recommend updates of the
Restricted Property Map to the City Council to reflect any changes in
the locations of any restricted property and setbacks. The City Council
shall review any proposed changes recommended by the Police
Department at public hearing and may thereafter amend the Restricted
Property Map by Council Order. The official Restricted Property Map,
and all amendments thereafter, shall be filed with the City Clerk and the
Police Department. If the Police Department does not forward or
recommend any changes or revisions to the Restricted Property Map,
then the existing Restricted Property Map shall remain in force and
effect until the succeeding July 1.
B. No designated sex offender shall reside within the setback of any
restricted property, except as may be permitted below pursuant to
§ 177-6.
C. Restricted property list:
(1) Thornton Academy, 438 Main Street.
(2) Middle School, 40 Buxton Road.
(3) Young School, 36 Tasker Street.
(4) Burns School, 135 Middle Street.
(5) Fairfield School, 75 Beach Street.
(6) Community Center, 75 Franklin Street.
(7) Pepperell Park, Beach Street.
(8) Diamond Riverside Park, Irving Street.
(9) Saco Little League Field, Summer Street.
(10) Parks and Recreation maintained playgrounds and athletic fields at
the following locations:
(a) Softball field, Franklin Street and North Street.
(b) Foss Road athletic fields.
§ 177-4 SACO CITY CODE § 177-5
173:450
§ 177-6. Exceptions.
A designated sex offender maintaining a residence within the setback of
a restricted property is not in violation of this article if the residence was
established and consistently maintained as a residence prior to the date of
adoption of this article. A designated sex offender is not in violation of this
article if the restricted property is created, moved or enlarged and such
creation, movement or enlargement results in a designated sex offender
residing within the setback of a restricted property, as long as the residence
was in place and consistently maintained prior thereto. The Police Chief has
the discretion, in the chief's judgment, to waive the residency restrictions.
§ 177-7. Publication and notice.
The Restricted Property Map shall be posted in the City Planning
Department with all City Zoning Maps, and a copy shall also be posted at
the Saco Police Station at a place easily visible by the public. The City shall
also post the Restricted Property Map on the City's official website. The City
may, at its option, also mail a copy of the Restricted Property Map to the
owners of all rental properties located within the City of Saco, so they are
also on notice as to the location of all restricted properties.
§ 177-8. Violations and penalties.
(c) Plymouth Drive playground.
(d) Richards Way playground.
(e) Bruno Circle athletic field.
(f) Hillview Avenue playground.
(g) Lincoln Road playground.
(h) Ryan Road playground.
(i) Rosewood Drive playground.
A. A designated sex offender who, 30 days after actual receipt of written
notice sent by regular mail or hand-delivered from the City, acting by
and through its Police Department, is in violation of this article shall be
subject to an action brought by the City to enforce the requirements of
this article. The City may file a legal action against the violator seeking
any and all remedies to which it is entitled pursuant to state and local
laws, including, without limitation, declaratory and injunctive relief.
B. The City may also seek a penalty in the minimum amount of $500 per
day. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate violation. In the
event the City is the prevailing party in any action under this article, it
shall be entitled to an award of its reasonable attorney's fees, court
costs and the costs of any expert witness fees incurred by the City. All
civil penalties shall inure to the benefit of the City of Saco.
§ 177-5 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 177-9
173:451
§ 177-9. Severability.
If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this article is for any reason
held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and
such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.
§ 177-9 SACO CITY CODE § 177-9
173:452
Chapter 181
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 149.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 163.
Recreational vehicles — See Ch. 169.
Sewers — See Ch. 176.
Junked vehicles — See Ch. 214.
§ 177-9 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 177-9
173:453

ARTICLE I
Collection and Removal
§ 181-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARBAGE — Includes all decayed or spoiled food and refuse resulting from
the preparation of food.
OVERFLOW — Garbage set out for collection that exceeds the amount
contained in the City-provided collection container; applies only to those
household wastes considered acceptable in the curbside collection
program.[Added 10-7-2002]
RESIDENTIAL USES — For the purpose of providing solid waste collection,
includes single-family, duplex and multifamily dwellings (up to and
including six units) on public ways. Residential uses may include home
occupations as defined in the Zoning Ordinance, but not other mixed
commercial and residential uses.[Amended 3-04-2002]
RUBBISH — Waste material not containing putrid matter or organic waste.
"Rubbish" does not include stumps, recyclable material or other wastes
designated as unacceptable herein.
§ 181-2. Container specifications. [Amended 10-20-1997;
10-7-2002]
§ 181-3. Containers required; hours for placement and removal;
replacement or additional containers; overflow waste. [Amended
10-7-2002]
A. All garbage and rubbish containers required by this article shall be
designated, provided and owned by the City of Saco; all residences
receiving municipal solid waste services are required to use only the
City-provided containers for weekly refuse collection. These containers
hold a capacity of up to 65 gallons and shall not be filled to a gross
weight of more than 150 pounds each. Each residential unit will be
allowed one City-designated container per pickup. Decisions to permit a
second container will be made on a case-by-case basis for exceptionally
large households, and in those cases, only after a solid waste inspection
by a Saco Public Works staff member to determine that the need
remains when maximum recycling is being done.
B. All nonresidential or commercial users shall provide adequate garbage
containers for the weekly rubbish generated by the business conducted
on the premise. At a minimum, the owner shall provide a secured
container or containers with closable covers to minimize the stacking
and spreading of the garbage generated by the subject business.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the City to provide and make available
suitable and sufficient containers as described by § 181-2 to receive the
§ 181-1 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 181-3
173:455
§ 181-4. Accumulation of rubbish prohibited.
accumulation of weekly household waste. Each container shall be
placed as instructed by the City or its designated garbage collector
along the street, sidewalk or roadside for automated collection. Citydesignated
garbage containers may be set out for collection the evening
or day before, and should be removed from the street or roadside after
collection.
B. Should a City-owned container be damaged or lost by a household, the
City will make another such container available for replacement at a
fee. Under special circumstances to be evaluated on a case-by-case
basis, rental or seasonal buildings will be allowed to rent additional
containers from the City for a fee to be determined by the City Council.
C. Residents who have “overflow waste,” defined as garbage set out for
collection that exceeds the amount contained in the City-provided
collection container, may take it to the City’s Recycling Center for
disposal. Residents may pick up a disposal permit at Public Works. With
proof of residency, a household may dispose of up to three cubic yards
of waste acceptable at the Transfer Station per year at no cost; waste in
excess of three cubic yards can be disposed of at the Transfer Station at
a rate to be established by the City Council. [Amended 10-20-2008]
A. Each household or business is responsible for preventing accumulation
of rubbish. All residential rubbish must be set out in a City-designated
container for garbage collection. Each household or commercial unit
must contain its waste in receptacles as described in § 181-2. Pursuant
to § 181-3, each container shall be placed as instructed by the garbage
collector along the street, sidewalk or roadside for automated
collection. City-designated garbage containers may be set out for
collection no earlier than 2:00 p.m. on the day before the day of
collection. All receptacles must be removed from the sidewalk or edge
of the roadway shoulder by noon on the day after collection. No person
shall cause or permit any accumulation of rubbish which, in the opinion
of the Health Officer or Health Inspector, is unsanitary or hazardous to
the health of the public or, in the judgment of the Fire Chief of the Fire
Department, constitutes a fire hazard. The Code Enforcement Officer is
hereby authorized to waive this requirement when it is found that
special or unusual circumstances do not permit the container to be
removed at the prescribed time. [Amended 10-7-2002; 3-19-2012]
B. Dumping prohibited. No person shall throw or place any refuse, paper,
trash, glass, nails, wire, bottles, cans, building materials, yard waste,
including grass trimmings, leaves, brush, branches, concrete, earthen
fill, garbage containers, litter or other debris in any ditch, stream, river
or retention basin that regularly or periodically carries surface water
runoff. Any person who deposits any of the above shall remove it or
cause it to be removed immediately. The Code Enforcement Officer, the
Public Works Director or any one else designated by either shall be
responsible for the enforcement of this provision. [Added 11-5-2001]
§ 181-3 SACO CITY CODE § 181-5
173:456
§ 181-5. Pickup schedule. [Amended 10-7-2002]
The City may provide one scheduled waste pickup and one recyclable
pickup per week per route for all residential uses, except during cleanup
weeks, by the order of the City Council and Director of Public Works. The
City will provide special collection to allow overflow, defined as excess
waste that does not fit into the City-designated container, around the
Thanksgiving and Christmas holidays. During the week immediately
following the Thanksgiving and Christmas holidays, garbage collection will
include in addition to the regularly collected sixty-four-gallon container, up
to two bags of overflow per household unit.
§ 181-6. Commercial uses.
No person, firm or corporation owning, operating or being in charge of
any public warehouse, market, store, fruit stand, restaurant, kitchen, dining
room or other place where putrescible waste matter or other rubbish
accumulates shall permit the deposit or accumulation of such waste matter
or other rubbish in or upon the building or premises controlled by him or it.
§ 181-7. Contracted services. [Amended 11-7-2005]
The City, at its discretion, may enter into contracts for the collection of
recyclable materials or other solid wastes with residential uses that do
not meet the strict definition of residential uses in this article, and with
nonresidential uses. Each contract shall be negotiated individually.
§ 181-8. Pickup procedure.
The occupants of every residential building shall place containers for the
removal of the contents by the persons authorized to collect the same,
and no person other than the occupant, the owner of the premises or an
authorized collector shall remove, take or otherwise disturb this refuse or
any portion thereof so placed for removal. Containers placed in the public
way on the regularly scheduled collection day shall be considered as being
intended for collection, and as such shall be collected by no one other than
authorized persons. Containers, if containing putrescible matter, shall be
covered to prevent the ingress of flies, rats or other animals.
§ 181-9. Abuse of containers.
No person shall willfully remove, destroy, mutilate or utilize for another
purpose other than the holding of rubbish, garbage, recyclables or other
waste matter containers which have been provided in accordance with this
article.
§ 181-10. City equipment on private property.
No City equipment shall leave public-used and City-maintained roads,
streets, lanes, highways, etc., to go on private property to pick up waste or
rubbish, unless otherwise provided for herein.
§ 181-5 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 181-11
173:457
§ 181-11. Notice to remove waste.
Any owner, agent or occupant of land upon whose premises any unlawful
accumulation of offal, refuse, waste or rubbish may be found shall, within 24
hours after receiving written notification from the Chief of Police or Health
Officer, cause the same to be removed and the nuisance abated in a manner
satisfactory to the Health Officer and the Chief of Police.
§ 181-12. Conveyance of refuse.
Every vehicle which shall be used for the conveyance of ashes, cinders,
sawdust, loose paper, cartons, boxes, cases, slabs, sticking wood, rubbish,
gravel, dirt or any other substance or material or any other articles which
may fall therefrom shall be entirely enclosed or have tarpaulins or covers
securely attached to the sides and ends of the vehicle and of sufficient
size and form as shall entirely cover the contents of such vehicle and
prevent such contents from being blown or falling therefrom, irrespective
of whether such vehicle is licensed for the conveyance of such contents or
not.
§ 181-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-5-2001]
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall be
subject to a penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $2,500 for each
offense.
§ 181-11 SACO CITY CODE § 181-13
173:458
ARTICLE II
Disposal Facilities
§ 181-14. Findings and purpose. [Amended 10-20-2008]
The City has a statutory obligation to provide a solid waste disposal facility
for domestic and commercial waste generated within the City and is
authorized to provide such a facility for industrial waste and sewage
treatment plant sludge pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A. § 1305, Subsection 1.
§ 181-15. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms have the following meanings,
unless the context indicates otherwise:
ACCEPTABLE WASTE — Solid wastes of the type presently accepted at
the landfill used by the municipality, including all ordinary household,
municipal, institutional and industrial wastes, with the following exceptions:
COLLECTION FACILITY — A building or container or designated area
at which acceptable waste is disposed for transshipment to the energy
recovery facility.
DISPOSAL FACILITY — One or more facilities designated by the
municipality as the storage and/or disposal site for unacceptable wastes.
Demolition or construction debris from building and roadway projects
or locations.
A.
B. Liquid wastes or sludges.
C. Abandoned or junk vehicles.
Hazardous waste; that is, waste with inherent properties that make
it dangerous to manage by ordinary means, including but not limited
to chemicals, explosives, pathological wastes, radioactive wastes, toxic
wastes and other wastes defined as hazardous by the State of Maine or
the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended, or
other federal, state and local laws, regulations, orders or other actions
promulgated or taken with respect thereto.
D.
E. Dead animals or portions thereof or other pathological wastes.
F. Water treatment residues.
G. Tree stumps.
H. Tannery sludge.
I. Waste oil.
Discarded white goods, including but not limited to freezers, stoves,
refrigerators and washing machines.
J.
§ 181-14 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 181-15
173:459
ENERGY RECOVERY FACILITY — The facility designated herein which
processes and recovers energy and/or useful materials from acceptable
waste generated in the City.
MIXED OR SPLIT LOAD — Municipal solid waste generated by two or
more municipalities and transported by a single waste vehicle for disposal
at a licensed waste handling facility and chargeable to respective
municipalities.[Amended 10-20-2008]
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Saco, Maine.
UNACCEPTABLE WASTE — All solid waste of the type municipalities are
required to regulate by 38 M.R.S.A. § 1305, as amended, which specifically
excludes industrial and sewage treatment plant sludge and is not included
in the definition of acceptable waste.
§ 181-16. (Reserved)72
§ 181-17. Regulated activity.
The accumulation, collection, transportation and disposal of acceptable
waste and unacceptable waste generated within the City shall be regulated
in the following manner:
§ 181-18. Exempted waste.
The following categories of waste shall be exempted from regulation by this
article:
A. All acceptable waste generated within the City shall be deposited at a
collection facility or directly at the energy recovery facility.
B. All unacceptable waste generated within the City shall be deposited at a
disposal facility.
C. Mixed or split loads are prohibited under this article.
A. Materials from manufacturing, processing or packaging operations
which are segregated from solid waste and salvaged for alternate use
or reuse by the generator or sold to third parties.
B. Glass, metal or other noncombustible materials which are separated
from acceptable waste by the generator as part of a recycling program
approved by the City Council.
C. Cardboard, paper or other combustible materials which are separated
from acceptable waste by the generator as part of a recycling program
approved by the City Council, provided that any such recycling program
shall not reduce the British thermal unit (Btu) content of acceptable
waste below the Btu level acceptable to the energy recovery facility.
72.Editor's Note: Former § 181-16, Energy recovery facility, was repealed 10-20-2008.
§ 181-15 SACO CITY CODE § 181-19
173:460
§ 181-19. Property rights.
All acceptable waste collected for transfer to the energy recovery facility or
deposited at a disposal facility shall become the property of the City or its
assignee. No one may salvage, remove or carry off any such waste without
prior approval of the City Council.
§ 181-20. Administration.
This article shall be administered by the City Council. Its powers and duties
are as follows:
§ 181-21. Licenses; fees.
A. To adopt reasonable rules and regulations as needed to enforce this
article.
B. To consider all license applications and to grant or deny each
application within 60 days after receipt of a completed application at
the City offices or within such other time as the Council and the
applicant shall agree is reasonable.
C. To review any alleged violation of this article and to impose appropriate
penalties therefor after notice and hearing as required by this article.
D. To institute necessary proceedings, either legal or equitable, to enforce
this article.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall accumulate, collect, store,
transport or dispose of acceptable waste or unacceptable waste
generated within the City without obtaining a license from the City
Council.
B. Any person, firm or corporation required by this article to obtain a
license shall make application to the City Council, providing the
information required. The rate shall be established by the City Council
after a public hearing.73 [Amended 5-15-2000]
C. The application shall contain all information required by the City
Council, including but not limited to a description of the activity, e.g.,
collection, transport or disposal of acceptable and/or unacceptable
waste; current list of customers; the type and amount of waste handled
in each service area; a description of the facility operated and used; and
an equipment inventory, including, for vehicles, a description of the
make, model and year of each vehicle used for the collection or
transportation of solid waste, which information shall be revised
annually upon license renewal. If the City Council determines the
application to be incomplete, it shall notify the applicant, in writing, of
the specific information necessary to complete it. The City Council shall
73.Editor's Note: Copies of the current fee schedule are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 181-19 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 181-21
173:461
be informed immediately of any changes in or additions to equipment,
including vehicles. [Amended 9-3-2002]
D. Licenses are not transferable.
E. All licenses shall expire one year from the date of issue, unless
otherwise stated on the license or revoked or suspended sooner in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
F. In the event that the City Council denies a license application, it shall
notify the applicant, in writing, and shall state the reasons for the
denial. The applicant may request a public hearing in accordance with
the procedures in § 181-23.
G. In the event that the City Council grants a license application, the
applicant shall pay the rate established by the City Council after a
public hearing for each vehicle licensed or a rate to be established by
the City Council after a public hearing for each applicant licensed for
activities not involving the transport of solid waste.74 This fee is in
addition to the application fee. The Council may prorate this fee where
appropriate. The Council may not refund any portion of this fee if the
license is suspended or revoked. [Amended 5-15-2000]
H. The Council may grant a special license to a licensee, for a limited
period and upon such terms and conditions as it deems appropriate
using the procedure that it deems appropriate, for a replacement
vehicle in the event of an emergency or a vehicle breakdown.
I. The Council may deny a license application upon a finding that the
applicant:
(1) Does not have the financial capacity and technical ability to
conduct the activity described in the application.
(2) Has not made adequate provision for the control of offensive odors
or has not made adequate provision to prevent air and water
pollution.
(3) Has not previously secured any necessary state or federal permits.
(4) Has failed to respond to inquiries relative to the source of waste or
location of waste generators during periods of time when the City
Administrator or his/her designee is monitoring tonnage being
hauled by waste haulers. Failure to respond within 14 days of an
inquiry shall be reason for denial.
(5) Has failed to transport waste loads in completely enclosed
containers or vehicles. Such containers or vehicles shall be kept
tightly covered and secured to prevent any spillage on public ways.
(6) Has failed to comply with any other provisions of this article.
74.Editor's Note: Copies of the current fee schedule are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 181-21 SACO CITY CODE § 181-21
173:462
§ 181-22. License suspension or revocation.
Any license issued may be suspended or revoked by order of the City
Council after benefit of a hearing in accordance with the procedures in
§ 181-23 for the following causes:
§ 181-23. Hearings.
J. As a general condition of all licenses, a licensee shall be billed monthly
by the City of Saco for the tipping fees paid at MERC on the licensee's
behalf by the City of Saco. In addition, the City shall establish a rate
after a public hearing for an administrative surcharge to the monthly
bill.75 Allowing a balance to remain unpaid for longer than 30 days will
constitute a violation of this article and is grounds for revocation of the
license. (Within 30 days of the effective date of this amendment, all
licenses issued under this article shall be reissued with this general
condition. No additional application fee will be required and the
existing expiration date will remain the same.) This provision will not
pertain to any company operating under a City contract. [Amended
5-15-2000]
A. Violation of this article.
B. Violation of any provision of any state or local law, ordinance, code or
regulation which relates directly to the provisions of this article.
C. Violation of any license condition.
D. Falsehoods, misrepresentations or omissions in the license application.
A. Anyone denied a license or whose license is suspended or revoked
pursuant to § 181-22 is entitled to a hearing before the City Council if
such request is made, in writing, within 10 days of the denial,
suspension or revocation.
B. Such hearings shall be held within 30 days after receipt of the written
request for a hearing.
C. The licensee or applicant shall be notified, in writing, as to the time and
place of the hearing at least 10 days prior to the hearing date. The
applicant or licensee has the right to be represented by counsel, to offer
evidence and to cross-examine witnesses, but the hearing is not subject
to rules of evidence or formal rules for adjudicatory proceedings.
D. A determination shall be made by the City Council within 10 days after
the conclusion of the hearing, and notice of the decision shall be served
upon the applicant or licensee by registered mail, return receipt
requested.
75.Editor's Note: Copies of the current fee schedule are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 181-21 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 181-23
173:463
§ 181-24. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
This article shall be enforced by the City Council or its designees. Any
person violating any provision of this article commits a civil violation for
which a forfeiture of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 shall be
adjudged. Each day of violation constitutes a separate offense. Any violation
is deemed to be a nuisance, and the City Council may bring an action for
equitable relief.
§ 181-25. Variances.
The City officers may, on written application, grant a variance from a
specific provision of this article in a specific case, subject to appropriate
conditions, where such variance is in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of this article and the agreement between the City and the energy
recovery facility.
§ 181-26. When effective.
This article shall become effective on the date that the energy recovery
facility begins commercial operations, provided that the City provides
notice of commencement in the manner required for publication of
ordinances. Any person, firm or corporation required to obtain a license
hereunder shall have 60 days from the date of adoption of this article to
secure such license, which shall become effective on the date specified
therein.
E. The City Council's final determination relative to the denial or
suspension or revocation of a license and the period of suspension or
revocation shall take effect as provided in the notice, unless, at the time
of final determination, the City Council made it effective immediately.
The City Council's determination is conclusive. Notice of the final
determination shall set forth the reasons for the denial, suspension or
revocation and the effective dates thereof, together with a statement
that such decision may be appealed as provided in this article.
F. Any controversy or claim arising out of or relating to the municipal
officers' determination may be appealed to the Superior Court pursuant
to Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 80B, within 30 days after the
City Council's final determination.
§ 181-23 SACO CITY CODE § 181-26
173:464
ARTICLE III
Transfer Station
[Amended 2-18-1997; 9-3-2002; 10-7-2002; 7-9-201876]
§ 181-27. Findings and purpose.
A. Eco-Maine, the City's solid waste provider, is not designed to receive
certain types of solid wastes. Those types of solid wastes are listed in
§ 181-15 under the definition of "acceptable waste," the exceptions
listed in Subsections A to J.
B. It is important that the City provides a disposal facility (hereinafter
referred to as "transfer station") for the receipt of unacceptable waste
other than hazardous waste. This article sets out the procedure for the
operation of the transfer station.
C. The Public Works Director shall be responsible for operation of the
transfer station and enforcement of this chapter in accordance with
current environmental regulations, and the director may amend
operational practices not contrary to the provisions of this transfer
station article.
D. The Director shall determine and post at the entrance to the transfer
station site the days and hours the site is open. The Director shall
designate attendants who shall control the access the facility.
E. The following shall be considered, allowable at the transfer station.
(1) Recyclable cans, plastics, newspapers, glass and flattened
cardboard, sorted and placed into appropriate bins;
(2) Leaves, grass, yard clippings; cut or decayed wood less than three
inches in diameter and six feet in length;
(3) Wood, lumber;
(4) Sheetrock, fiberglass insulation, clean scrap metal, vinyl siding;
(5) Household white goods including stoves, refrigerators, washing
machines and clothes dryers; other used or scrap residential or
office furniture including tables, desks, and filing cabinets;
(6) Furniture, such as mattress/boxsprings, couch, chairs, or carpets;
(7) Electronic and universal waste products such as televisions and
computer components;
(8) Any used, scrapped or otherwise discarded rubberized vehicle tire;
(9) Any other material which the attendant deems reasonably similar
in composition and character to the material designated in
76.Editor’s Note: This amendment provided an effective date of 8-9-2018.
§ 181-27 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 181-27
173:465
§ 181-28. through § 181-29. (Reserved)
Subsection E(1) through (8) and which is not prohibited by
Subsection F.
F. The following shall be prohibited from deposit at a City transfer station:
(1) Explosives or other volatile materials or any chemical or waste
found to be hazardous;
(2) Junk vehicles, trailers and construction equipment bodies;
(3) Products with asbestos contents;
(4) Combustible material of any kind including but not limited to
gasoline, kerosene and paint thinner;
(5) Fuel, gas;
(6) Medical or other potentially infectious or pathogenic wastes;
(7) Excavation materials;
(8) Any material which the attendant because of character or quality,
considers hazardous or detrimental to the efficient or sanitary
operation of the area.
G. Fee schedule.
(1) The City shall set and charge user fees for disposable items and
refuse. The fees may be adjusted by order of the City Council, as
needed. User fees must be paid at the transfer facility at the time of
disposal.
(2) No commercial vehicles, except those with the sole purpose of
disposing leaves, grass, yard clippings and construction or bulky
debris derived from Saco residential properties or trucks larger
than one ton may dispose of waste materials at the transfer facility.
City vehicles may dispose of waste materials at the facility.
§ 181-27 SACO CITY CODE § 181-28
173:466
ARTICLE IV
Mandatory Recycling Program
§ 181-30. Purpose.
The purposes of this article are to protect the health, safety and general
well-being of the residents of the City and provide a solid waste disposal
option that does not require the incineration or burial of valuable raw
materials. By establishing a mandatory recycling program affecting all
residents of the City of Saco, the City will save money currently being
spent on the disposal of solid waste, will generate revenues from the sale
of recyclable materials and will reduce the impact on the environment
from the generation, processing, manufacturing and sale and distribution of
goods made from virgin materials.
§ 181-31. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONTAINERS — Items including glass bottles and jars, plastic bottles and
jugs, and metal cans.[Added 10-7-2002]
FIBER — Items including paper products such as cardboard, newspaper,
and magazines.[Added 10-7-2002]
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those items designated by the City
Administrator or his designee as suitable for inclusion in the City's recycling
program.
RECYCLING CONTAINER — A container distributed by the City of Saco to
Saco residents for the purpose of facilitating the collection of recyclable
materials at the curb.
RECYCLING VEHICLE — A vehicle utilized by the City of Saco or its
designated agent to collect recyclable materials at the curb from all
residential uses on a City-maintained public way.
RESIDENTIAL USES — For the purpose of providing solid waste collection,
shall mean and include single-family, duplex and multifamily dwellings (up
to and including six units) on public ways.
§ 181-32. Applicability; separation of recyclable materials required.
[Amended 11-7-2005]
A. This article shall apply to all uses, both residential and nonresidential,
within the City.
B. All recyclable materials shall henceforth be separated from the daily
waste stream and, for residential uses, placed at the curb in accordance
with the provisions of this article. Nonresidential uses shall also
separate recyclables from the waste stream and either deliver those
items to the City's recycling center or have them collected as
recyclables, not as acceptable waste to be sent to the City's contracted
§ 181-30 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 181-32
173:467
§ 181-33. Property rights.
Any and all recyclable materials placed at the curb become the sole
property of the City or its designated agent. No one may salvage, remove or
carry off any such material without prior approval of the City Council.
§ 181-34. Collection procedures.
§ 181-35. Violations and penalties.
disposal facility. The City may provide curbside collection of recyclables
for all residential uses located on a public road. Nonresidential
buildings, i.e., businesses, offices, retail, hotels, apartments, mobile
home parks, motels and bed-and-breakfast establishments, shall not
receive curbside collection services from the City. Buildings that
contain both business and residential uses shall be classified by the
majority use within the building, based on square footage. However, the
City may, in its discretion, contract individually with nonresidential uses
to provide curbside recycling collection services.
A. The City may provide weekly curbside collection of recyclable materials
to all residential uses within the City. Collection of recyclables shall be
on the same day as the regular garbage collection.
B. Recyclable materials shall be placed at the curb, separate from the
regular garbage and rubbish. All items shall be prepared as directed by
the City Administrator or his/her designee. Items not prepared as
directed by the City Administrator will be left at the curb.
C. Recyclable materials shall be placed in separate containers for each
category of materials, e.g., fiber and containers or as directed by the
City Administrator. Containers may be provided by the City to every
household to facilitate the separation and collection process. Any
containers distributed by the City remain the property of the City.
[Amended 10-7-2002]
A. For the purposes of this article, the placement of recyclable materials in
with regular garbage for collection and transport to the City's
contracted disposal facility shall constitute a violation. Violators of this
article shall first be given written notice of noncompliance. Subsequent
violations shall result in noncollection of garbage placed at the
curbside, along with written notice. On the third event of written notice,
a civil violation shall have been committed for which a forfeiture of not
less than $50 shall be adjudged. Any violation is deemed to be a
nuisance, and the City Council may bring an action for equitable relief.
B. For the purposes of this article, the collection and transport of
recyclable materials to a facility that does not provide for the
separation and reclamation of recyclable materials shall also constitute
a violation. Each violation shall constitute a civil violation for which a
forfeiture of not less than $100 shall be adjudged. Any violation is
§ 181-32 SACO CITY CODE § 181-35
173:468
§ 181-36. Contracted services. [Amended 11-7-2005]
The City, at its discretion, may enter into contracts for the collection of
recyclable materials or other solid wastes with residential uses that do
not meet the strict definition of residential uses in this article, and with
nonresidential uses. Such additional residential uses would include but not
be limited to condominium associations. Each contract shall be negotiated
individually.
deemed to be a nuisance, and the City Council may bring an action for
equitable relief. Such violation shall also be considered a violation of
§ 181-22.
C. Violations of any other provisions of this article shall constitute a civil
violation for which a forfeiture of not less than $50 shall be adjudged.
Any violation is deemed to be a nuisance, and City Council may bring an
action for equitable relief.
§ 181-35 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 181-36
173:469

ARTICLE V
Sludge
§ 181-37. Title.
This article may be cited as the "Sludge Utilization Ordinance."
§ 181-38. Purpose.
This article regulates the land application of stabilized sludge within the
City, in conjunction with rules and conditions of approval of the Department
of Environmental Protection. It is intended to encourage utilization of
recoverable resources under circumstances which protect the health, safety
and welfare of the citizens of Saco and which protect the environment.
§ 181-39. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — The owner of land upon which stabilized sludge is proposed
to be spread.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Environmental Protection.
INCORPORATION — The mixing of sludge with soil in its upper horizon by
such means as subsurface injection, rototilling, harrowing or plowing.
PLANT — The City of Saco Wastewater Treatment Plant.[Amended
4-1-1996]
SLUDGE — The various solids and associated liquids encountered and
concentrated during wastewater treatment.
STABILIZED SLUDGE — Sludge which may be spread on or applied to land
after having undergone a process to reduce pathogens that is acceptable to
the Department. Analysis of sludge shall be conducted quarterly.77
§ 181-40. Certain sludge prohibited; exemptions. [Amended
4-1-1996]
A. Sludge generated at sources other than the City of Saco Wastewater
Plant may not be imported into the City for disposal, treatment,
processing or utilization of any kind unless such application has been
approved by the Superintendent and permitted by the City Council.
B. This article does not regulate the importation or utilization of stabilized
sludge which has been composted or stabilized in a manner to further
reduce pathogens as approved by the Department. The use of such
stabilized sludge may be permitted by the Superintendent, who is
77.Editor's Note: The former definition of "Superintendent," added 4-1-1996, as amended,
which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 1-22-2013.
§ 181-37 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 181-40
173:471
§ 181-41. Application process; fee; renewal.
authorized to waive the provisions of this article if satisfied that the
stabilized sludge to be used falls within the provisions of this section.
C. Municipalities having reciprocal agreements with the City of Saco may
be permitted for land spreading agreements by the City Council,
provided that the sludge has been composted or stabilized in a manner
to further reduce pathogens that is approved for utilization by the
Department. The use of such stabilized sludge must be approved by the
Superintendent and permitted by the City Council, provided that the
stabilized sludge or pulp and paper-mill sludge to be used falls within
the provisions of this section.
A. Any person, firm or corporation desiring to apply stabilized sludge to
his or its land shall first apply for a license from the City Council. A fee
established by the City Council after a public hearing shall accompany
the application. [Amended 4-1-1996; 4-7-2003]
B. The applicant shall indicate on the application the following
information:
(1) The proposed method of land application.
(2) The proposed buffer zones.
(3) The present land use and any proposed land use.
(4) The soil type. A copy of the soil test shall be attached to the
application and maintained with the City's records.
(5) A permit from the Department approving land spreading. [Added
4-1-1996]
(6) The location of wells on the applicant's property and abutting
properties.
C. If the application is subsequently approved, the City shall offer abutting
landowners an initial well-testing for heavy metals and other
contaminants, as recommended by the Department of Environmental
Protection. Anyone not willing to submit to testing shall have no claim
honored by the City for alleged contamination.
D. The applicant must have a reciprocal agreement with the City of Saco.
[Added 4-1-1996]
E. When an application is received under this article, the City Clerk shall
place the application on the agenda for the next City Council meeting.
At that meeting, the Council shall schedule a public hearing for the
purpose of reviewing the application.
F. Not less than five days before the public hearing, the City Clerk shall
cause a notice of the hearing to be published in a newspaper having
§ 181-40 SACO CITY CODE § 181-41
173:472
§ 181-42. Buffer zones.
§ 181-43. Limitations on sludge application.
As part of the approval of any application, the Council may impose any or
all of the following limitations:
§ 181-44. Standards for sludge application.
The application of stabilized sludge to land shall conform to good
agricultural practices and is subject to any rules established by the
Department.
general circulation in the City. Not less than seven days before the
public hearing, the City Clerk shall cause notices of the hearing to be
sent to owners of land abutting the land upon which the sludge is to
be used. The City Clerk may send the notices by regular mail to the
addresses indicated in the records of the Tax Assessor's office.
G. Any person, firm or corporation who wishes to renew a license issued
under this article shall file an application for renewal with the City
Clerk. Upon receipt of such renewal application, the City Clerk shall
follow the procedure outlined in Subsections E and F of this section.
A. The Council may not approve an application which does not
demonstrate that the following distances will be maintained from the
land proposed for sludge application:
(1) Residence: 300 feet.
(2) Surface waters: 300 feet.
(3) Roadways: 100 feet.
(4) Water supply wells: 300 feet.
(5) High-water mark of intermittent swales and drainage ditches: 25
feet.
B. The distances indicated in Subsection A may be increased depending
upon site conditions, provisions to prevent odors, runoff or
groundwater contamination and any other factors which the Council
considers to require greater distances.
A. A specified limit on the number of times stabilized sludge may be
applied to the land.
B. More restrictive buffer zones, as indicated in § 181-42.
C. Initial and subsequent soils analyses to determine the cumulative effect
of the sludge application process.
D. Monitoring of wells to determine impact on water supplies.
§ 181-41 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 181-45
173:473
§ 181-45. Use of lime to control odors. [Amended 4-1-1996]
If, during or after the application of stabilized sludge to land, excessive
odors are noticeable from any abutting property, the Superintendent may
require the immediate application of lime to the land. The Superintendent
shall ensure that sufficient lime is immediately applied to eliminate the
excessive odors.
§ 181-46. Right of entry.
As a condition of any approval, the applicant shall agree to provide to
the Council's designee and to the Department access to the land at all
reasonable times.
§ 181-47. Term of license; revocation.
§ 181-48. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates any provision of this
article is subject to a forfeiture of not less than $500 for each offense, to
be recovered in a proceeding brought in the name of the City. Each day of
violation constitutes a separate violation.
A. Any license issued under this article expires three years after issuance
but may be renewed if a renewal application is submitted under
§ 181-41G prior to the expiration date. [Amended 4-1-1996]
B. Any violation of this article or of any term or condition of a license is
grounds for revocation of the license. In case of any such violation, the
Council may notify the applicant and establish a hearing date to
consider revocation of the license. Such notification to the applicant
constitutes an immediate suspension of any authority granted to the
applicant by the license or under this article pending hearing.
§ 181-45 SACO CITY CODE § 181-48
173:474
ARTICLE VI
Disposal on Private Property
§ 181-49. Private dumps.
§ 181-50. Use of public facilities.
§ 181-51. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a fine
of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 for every offense. Every day a
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the stated
fine, the costs incurred by the City of Saco to clean up and dispose of the
waste shall also be collected.
§ 181-52. Rewards.
Any person, firm or corporation providing information leading to the
conviction of any person, firm or corporation for depositing or dumping any
domestic or commercial solid waste, such as rubbish, refuse, debris, trash
or garbage, or any wastes classified as special or hazardous by the State of
Maine, shall receive a reward of $250 from the fine paid by the violator of
this article.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall use, cause to be used or allow to be
used any lot or parcel owned by said person, firm or corporation for the
depositing or dumping of any solid domestic or commercial waste, such
as rubbish, refuse, debris, trash or garbage, or any wastes classified as
special or hazardous by the State of Maine.
B. No person, firm or corporation shall use or cause to be used any lot or
parcel owned by another for the depositing or dumping of any solid
domestic or commercial waste, such as rubbish, refuse, debris, trash or
garbage, or any wastes classified as special or hazardous by the State of
Maine.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall use or cause to be used any litter
receptacle, trash can or dumpster owned and maintained by the City of
Saco for the depositing or dumping of any domestic or commercial solid
waste, such as rubbish, grass clippings or other yard wastes, refuse,
debris, trash or garbage, or any wastes classified as special or
hazardous by the State of Maine.
B. No person or corporation shall use, cause to be used or allow to be used
any public right-of-way for the depositing or dumping of any domestic
or commercial solid waste, such as rubbish, refuse, debris, trash,
garbage, grass clippings or other yard wastes. Public rights-of-way,
including sidewalks, drive aprons and esplanades, shall remain free of
commercially distributed advertisements or newsprint of any kind.
§ 181-49 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 181-52
173:475
Chapter 186
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs and nondomestic animals at large — See
Ch. 64, Arts. II and IV, respectively.
Bicycles, skateboards and roller skates — See
Ch. 69.
Sewers — See Ch. 176.
Trees — See Ch. 204.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 211.
§ 181-52 SACO CITY CODE § 181-52
173:476
ARTICLE I
Excavations in Streets and Public Places
[Amended 4-18-2000; 1-8-2001; 4-7-2003; 4-18-2017]
§ 186-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY — The City of Saco and/or its public works.
DRIVEWAY OPENING PERMIT — Permit issued by the City to a licensed
contractor for construction or reconstruction of any portion of a residential
or commercial driveway within the public right-of-way.
EXCAVATION — Any opening in the surface of a public place made in any
manner whatsoever, except an opening in a lawful structure below the
surface of a public place, the top of which is flush with the adjoining surface
and so constructed as to permit frequent openings without injury or damage
to the public place.
FACILITY — Pipe, pipeline, tube, main, service, trap, vent, vault, manhole,
meter, gauge, regulator, valve, conduit, wire, tower, pole, pole line, anchor,
cable, junction box or any other material, structure or object of any kind or
character, whether enumerated herein or not, which is or may be lawfully
constructed, left, placed or maintained in, upon, along, across, under or
over any public place.
INSPECTOR — A duly authorized representative of the City, including the
Director of Public Works, the City Engineer or their representatives.
LICENSED CONTRACTOR — Any person who has been issued a contractor
license by the City to work within public places and public rights-of-way in
the City.
NEWLY BUILT or REBUILT STREETS — Any public place which has been
newly built or rebuilt within the preceding five years.
PERMITTEE — Any person who has obtained a permit as required by this
article.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street, way, place, alley, sidewalk, park,
square, plaza or any other similar public property owned or controlled by
the City and dedicated to public use.
STREET OPENING PERMIT — Permit issued by the City to a licensed
contractor for any construction activity within the public right-of-way,
excluding work associated with residential or commercial driveways.
UTILITY — A private company, corporation or quasi-municipal corporation
under the direction and control of the Public Utilities Commission.
§ 186-2. Contractor license.
§ 186-1 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 186-2
173:477
§ 186-3. Permit required.
A. No person or utility shall be granted an opening permit to work in a
public place without holding a valid Contractor License for such work
from the City. The Public Works Department shall issue such license
upon receipt of a completed application; determination of competency
and ability of the applicant to perform work in accordance with City
standards; receipt of the required annual license fee; receipt of proof of
insurance as required in § 186-31; and receipt of bond or cash deposit.
A Contractor License may be revoked if the City determines the person
or utility has willfully disobeyed any portion of this article. The
Contractor License is valid for one year unless an extension is approved
by the Director.
B. Bonds or cash deposits shall be required for all licensed contractors in
good standing, other than utilities, in order to guarantee their
performance. Bonds in the amount of $5,000 or cash deposit in the
amount of $2,500 shall be provided to the City in order for a license to
be issued. Bonds shall be posted for a minimum of two years. Cash
deposits shall be refunded on an annual basis in an amount not to
exceed $2,000 upon approved completion of all conditions of this
article.
A. No licensed contractor shall make any excavation or fill any excavation
in any public place without first obtaining an opening permit from the
Director of Public Works, except as otherwise provided in this article.
(1) Examples of work typically requiring an opening permit include,
but are not necessarily limited to, installation of utilities,
driveways, curbing or sidewalks; excavation or filling for grading
purposes; or any other modification that could either damage the
City's infrastructure or conflict with existing or planned utility or
infrastructure locations.
(2) Construction activities limited to the repair/reconstruction of
existing driveways or construction of new driveways within any
public place (primary activity) are required to obtain a driveway
opening permit. The work associated with these construction
activities may also include ancillary sidewalk and curb restoration
work associated with the primary activity.
(3) All other construction activities within a public place are required
to obtain a street opening permit.
B. Each year, on or about March 31 and updated monthly thereafter, each
utility should submit to the Director of Public Works its planned work
program for the ensuing year, which will not include emergency work,
as defined in § 186-21 hereof, or normal hours service lines. Any
opening permit issued to a utility company by the Director of Public
Works which is contained on the list aforementioned shall be issued for
the duration depending on the complexity of the work to be performed
§ 186-2 SACO CITY CODE § 186-3
173:478
§ 186-4. Application for permit.
and supported by a work schedule which must be approved by the
Director of Public Works. Any opening permit issued to a utility
company by the Director of Public Works which is not covered on the
aforementioned list shall be issued for a period not to exceed 30 days
from the time of issuance. All opening permits issued under this section
will terminate on November 1 of each year.
C. Excavation work must be started no later than 30 days from the date of
issuance of the opening permit. After the expiration of this thirty-day
period, the opening permit shall become null and void and shall have to
be renewed.
D. Excavation shall not begin within a twelve-hour period from the time
the opening permit is issued. The applicant shall notify the Director of
Public Works when excavation will begin, at least 12 hours beforehand.
E. The Director of Public Works or his/her duly authorized representative
shall have the authority to revoke the opening permit if it is found that
any section of this article has been violated. Upon such action, the
person or utility shall cease all work and proceed to make trench
conditions safe to the public. Work shall not commence until a new
opening permit has been issued and all waiting periods have been
adhered to.
A. No opening permit shall be issued unless a written application, on a
form provided by the City for the issuance of an opening permit, is
submitted to the Director of Public Works. The written application shall
state the name and address of the applicant, licensed contractor, and an
emergency phone number that will be answered 24 hours a day.
(1) If the applicant is other than a utility and intends to excavate in the
vicinity of a facility owned or operated by a public utility or an oil
pipeline owned by a person, the applicant shall provide the
information required by the City under this section to the utility or
person owning such facility, in addition to providing such
information to the City.
(2) The application shall provide the name of the public place to be
excavated, the street number, the beginning date of proposed work
and the type of work to be done. Signatures of utility approval, the
signature of the City department (if involved) and a diagram of the
planned excavation, submitted on a sketch 8 1/2 inches by 11
inches, marked "Exhibit A," showing trench locations, trench
widths, trench depths and the location of all barricades, warning
signs, detour signs and detour routes may be required by the
Director of Public Works. This sketch shall become part of the
permit and shall be strictly followed. Three copies shall be
presented with the application.
§ 186-3 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 186-4
173:479
§ 186-5. Fees.
§ 186-6. (Reserved)
§ 186-7. Clearance for vital structures.
The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to
interfere with access to fire hydrants, fire stations, valve housing structures,
traffic signal cables and loops and all other equipment as designated by the
City.
§ 186-8. Protective measures and routing of traffic.
(3) The permit shall also provide for a preconstruction meeting if so
warranted by the Director of Public Works.
B. The application for an opening permit shall be accompanied by a cash
deposit as hereinafter provided. All applications shall be presented to
the Director of Public Works for the issuance of an opening permit,
within 30 days from the date of the last utility approval. After the
expiration of this thirty-day period, the application shall become null
and void and shall have to be renewed.
A. A fee established by the City Council after a public hearing shall be paid
for each opening permit or renewal thereof. Each opening permit may
be assessed two fees; an administrative charge and a permanent
pavement restoration charge as follows:
(1) Administrative. This fee shall reimburse the City for the direct cost
of labor and equipment necessary to administer the rules and
regulations of this article and the rehabilitation of the City streets
primarily due to excavations.
(2) Permanent pavement restoration. This fee shall cover the City's
cost of permanently restoring the disturbed pavement area.
B. Effective April 18, 2017, all fees and charges collected by the
Administrator in the issuance of permits pursuant to this article shall be
placed in a fund dedicated and utilized solely for the administration of
this article and the rehabilitation of City streets primarily due to
excavations.
C. Public utility companies. Where excavations are made by public utility
companies operating under a franchise issued by the City or under the
supervision of the Public Utility Commission or utilities operated by
governmental agencies, a permit may be granted without assessment of
the permanent pavement restoration fee. In such cases, the utility
company shall be liable for the cost to repair the opening in accordance
with City standards and maintenance of the repair for a three-year
period.
§ 186-4 SACO CITY CODE § 186-8
173:480
A. The permittee shall, in general, maintain safe crossings for two lanes of
vehicle traffic at all street intersections where possible and safe
crossings for pedestrians at intervals of not more than 200 feet. If any
excavation is made across any public street, alley or sidewalk, adequate
crossings shall be maintained for vehicles and for pedestrians. If the
street is not wide enough to hold the excavated material without using
part of the adjacent sidewalk, a passageway at least 1/2 of the sidewalk
width shall be maintained along such sidewalk line.
B. It shall be the duty of every permittee cutting or making an excavation
in or upon any public place to place and maintain barriers and warning
devices necessary for the safety of the general public. Traffic control in
the vicinity of all excavations affecting vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle
traffic shall be subject to final review and approval of the Traffic
Engineer or his/her designated representative.
C. Barriers, warning signs, lights, etc., shall conform to the latest edition
of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Warning lights shall
be electrical markers or flashers used to indicate a hazard to traffic
from sunset of each day to sunrise of the next day. Electrical markers or
flashers shall emit light at sufficient intensity and frequency to be
visible at a reasonable distance for safety. Reflectors or reflecting
material may be used to supplement, but not replace, light sources.
D. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that during
the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions as near
normal as possible shall be maintained at all times so as to minimize
inconvenience to the occupants of the adjoining property and to the
general public.
E. When traffic conditions permit, the Public Works Director or his/her
designated representative, with the approval of the Police and Fire
Departments of the City, may, by written approval (or by verbal
approval in case of emergency), permit the closing of streets and alleys
to all traffic for a period of time prescribed by him/her, if in his/her
opinion it is necessary. The written approval of the Public Works
Director may require that the permittee give notification to various
public agencies and to the general public. In such cases, such written
approval shall not be valid until such notice is given. In case of
emergency on weeknights, weekends or holidays, the utility company
having such emergency shall contact the Police and Fire Departments
by phone before closing a street to traffic, except in a case of immediate
hazard of loss of life or serious property damage, in which event prompt
notice of closing shall be given.
F. Warning signs shall be placed far enough in advance of the construction
operation to alert traffic within a public street, and cones or other
approved devices shall be placed to channel traffic in accordance with
the instructions of the Public Works Director, after his/her review of the
proposed traffic control measures for the project.
§ 186-8 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 186-8
173:481
§ 186-9. Relocation and protection of existing utilities.
The permittee shall not interfere with any existing facility without the
written consent of the City and the owner of the facility. If it becomes
necessary to relocate an existing facility, this shall be done by its owner.
No facility owned by the City shall be moved to accommodate the permittee
unless the cost of such work shall be borne by the permittee. The cost of
moving privately owned facilities shall be similarly borne by the permittee,
unless it makes other arrangements with the person owning the facility.
G. The permittee shall hereby be informed that the Public Works Director
will require special police protection at locations where the permittee,
by his/her work, interferes with school walk routes or crossing
locations.
H. The permittee is also informed that construction activities (unless an
emergency condition exists) shall not interfere with the normal flow of
traffic on arterial streets of the City, except to the extent and under
conditions approved by the Public Works Director and Police and Fire
Departments. The full roadway lane width shall be maintained between
the hours of 6:45 a.m. and 8:30 a.m. and between the hours of 4:00 p.m.
and 9:00 p.m.
I. The permittee may shift traffic to the opposite side of the roadway to
maintain the above-required lane width. The permittee may only make
such shift with the approval of the Public Works Director, following
proper review of detour plans to ensure adequate, safe two-way traffic
flow and proper number and placement of police officers.
A. The permittee shall support and protect, by timbers or otherwise, all
pipes, conduits, poles, wires or other apparatus which may be in any
way affected by the excavation work and do everything necessary to
support, sustain and protect them under, over, along or across the work.
The permittee shall secure approval of method of support and
protection from the owner of the facility.
B. In case any pipes, conduits, poles, wires or apparatus should be
damaged, and for this purpose pipe coating or other encasement or
devices are to be considered as part of a substructure, the permittee
shall promptly notify the owner thereof. All damaged facilities shall be
repaired by the agency or person owning them, and the expense of such
repairs shall be charged to the permittee.
C. It is the intent of this section that the permittee shall assume all liability
for damage to facilities, and any resulting damage or injury to anyone
because of such facility damage and such assumption of liability is a
contractual obligation of the permittee. The only exception will be such
instances where damage is exclusively due to the negligence of the
owner of the facility. The City shall not be made a party to any action
because of this section. The permittee shall inform itself as to the
§ 186-8 SACO CITY CODE § 186-9
173:482
§ 186-10. Abandonment of substructure.
§ 186-11. Protection of public property.
The permittee shall not remove, even temporarily, any trees or shrubs which
exist in the street area without first obtaining the consent of the appropriate
City department or City official having control of such property.
§ 186-12. Excavated material.
existence and location of all underground facilities and protect the
same against damage.
A. Whenever the use of a substructure is abandoned, except the
abandonment of service lines designed to serve single properties, the
person or utility owning, using or controlling such substructure or
having an interest therein shall, within 30 days after such
abandonment, file with the City a statement, in writing, giving in detail
the location of the substructure so abandoned. If such abandoned
structure is in the way or subsequently becomes in the way of an
installation of the City or any other public body, the owner of such
substructure shall establish if the substructure is abandoned and make
the first cut or tap before allowing the substructure to be removed by
the excavator.
B. When gas or other flammable service to buildings is discontinued, the
existing service line for such service shall be terminated at a point
outside the building.
A. All work shall be conducted in strict accordance with the latest
regulations of OSHA for excavations.
B. All excavations shall be performed in accordance with the City of Saco
Department of Public Works specifications or in a manner prescribed by
the Public Works Director for circumstances not covered by the
specifications.
C. All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or
in any street shall be piled and maintained in such manner as not to
endanger those working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the
streets and so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those
using streets and adjoining property.
D. Where the confines of the area being excavated are too narrow to
permit the piling of excavated material beside the trench, the City shall
have the authority to require that the permittee haul the excavated
material to a storage site and then rehaul it to the trench site at the
time of backfilling.
E. It shall be the permittee's responsibility to secure the necessary
permission and make all necessary arrangements for all required
storage and disposal sites.
§ 186-9 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 186-12
173:483
§ 186-13. Breaking through pavement in streets.
§ 186-14. Breaking through pavement in sidewalks.
§ 186-15. Backfilling.
Upon completion of the utility installation, the trench shall be backfilled to
the grade of the underside of the surfacing material.
F. All material excavated shall be laid compactly along the side of the
trench and kept trimmed so as to cause as little inconvenience as
reasonably possible to vehicular and pedestrian traffic or as specified
by the City. Whenever necessary in order to expedite the flow of traffic
or to abate the dirt or dust nuisance, toe boards or bins may be required
by the City to prevent the spreading of dirt into traffic lanes.
A. All excavations on paved street surfaces shall be precut in a neat
straight line with pavement breakers or saws.
B. Heavy-duty pavement breakers may be prohibited by the City when the
use endangers existing underground facilities or other property.
C. Cutouts of the trench lines must be normal or parallel to the trench line.
D. Pavement edges shall be trimmed to a vertical face and neatly aligned
with the center line of the trench.
E. Unstable pavement shall be removed over caveouts and overbreaks,
and subgrade shall be treated as the main trench.
F. The permittee shall not be required to pay for repair of pavement
damage existing prior to the excavation, unless his/her cut results in
small floating sections that may be unstable, in which case the
permittee shall remove the unstable portion, and the area shall be
treated as part of the excavation.
G. When three or more street openings are made in sequence (15 factor
less, center to center, between each adjacent opening), the permittee
shall neatly cut and remove the area of pavement between these
adjacent openings and shall patch as one trench.
A. All parts of § 186-13 shall apply to this section in all cases except gravel
sidewalks.
B. On concrete sidewalks, all cuts shall be made from the nearest joint or
score line on one side of the excavation to the nearest joint or score line
on the other side of the excavation.
C. All bricks in the way of excavation shall be removed by the permittee
prior to the work to be done and transported to a storage site to be
selected by the City.
§ 186-12 SACO CITY CODE § 186-15
173:484
§ 186-16. Restoration of surface in streets and sidewalks.
A. Trench backfilling; paved areas. In paved areas, the backfill material
shall be that excavated material which the inspector deems suitable
and which the excavator may have stockpiled, or it shall be a granular
material from off site. Granular material for trench backfill shall be
approved by the inspector and shall meet the requirements of the
American Association of Highway Officials (AASHO) Specification
M145-49, Classification A-3 or better. No stones over three inches in
size, roots or other organic matter or frozen material will be allowed in
the backfill material.
(1) The backfill shall be placed and compacted in layers not exceeding
nine inches in depth. The moisture content of the fill material shall
be such that 95% of optimum density, as determined by field tests,
may be obtained. The maximum density shall be determined in
accordance with AASHO Specification T180, Method C or D. The
inspector shall reserve the right, if in his/her opinion the
compaction is not adequate, to perform such tests necessary to
confirm that the required compaction has been attained. The cost
of such tests shall be borne by the excavator should they not meet
the above requirements. If it is found that the above requirements
have not been met, the excavator shall recompact and/or
reexcavate and compact as necessary until the density
requirements have been met. Compaction methods shall be the
option of the excavator, provided that required densities can be met
without disturbing or damaging existing facilities.
(2) Minimum depths of base and subbase materials in paved areas
shall be those required under this article, unless existing conditions
exceed these minimums.
B. Trench backfilling; nonpaved areas. For nonpaved areas the trench may
be backfilled with excavated material or with granular material
described as specified in Subsection A above. The material shall be
placed in layers not to exceed two feet and compacted to assure a
reasonably firm mass and to minimize subsequent settlement. Specific
density requirements will not apply in these areas except that the
permittee shall maintain any apparent trench settlement for a period of
six months after the excavation has been completed.
A. Temporary resurfacing by the permittee. The top surface of the backfill
shall be covered with three inches compacted depth of bituminous
temporary resurfacing material by the permittee. Such temporary
paving material shall be cold mix, except that the permittee may use or
the City may require hot mix. All temporary paving material shall
conform closely enough to the level of the adjoining paving surface and
shall be compacted so that it is hard enough and smooth enough to be
safe for pedestrian travel over it, as well as for vehicular traffic to pass
safely over it at a legal rate of speed. The permittee shall maintain
temporary paving for a period not exceeding six months after all
§ 186-15 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 186-16
173:485
§ 186-17. (Reserved)
backfilling is completed and shall keep the same safe for pedestrian
and vehicular traffic until the excavation has been resurfaced with
permanent paving by the City, except that if it is not possible to
maintain the surface of the temporary paving in a safe condition for
pedestrian travel or vehicular traffic, then the permittee shall maintain
barriers and light where required herein.
B. Permanent resurfacing by the City. Upon completion of the backfilling
and temporary resurfacing of an excavation within a public place for
the installation or removal of a substructure, the City shall permanently
resurface that portion of the street surface damaged by the permittee's
excavation, except that, upon written request by a utility and approval
by the Director of Public Works, the utility may contract privately to
repair the street and/or sidewalk, all work to be done in accordance
with City standards. The cost to complete the permanent resurfacing
work by the City will be paid through the permanent pavement
restoration fee that is assessed to the permittee as part of the opening
permit application.
C. Refilling of bar holes. Any person or utility making bar holes in the
street or sidewalk area of any public way shall, immediately upon
completion of the work, fill these bar holes by the method set forth
below:
(1) Plugging of bar holes. Bar holes shall be plugged by the use of Plug-
R asphalt plugs made by the Package Pavement Company,
Stormville, New York, or approved equal.
(2) The size of the asphalt plug to be used shall be as follows:
Size of Plug
(inches)
Approximate Drill
Size
(inches)
Top Diameter Plug
(inches)
3/4 3/4 1
7/8 1 1 1/4
1 1/8 1 1/4 1 1/2
1 1/4 1 1/2 1 3/4
1 1/2 1 3/4 2
1 3/4 2 2 1/4
D. Unfilled bar holes. Any bar holes left unfilled will be repaired by the
City, and the minimum two square yards per hole will be charged to the
permittee at the rate set forth herein.
§ 186-16 SACO CITY CODE § 186-18
173:486
§ 186-18. Trenches.
The maximum length of open trench permissible at any time shall be 100
feet, and no greater length shall be opened for pavement removal,
excavation, construction, backfilling, patching or other operation without
the written permission of the City. No trench exceeding five feet in length
shall remain open through night hours or nonworking days without the
written permission of the City, which permission may be made conditional
upon having the excavation guarded or protected by a watchman, at the
permittee's expense, 24 hours a day. Trenches shall be at a width that
will allow the backfill materials to be thoroughly compacted. When an
excavation is within a paved area, the trench area within the pavement and
road or sidewalk base area shall not be less than 24 inches in width.
§ 186-19. Prompt completion of work.
After an excavation is commenced the permittee shall pursue, with
diligence and expedition, all excavation work covered by the opening permit
and shall promptly complete such work and restore the disturbed area as
specified herein. The permittee shall perform such restoration work so as
not to obstruct, impede or create a safety hazard to public travel by foot
or vehicle. The permittee must renew the opening permit far enough in
advance of the expiration date if the terms of the permit have not been
completed before expiration.
§ 186-20. Urgent work.
When traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the traveling public
or the public interests require that the excavation work be performed as
emergency work, the City shall have the full power to order, at the time the
permit is granted, that a crew of men and adequate facilities be employed
by the permittee beyond normal working hours, including up to 24 hours
a day to the end, that such excavation work may be completed as soon as
possible.
§ 186-21. Emergencies.
A. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the making of such
excavations as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property
or for the location of trouble in conduit or pipe or for making repairs,
provided that the person making such excavation shall apply to the City
for such a permit on the first working day after such work is
commenced. Before any excavation work is started, the person or utility
excavating must contact all utilities or persons owning oil pipelines in
the area for on-the-spot locations.
B. Within 15 days after commencing any such emergency excavation, the
person performing such emergency excavation shall make a detailed
report thereof to the Director of Public Works, who shall review the
same to determine whether or not such excavation was of an
emergency nature. No further permits under this section shall be issued
§ 186-18 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 186-21
173:487
§ 186-22. Noise; dust and debris.
Each permittee shall conduct and carry out excavation work in such manner
as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public
and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall take
appropriate measures to reduce, to the fullest extent practicable in the
performance of the excavation work, noise, dust and unsightly debris and
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall not use, except with the
express written permission of the City or in case of an emergency as herein
otherwise provided, any tool, appliance or equipment producing noise of
sufficient volume to disturb the sleep of occupants of the neighboring
property.
§ 186-23. Monuments.
Any monument set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines of
any street or property subdivision or a precise survey reference point or
a permanent survey benchmark within the City shall not be removed or
disturbed or caused to be removed or disturbed without first obtaining
permission, in writing, from the City to do so. Permission to remove or
disturb such monuments, reference points or benchmarks shall be granted
only when no alternate route for the proposed substructure or conduit
is available. If the City is satisfied that no alternate route is available,
permission shall be granted only upon the condition, by an agreement in
writing, that the person or utility applying for such permission shall pay all
expenses incident to the proper replacement of this monument by the City.
§ 186-24. Granite curb.
No person or utility shall remove, damage, haul away or cause misalignment
of any granite curbing, including radius curb and catch basin stones, for
any reason whatsoever without first receiving written permission from the
City. Any curb missing, damaged or misaligned shall be replaced by the
contractor.
§ 186-25. Bituminous and concrete curb.
Any person or utility damaging bituminous and concrete curbing during the
course of excavation work or for any other reason shall be charged for the
repair or replacement of the bituminous and concrete curbing at the rate
set forth herein.
§ 186-26. Denial of permit; arterial streets.
to the person or utility making such excavation after the expiration of
the fifteen-day period until such report has been submitted.
A. The Director of Public Works may, at his/her discretion, deny any street
opening permit if he/she feels, in his/her judgment, such excavation
would endanger the life or property of Saco citizens or if such
excavation would endanger the general public or interfere with snow
§ 186-21 SACO CITY CODE § 186-26
173:488
§ 186-27. Installation of facilities.
§ 186-28. Inspections.
The City shall make such inspections as are reasonably necessary in the
enforcement of this article. The City shall have the authority to promulgate
and cause to be enforced such rules and regulations as may be reasonably
necessary to enforce and carry out the intent of this article.
§ 186-29. Maps.
Every person or utility owning, using, controlling or having an interest in
substructures under the surface of the public way used for the purpose
of supplying or conveying gas, electricity, communication, impulse, water,
steam, ammonia or oil in the City shall file with the City, after the adoption
of this article, a map or set of maps, each drawn to scale commonly used by
the utility, showing in detail the plan, location, size and kind of installation
of all new and/or renewed substructures except service lines designed to
serve single properties. These maps shall be provided to the City no later
than 60 days after the completion date of construction.
§ 186-30. Liability of City.
This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the City or any official
or employee any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured
maintenance. The denial may be appealed within 30 days to the Saco
City Council, and all denials by the Director of Public Works shall be
made in writing to the applicant. Street opening permits for arterial
streets will not be granted between December 1 and April 1 of each
year, unless it can be shown that denial will create an undue hardship.
B. The arterial streets are Main Street, United States Route No. 1, Beach
Street, North Street, Industrial Park Road and Bradley Street.
A. No person or utility shall, without written permission of the City, install
any facility, except manholes, vaults, valve casings, culverts and catch
basins, at a vertical distance less than 24 inches below the established
flow line of the nearest gutter in street areas. If the flow line is not
established, then the depth shall be at a minimum of 24 inches below
the surface of the nearest outermost edge of the traveled portion of the
street.
B. Other public places. The minimum depth of any facility on any other
public place shall be 18 inches below the surface; provided, however,
that the City may permit a lesser depth in special cases.
C. Nothing in this section shall impose a duty upon the permittee to
maintain said specifications as required herein upon subsequent
changes of grade in the surface, unless the grade in the facility
interferes with the maintenance of or travel on a public street.
§ 186-26 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 186-30
173:489
by the performance of an excavation work for which an excavation permit
is issued hereunder, nor shall the City or any official or employee thereof
be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason
of inspections authorized hereunder, the issuance of any permit or the
approval of any excavation work.
§ 186-31. Insurance.
A public liability insurance certificate naming the City as an additional
insured shall be provided by the licensed contractor. The permittee shall
maintain during the life of any opening permit the following insurance,
which shall be made a part of the permit application:
§ 186-32. Reconstructed or repaved streets.
Whenever the City has developed plans to reconstruct a street, the City or
its representative shall give written notice thereof to all abutting property
owners, to the City departments and to all public utilities or persons who
or which have or may wish to lay pipes, wires or other facilities in or
under the highway. Upon receipt of such written notice, such person or
utility shall have 60 days in which to install or lay any such facility. If an
extension of time is needed by a person or utility for the installation of such
facilities, the person or utility shall make a written application to the City
explaining fully the reasons for requesting such an extension of time. At the
expiration of the time fixed and after such street has been reconstructed,
no permit shall be granted to open such street for a period of five years,
unless an emergency condition exists or unless the necessity for making
such installation could not reasonably have been foreseen at the time such
notice was given.
A. Bodily injury liability and property damage liability insurance. The
contractor shall take out and maintain during the life of this permit
such bodily injury liability and property damage liability insurance and
automobile bodily injury liability and property damage liability
insurance as shall protect him and any subcontractor performing work
covered by this permit from claims for damages for personal injury,
including accidental death, as well as from claims for property damage
which may arise from operations under this permit, whether such
operations be by himself or by any subcontractor or by anyone directly
or indirectly employed by either of them, and the amounts of such
insurance shall not be less than the following:
(1) Bodily injury liability insurance, in an amount not less than
$1,000,000 for injuries, including wrongful death to any one
person, and subject to the same limit for each person in an amount
not less than $1,000,000 on account of one accident.
(2) Property damage insurance, in an amount not less than $2,000,000
for damages on account of any one accident and in an amount not
less than $2,000,000 for damages on account of all accidents.
§ 186-30 SACO CITY CODE § 186-33
173:490
§ 186-33. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates any of the provisions
of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined not less than $25 and not more than $100. Each day such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
A. If the work or any part thereof mentioned in the preceding sections of
repairing or backfilling the trenches or excavations aforesaid shall be
unskillfully or improperly done, the City shall cause the same to be
skillfully and properly done and shall keep an account of the expense
thereof, and in such case such person or utility shall pay the City an
amount equal to the whole of the expense incurred by the City, with an
additional amount of 50%. Thereafter, upon completion of the work and
the determination of the costs thereof, the City shall issue no further or
new permits to any person or utility until it shall receive payments of
said costs.
B. Any person or utility who or which continues to violate any section of
this article shall receive no further permits until such time as the City is
satisfied that the person or utility shall comply with the terms of this
article.
§ 186-33 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 186-33
173:491

ARTICLE II
Street Acceptances
§ 186-34. Streets less than 50 feet wide.
No street or way less than 50 feet wide shall be laid out and accepted by
the City as a public street or way unless the same shall have been actually
dedicated and constructed and used for public travel prior to December 8,
1978.
§ 186-35. Acceptance or extension of previously constructed
streets.
No street or way dedicated or constructed prior to December 9, 1978, shall
be accepted nor shall any street previously accepted be extended in length
which is of a width less than 35 feet, unless the owners of property adjoining
the street shall deed to the City of Saco sufficient land to lay out a street of
minimum width, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 186-36. Petition by abutters; assessments.
No street or way in §§ 186-34 and 186-35 above shall be laid out, accepted,
extended or improved unless:
§ 186-37. Construction standards and acceptance of City
infrastructure. [Amended 12-15-2003]
No street or way constructed on private lands by the owners thereof shall be
hereafter recommended by any committee or office of the City government
A. Petition by abutters. A majority of the abutters upon the street or way
shall, in writing, on a form to be prescribed by the Director of Public
Works, petition the City Council to improve the street by grading,
curbing, gravelling, macadamizing, paving or in any other way making
a permanent street of the same or any part thereof and in the petition
shall waive any damages resulting from the laying out and acceptance
of the street or way or any necessary changes in the grade thereof and
shall agree to pay their just proportion of 1/3 of the cost thereof. For
purposes of this section, a majority of the abutters shall mean those
abutters who own more than 50% of the frontage, both in front feet and
in assessed value. The abutter shall be notified by letter.
B. Assessments. When the street or way shall have been laid out and
accepted as a public street or way and such improvements have been
made, 1/3 of the cost thereof shall be assessed on the property adjacent
to and bounded on such street or way in the manner and with the same
right of appeal provided in 23 M.R.S.A. §§ 3601 to 3605. The
assessment shall be on a front foot basis. The cost of the culs-de-sac or
turnarounds necessary for the provision of municipal services shall be
borne by the City of Saco. Land necessary for said culs-de-sac or
turnarounds will be provided by the abutters.
§ 186-34 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 186-37
173:493
to the City Council for acceptance as a public street of the City of Saco
unless previously constructed in accordance with the City’s specifications,
which shall constitute the minimum requirements for the acceptance of
such street or way.
A. Plan and profile. The accepted record drawing plan and profile of every
such street shall be filed in the Planning Office and Department of
Public Works.
B. Design and construction standards. The entire area of the street shall
be constructed in all respects according to Planning Board approval
based on standards set forth in the City of Saco Subdivision
Regulations, latest revision.
C. Grades. The Director of Public Works or his designee shall fix grades of
every such street.
D. No petition for acceptance of a street or portion of a street shall be
approved until the City Council has reviewed the request and
considered the following factors: recommendations received from the
Planning Board and staff as to completeness of the street, sidewalk,
streetlights, street trees, drainage structures, utilities, deeds,
easements, and any other issues the Planning Board, staff, or City
Council deem appropriate.
E. No petition shall be complete and ready for review until the following
have been submitted, reviewed and found acceptable by staff:
(1) The legal description of the street to be accepted, name of
subdivision where the street is located, date the subdivision was
approved and the book and page where the subdivision plan is
recorded at the York County Registry of Deeds.
(2) The warranty deed for the real estate to be conveyed to the City.
(3) Copies of any easements to be transferred.
F. After a completed petition has been submitted to the City Planner, the
City Planner shall seek recommendations from the City Administrator,
Police Chief, Fire Chief, Public Works Director, Code Officer,
Development Director, Parks and Recreation Director, Conservation
Commission and such other officials or persons as he/she deems
necessary. The City Planner will seek a recommendation from the
Planning Board. The Planning Board shall consider the comments of
City staff in arriving at a recommendation as to whether or not the
street shall be accepted, which shall be forwarded to the City Council.
Final action on the street acceptance will be made by the City Council.
G. If any issues remain unresolved when brought forth for Council
consideration, a written report shall be submitted by staff, and said
issues shall be immediately reported to the Council. The Council shall
determine whether said issues shall delay consideration of acceptance
§ 186-37 SACO CITY CODE § 186-37
173:494
§ 186-38. Conveyance of land; filing of plan; bond.
Compliance with the above conditions and specifications will render a street
or way constructed on private land by the owners thereof eligible for
consideration by the Councilmen for laying out and acceptance as a street
or public way for the use of the City of Saco, provided that:
§ 186-39. City not to participate financially.
It is expressly provided that the City of Saco will not participate financially
in the improvement of a street where the primary beneficiary is a
subdivider.
until resolved or may be noted and addressed as consideration of
acceptance moves forward.
A. The owner conveys to the City, in fee, the land occupied by the street.
B. A plan of the street shall be recorded in the York County Registry of
Deeds.
C. Should any of the work remain to be done to complete the project or
street in any of its specifications, the owner shall post a good and
sufficient bond with the City Treasurer to cover the cost of completion,
in an amount to be set by the City Council.
§ 186-37 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 186-39
173:495

ARTICLE III
Building and Street Numbering
§ 186-40. Findings.
It is the responsibility of the City to protect the lives and property of the
residents of Saco, and it is the desire of the City to operate efficient and
effective public safety services. These efficient and effective public safety
operations are inhibited by the current inconsistent residential building and
street numbering process.
§ 186-41. Designation of numbers; Street Numbering Map.
All buildings shall bear a distinctive street number in accordance with
and as designated upon the Street Numbering Map, on file with the City
of Saco Assessors Department. The Assessor or his/her designee shall be
responsible to maintain and keep current said map.
§ 186-42. Display of numbers.
The number shall be displayed upon the front of the building and/or on the
side facing the street. The number shall be plainly visible from the street.
Houses that are set back out of view from the road shall place a post or sign
at the driveway entrance, upon which shall be affixed the herein specified
numbers. For City fire lanes, a numbered sign shall be affixed vertically to
the existing fire lane post and shall conform to the following dimensions:
§ 186-43. Multifamily units.
For multifamily houses or apartment buildings, the house number shall be
displayed as outlined in § 186-42. Each individual apartment or living unit
shall be clearly sublettered.
§ 186-44. Number size and color.
Numbers shall be in Arabic figures, be no less than three inches in height
and a one-half-inch-wide stroke and shall contrast in color with the color of
the building or background to which they are attached.
A. For two-digit numbers, the sign shall be five inches wide by five inches
long.
B. For three-digit numbers, the sign shall be eight inches wide by five
inches long.
C. For multiple numbers, two- or three-digit numbers are to be in order
and sequential, allowing five inches for each number. The post/sign
shall not be considered a structure which must conform to Zoning
Ordinance setbacks. The post/sign shall be placed out of the City's
right-of-way and shall be six feet in height.
§ 186-40 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 186-45
173:497
§ 186-45. Illegal display of numbers.
No person shall affix or allow to be affixed a different street number from
the one designated on the Street Numbering Map by the Assessor.
§ 186-46. Private ways. [Amended 10-2-2017]
If there are three or more developed parcels that abut a private lane or way,
the owners of those lots, with a consensus of opinion, shall petition the City
E911 Addressing Officer to name the private way. The name of the private
way cannot conflict with or sound similar to existing road names. It will
be the sole responsibility of the owners to purchase a street sign from the
Department of Public Works, and maintain the street sign at the entrance
to the private way in accordance with public works standards for public and
private road signs. The City will then issue street numbers for that road.
§ 186-47. Violations and penalties.
Any person who, after being notified by the Code Enforcement Officer or
any officer from the City of Saco, fails to comply with any of the provisions
of this article within the time limit of not less than 30 days specified in such
notice shall pay a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $100 per violation.
§ 186-45 SACO CITY CODE § 186-47
173:498
ARTICLE IV
Obstructions
§ 186-48. Obstruction of public ways prohibited.
No person shall place or deposit or cause to be placed or deposited any
ice, snow, objects, material or any other obstruction on any road, highway,
street, lane or sidewalk in the City of Saco in such a manner as to obstruct
or create a hazard to vehicles traveling on such road, highway, street or lane
or to obstruct or create a hazard to pedestrians using sidewalks.
§ 186-49. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be punished by a
fine of not less than $10 and not more than $100, to be recovered to the use
of the City by complaint in the District Court.
§ 186-48 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 186-49
173:499

ARTICLE V
Entrances to Highways in Compact Section
§ 186-50. Permits.
Permits for driveways, entrances and approaches to compact or built-up
sections shall be granted as follows:
A. A permit shall be issued to a property owner for a driveway, entrance or
approach not to exceed 33 feet for each 175 feet or less of frontage in
the compact or built-up section.
B. A permit shall be issued for an additional driveway, entrance or
approach, not to exceed 33 feet in width, to a property owner who has
frontage of more than 175 feet on the compact or built-up section,
provided that the driveways, entrances or approaches are separated by
an island that shall not be less than 75 feet in width.
C. A permit shall be issued for an additional driveway, entrance or
approach, not to exceed 20 feet in width, to a property owner who has
frontage of more than 175 feet on the compact or built-up section,
provided that the driveways, entrances or approaches are separated by
an island that shall not be less than 35 feet in width.
D. For the purposes of this section, the words "compact or built-up
section" are defined as stated in 23 M.R.S.A. § 2.
E. Notwithstanding Subsections A, B and C above, a permit for a second
driveway entrance may be granted to the owner(s) of a two-family
dwelling if the lot and dwelling meet all of the following conditions:
(1) The lot has at least 75 feet of frontage.
(2) The lot is located on a street classified as a local street in the 1990
Infrastructure Inventory and Management Program or, in the case
of a new street, is classified as local by the Director of Public
Works, using the same standards as the 1990 report.
(3) The building entrances, in the judgment of the Director of Public
Works, are substantially at the opposite ends of the building as it
parallels the street frontage where the driveways will be located.
(4) The width of each driveway entrance does not exceed 16 feet.
(5) An island width of 20 feet is maintained between the two driveway
entrances.
§ 186-50 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 186-50
173:501

ARTICLE VI
Closing of Ways
§ 186-51. Findings; purpose; statutory authority
§ 186-52. Definitions.
The definitions contained in Title 29 of the Maine Revised Statutes
Annotated shall govern the construction of words contained in this article.
Any words not defined therein shall be given their common and ordinary
meaning.
§ 186-53. Restrictions and notices.
Whenever notice has been posted as provided herein, no person may
thereafter operate any vehicle with a gross registered weight in excess of
the restriction during any applicable time period on any way or bridge so
posted, unless otherwise exempt as provided herein.
A. Temporary closings are necessary at different times of the year and are
not limited to springtime or mud season.
B. The following rules and regulations are necessary to ensure the proper
use and to prevent abuse of all highways under our maintenance or
supervision by motor-driven vehicles for the protection of public safety,
health and property, to extend and retain the life expectancy of City
ways and bridges and to reduce the public expense of their
maintenance and/or repair.
C. This article is adopted pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3009 and 29
M.R.S.A. §§ 902 and 1611.78
A. The notice shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: the
name of the way or bridge, the gross registered weight limit, the time
period during which the restriction applies, the date on which the
notice was posted and the signature of the posting official.
B. The notice shall be conspicuously posted at each end of the restricted
portion of the way or bridge in a location clearly visible from the travel
way. Whenever a restriction expires or is lifted, the notices shall be
removed wherever posted. Whenever a restriction is revised or
extended, existing notices shall be removed and replaced with new
notices.
C. No person may remove, obscure or otherwise tamper with any notice so
posted, except as provided herein.
78.Editor's Note: Title 29 was repealed by Chapter 683 of the Laws of 1993. See now 29-A
M.R.S.A. §§ 2395 and 2388, respectively.
§ 186-51 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 186-54
173:503
§ 186-54. Designation of ways and bridges.
The Director of Public Works is hereby directed and authorized to designate
such City ways and bridges or portions thereof, over age 22 which, during
such periods of time as he/she may determine are necessary for the
protection of such ways and bridges in implementing the within rules for
the purpose herein stated.
§ 186-55. Signs.
The Director of Public Works is further directed and authorized to cause the
construction and painting of conspicuous signs for the posting of the closed
portions of ways and bridges with the information as provided herein.
§ 186-56. Exemptions.
The following vehicles are exempt from this article:
§ 186-57. Permits.
A. Any two-axle vehicle while delivering home heating fuel.
B. Any emergency vehicle (such as fire-fighting apparatus or ambulances)
while responding to an emergency or routine training or maintenance
activities.
C. Any vehicle while engaged in highway maintenance or repair under the
direction of the City or state.
D. Any school transportation vehicle while transporting students.
E. Any public utility vehicle while providing emergency service or repairs.
F. Any vehicle whose owner or operator holds a valid permit from the
Director of Public Works or his/her designee as provided herein.
A. The owner or operator of any vehicle not otherwise exempt as provided
herein may apply, in writing, to the municipal officers for a permit to
operate on a posted way or bridge notwithstanding the restriction. The
Director of Public Works or his/her designee may issue a permit only
upon all of the following findings:
(1) No other route is reasonably available to the applicant.
(2) It is a matter of economic necessity and not mere convenience that
the applicant uses the way or bridge.
(3) The applicant has tendered cash, a bond or other suitable security
running to the City in an amount sufficient, in the official's
judgment, to repair any damage to the way or bridge which may
reasonably result from the applicant's use of the same.
§ 186-54 SACO CITY CODE § 186-57
173:504
§ 186-58. Administration and enforcement.
This article shall be administered and may be enforced by the municipal
officers or their duly authorized designee.
§ 186-59. Violations and penalties.
§ 186-60. When effective; amendments.
B. Even if the Director of Public Works or designee makes the foregoing
findings, he/she need not issue a permit if he/she determines the
applicant's use of the way or bridge could reasonably be expected to
create or aggravate a safety hazard or cause substantial damage. The
Director of Public Works may also limit the number of permits issued or
outstanding as may, in his/her judgment, be necessary to preserve and
protect the highways.
C. In determining whether to issue a permit, the municipal officers shall
consider the following factors:
(1) The gross registered weight of the vehicle.
(2) The current and anticipated condition of the way or bridge.
(3) The number and frequency of vehicle trips proposed.
(4) The cost and availability of materials and equipment for repairs.
(5) The extent of use by other exempt vehicles.
(6) Such other circumstances as may, in their judgment, be relevant.
D. The municipal officials may issue permits subject to reasonable
conditions, including, but not limited to, restrictions on the actual load
weight and the number or frequency of vehicle trips, which shall be
clearly noted on the permit.
A. Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be considered a civil
infraction and subject to a minimum mandatory fine of $250 up to a
maximum of $1,000. In addition to any fine, the City may seek
restitution for the cost of repairs to any damaged way or bridge and
reasonable attorney fees and costs. All penalties shall accrue to the
municipality.
B. Prosecution shall be in the name of the City and shall be brought in the
Maine District Court.
A. This article shall become effective 30 days from the date of adoption.
The City Clerk is authorized and directed to have this article and
adoption published as provided by the City Charter.
B. This article may be amended by the municipal officers at any properly
noticed meeting.
§ 186-57 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 186-61
173:505
§ 186-61. Accessways. [Added 12-18-2000]
State law, 23 M.R.S.A. § 3032, permits the City to abandon town ways
but to retain simultaneously a public easement on such abandoned ways.
The City expressly sets forth herein the conditions for such retention and
improvements of public easements.
A. If the City abandons a town way but retains a public easement, at the
time of such abandonment and the retention of a public easement, the
City Council may determine if and when it will improve the public
easement by creation of an accessway. It will also further determine
what manner of improvements will be made. The decision to create any
accessway is discretionary and can be made any time after retention of
the public easement.
B. The decision as to scope and extent of any improvements constituting
an accessway will lie with the Council. An accessway shall be those
improvements paid and maintained at City expense which permit the
public access to land or water by foot or other means (animal, bicycle,
etc), but not by motorized vehicle, and may include but are not limited
to the following actions/improvements:
(1) Clearing.
(2) Grading.
(3) Filling and backfilling.
(4) Paving.
(5) Decking or boardwalks.
(6) Simple bridge work.
(7) Utilities and utility service.
C. Notwithstanding Subsection B, the City of Saco may operate motorized
vehicles on any accessway for emergency or other governmental
purposes.
D. Accessways, unlike town ways, will not be constructed to the standards
set forth in Article I or Article II of this chapter.
E. Though established, the City will maintain an accessway for public use
and benefit at its discretion and as its finances permit.
F. An accessway may only be established on those proposed so-called
"paper streets" shown on a certain list dated September 12, 1997, and
as recorded in the York County Registry of Deeds at Book 8445, Page
240.
§ 186-61 SACO CITY CODE § 186-62
173:506
§ 186-62. Bridle paths and trails. [Added 12-18-2000]
State law, 23 M.R.S.A. § 3151 et seq., authorizes the City to lay out, alter
and discontinue bridle paths and trails. The City expressly sets forth herein
the conditions for such ways as permitted pursuant to 23 M.R.S.A. § 3152.
A. The City may accept, lay out, alter or discontinue bridle paths or trails
as it determines, but if it shall choose to accept or lay out such paths or
trails, they shall be limited to accessing land or water by foot, bicycle,
animal or nonmotorized vehicles only.
B. Creation of such paths and trails may include, but is not limited to, the
following improvements:
(1) Clearing.
(2) Grading.
(3) Filling and backfilling.
(4) Paving.
(5) Decking or boardwalk.
(6) Simple bridgework.
(7) Utilities and utility service.
C. Bridle paths and trails may, alternatively, be left in a roughly natural,
vegetative condition, provided that at least minimal access is kept or
maintained for the public.
D. Bridle paths and trails, unlike town ways, will not be constructed to the
standards set forth in Article I or Article II this chapter.
E. Though established, the City will maintain bridle paths and trails for
public use and benefit at its discretion.
§ 186-62 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 186-62
173:507

ARTICLE VII
Subdivisions
§ 186-63. Improvements in old subdivisions. [Added 11-5-2001]
The construction of streets, sewers, drains and other improvements in any
subdivision approved prior to October 13, 1988, in which the construction
of said improvements was not completed prior to September 1, 2001,
shall conform to the current street, storm water drainage, erosion and
sedimentation, water supply, and sewage disposal and other standards of
Article 11 and Sections 10.10, 10.11, 10.12, 10.13, 10.17, 10.18, 10.19,
10.20, 10.21, 10.22 of Article 10, of the Saco Subdivision Regulations and
Standard Construction Specifications of the City unless such conformance
is waived by formal vote of the Planning Board based upon a finding
that lack of conformance with the specific standard will not reduce public
safety, will not reduce traffic flow or efficiency, will not adversely impact
drainage in the area, will adequately provide for sewage disposal, will not
adversely impact water quality and will not reduce the expected life of said
improvements. Any street in such a previously approved subdivision that is
constructed after September 1, 2001, that does not meet these standards,
unless waived by the Planning Board, shall not be accepted as a public
street by the City Council.
§ 186-63 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 186-63
173:509
Chapter 192
TAXATION
§ 186-63 SACO CITY CODE § 186-63
173:510
ARTICLE I
Municipal Service Fee
[Adopted 5-1-1995 as Ch. VI, Sec. 6-1, of the 1994 Code]
§ 192-1. Property exempt from taxation.
Pursuant to 36 M.R.S.A. § 652, properties in the City which are owned
by benevolent and charitable institutions shall be exempt from property
taxation. This article incorporates by reference the definition of "benevolent
and charitable institutions" used in 36 M.R.S.A. § 652.
§ 192-2. Fee imposed on rental property; exception.
The owners of residential properties exempt from taxation under § 192-1
that are used to provide rental income (with the exception of student
housing or parsonages) shall pay to the City of Saco a service fee in lieu of
property tax.
§ 192-3. Calculation of fee.
The fee for services in lieu of property tax shall be calculated according to
the actual costs of providing municipal services to the property. Municipal
services included in the calculation of the fee shall include fire and police
protection, road maintenance and construction, traffic control, snow and
ice removal, water and sewer service, sanitation services and all other
municipal services except the costs of education and welfare, which shall
be excluded. In no instance shall this fee exceed 2% of the gross annual
revenues of the organization.
§ 192-4. Appeals.
Any property owner levied a service charge in lieu of property tax shall have
the right to appeal the levy to the Board of Assessment Review.
§ 192-1 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 192-4
173:511
Chapter 195
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses — See Ch. 132. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 211.
§ 195-1. Title, authority and purpose.
This chapter shall be known as the "Ordinance to Regulate and License the
Operation of Taxicabs Within the City of Saco" and is enacted pursuant to
the authority granted to the City now or hereafter by general law, including
30-A M.R.S.A. § 3009. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the number
and operation of taxicabs and those operating taxicabs within the City of
Saco through a licensing procedure in order to promote the general welfare
and public safety.
§ 195-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meanings
as set out herein, unless the context clearly demonstrates otherwise:
DISQUALIFYING CRIMINAL CONVICTION — Any conviction for any
criminal offense punishable by imprisonment for any period of time,
whether or not the sentence was imposed or served, but shall not include
any conviction which is shown to have been set aside on appeal or
collaterally or for which a pardon, certificate of rehabilitation or the
equivalent under the law of the sentencing jurisdiction has been granted
or which is not rationally related to the purposes of owning or operating a
taxicab.
LICENSE INSPECTOR — Any person designated by the City Clerk to
perform inspections of taxicabs.
OPERATION WITHIN THE CITY OF SACO — The act or business of picking
up persons in a taxicab within the City of Saco for transportation to
locations within or outside the city, except that the provisions of this chapter
shall not apply to a motor vehicle licensed by another municipality to
operate as a taxicab which is operated within the City of Saco in response
to:
A request to transport passengers from a point of destination within the
City to another municipality but not to a point of destination within the
city, provided that such drivers shall not cruise, park or stand for the
purpose of soliciting passengers within this city; or
A.
A request to convey a passenger from such other municipality to the
city.
B.
§ 192-4 SACO CITY CODE § 195-2
173:512
OPERATOR — A person to whom a license to operate a taxicab has been
issued.
OWNER — A person owning and/or leasing for use any taxicab used in the
taxi business.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation or other legal entity.
TAXICAB — Any motor vehicle designed and used for the transportation of
persons for compensation, the destination and route of which are under the
direction and control of the passengers. Excluded from this definition are
buses and vehicles commonly referred to as "stretch limousines."
TAXICAB BUSINESS LICENSE — The permission or license granted to a
business seeking to engage in providing taxis for hire to the general public.
TAXICAB OPERATOR'S LICENSE — The permission or license granted to
an individual allowing that individual to operate a taxicab within the City of
Saco when such license is required under the terms of this chapter.
TAXICAB VEHICLE LICENSE — The permission or license granted to the
owner of any taxicab used in the taxi business authorizing said vehicle to
engage in the taxi business.
§ 195-3. Licenses required.
No person shall operate, cause to be operated, lease, rent or otherwise
provide for use a taxicab within the City of Saco without such taxicab owner
and the operator thereof having first obtained all licenses required from the
City Council as provided herein.
§ 195-4. Application for taxicab business license.
A. An application for a taxicab business license shall be filed with the City
Clerk upon forms provided by the Clerk. The application shall provide
the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The address location of the dispatch center and garage.
(3) A signed consent to allow the Saco Police Department to
investigate and verify all information submitted as part of the
application.
(4) Proof of adequate public liability insurance as required under this
chapter.
(5) A detailed description of the company logo, design, insignia,
wording and coloring that will appear on any vehicles licensed
under the applicant's name.
(6) Evidence that the applicant corporation, business, partnership or
other legal entity is in good standing to operate within the State of
Maine, if so required.
§ 195-2 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 195-4
173:513
§ 195-5. Application for taxicab operator's license. [Amended
3-5-2001]
An application for a taxicab operator's license shall be filed with the City
Clerk upon forms provided by the Clerk. The application shall be verified
under oath and shall provide the following requirements:
(7) A listing of all principals in the business or corporation, if
applicable.
(8) A listing of all rates to be charged and the method of computation.
(9) Such further information as the City Council may require.79
B. Upon receipt of the report and comments from the Chief of Police, the
City Clerk shall forward the application and all supporting
documentation to the City Council for action. The Council shall consider
the application during a public hearing at its next available meeting.
Said public hearing shall be advertised in a newspaper of general
distribution at least seven days prior to the hearing.
C. The Council shall review the application with respect to location of the
business and adverse impacts to surrounding properties from noise,
odor, fumes, traffic congestion or other causes. Following a hearing, the
Council can grant a license, grant a license with certain conditions or
deny the application. If the Council denies an application, it shall issue
written findings within 10 days of the decision.
D. Aggrieved parties shall have 30 days to appeal the decision of the
Council to Superior Court.
A. The name, address and date of birth of the applicant.
B. Any prior experience in the transportation of passengers.
C. Proof of a valid motor vehicle license and whether any license held by
the applicant is presently revoked or has been revoked during the three
years preceding the application and the reasons for any such
revocations.
D. The applicant's prior traffic and police record, if any.
E. The consent to allow the Saco Police Department to investigate and
verify the information submitted in the application.
F. Two photographs of the applicant of such size as the Clerk may specify.
G. Proof of adequate public liability insurance as required by this chapter.
H. Such further information as the City Council may require.
79.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(10), establishing the application fee, was repealed
3-5-2001. Copies of the current fee schedule are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 195-4 SACO CITY CODE § 195-6
173:514
§ 195-6. Application for taxicab vehicle license. [Amended
3-5-2001]
An application for a taxicab vehicle license shall be filed with the City Clerk
upon forms provided by the Clerk. The application shall be verified under
oath and shall provide the following requirements:
§ 195-7. Issuance or denial of licenses; term.
A. The name, address and date of birth of the owner of the vehicle or of all
principle officers of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation,
including the clerk of the corporation, together with the address of a
business office or principal place of business.
B. The make, type, year, vehicle identification number and license plate
number of each vehicle for which a taxicab vehicle license is being
sought and the address of the garage or site where the vehicle will be
stationed when not in service.
C. A state inspection sticker issued within the 30 days prior to the date of
application.
D. Adequate proof showing the vehicle to be currently registered and
licensed within the State of Maine.
E. Proof of adequate public liability insurance as required by this chapter.
F. A detailed description of the graphic design, insignia, wording and
coloring which will appear on the vehicle, if licensed.
G. Such further information as the City Council may require.
A. Taxicab operator's license.
(1) Upon receipt of a completed application for a taxicab operator's
license, the City Clerk shall refer the same to the Chief of Police or
his designee to verify the information set forth therein and to
report and comment on the same to the Clerk within 30 days. The
Chief of Police will ensure that the information contained on the
application is valid, and the fee for such investigation and taxicab
inspection shall be established by the Council after public hearing.
[Amended 5-3-2004]
(2) Upon receipt of the report and comments from the Chief, the Clerk
shall either issue or deny a license based on the standards in this
chapter. Any decision of the Clerk can be appealed to the City
Council. The initial application fee for each license shall constitute
the first year's license fee, and the license shall be in effect for the
remainder of the calendar year in which the license is issued.
Written findings for any denial shall be prepared by the Clerk
within 10 business days of the decision.
B. Taxicab vehicle license.
§ 195-6 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 195-7
173:515
§ 195-8. Standards for denial.
Any license applied for under this chapter shall be denied by the Council or
Clerk under the following circumstances:
(1) Upon receipt of a completed application for a taxicab operator's
license, the City Clerk shall refer the same to the Chief of Police or
his designee to verify the information set forth therein and to
report and comment on the same within seven days.
(2) Upon receipt of the report and comments from the Chief, the Clerk
shall either issue or deny a license based on the standards in this
chapter. Any decision of the Clerk can be appealed to the City
Council. The initial application fee for each license shall constitute
the first year's license fee, and the license shall be in effect for the
remainder of the calendar year in which the license is issued.
Written findings for any denial shall be prepared by the Clerk
within 10 business days of the decision.
C. License renewal. Licenses may be renewed only by the City Clerk after
a review of a new application updating all required information.
Licenses issued by the City Council shall be renewed by the City
Council following a new application.
A. Taxicab vehicle license:
(1) If the applicant is other than the registered owner of the vehicle;
(2) If any of the principals of the applicant corporation or any person
having an actual ownership interest or management authority
therein has a disqualifying criminal conviction;
(3) If the applicant has had a taxicab vehicle license revoked within the
three previous years; or
(4) Failure to have an approved taxicab business license.
B. Taxicab operator's license:
(1) If the applicant has not attained the age of 18 years;
(2) If the applicant has been given a disqualifying criminal conviction
at any time during the five years immediately preceding the
application or if the applicant has been imprisoned at any time
during said period for a disqualifying criminal conviction, provided
that said conviction was for an offense which is rationally related to
the purpose of licensing taxicab operators;
(3) If the applicant has been convicted, at any time during the three
years immediately preceding the application, of criminal speeding,
reckless driving, driving to endanger, operating under the
influence, attempting to operate under the influence, operating
under suspension or an equivalent offense in any other jurisdiction
§ 195-7 SACO CITY CODE § 195-8
173:516
§ 195-9. Temporary licenses.
Upon an application for a taxicab operator's license, the City Clerk may
issue a thirty-day temporary license which shall carry all the privileges of
a permanent license. During this thirty-day period, the Clerk shall request
of the Chief of Police an investigation of the information contained in the
application for an operator's license. This temporary license may be revoked
by the City Clerk upon a determination that any of the standards of this
chapter have been violated by the operator or if the investigation by the
Police Chief reveals that the applicant does not meet the qualifications to
receive a permanent operator's license.
§ 195-10. Suspension and revocation of licenses.
or if the applicant's privilege to operate a motor vehicle in any
jurisdiction has been revoked at any time during said period for any
reason; or
(4) If the applicant has been convicted of criminal speeding, reckless
driving, driving to endanger, operating under the influence,
attempting to operate under the influence or operating under
suspension while operating any vehicle licensed under this chapter
for the five years immediately preceding the date of application.
C. Taxicab business license:
(1) If the Council determines that the proposed business location will
have an undue adverse impact on surrounding property owners;
(2) If the Council determines that the applicant has had a taxicab
business license revoked in the past three years;
(3) If the applicant business or corporation is not licensed and in good
standing to do business in the State of Maine;
(4) If any of the principals of the applicant corporation or any person
having an actual ownership interest or management authority
therein has a disqualifying criminal conviction;
(5) If the applicant has had a taxicab business license revoked within
the three previous years; or
(6) If the applicant is not current for all personal property taxes owed
to the City of Saco.
A. A license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or
suspended by the City Council upon the recommendation of the Chief of
Police if the holder thereof has violated any of the provisions of this
chapter or has violated any ordinances of the City of Saco or the laws of
the United States or the State of Maine, the violations of which reflect
unfavorably on the fitness of the operator to offer public transportation.
§ 195-8 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 195-10
173:517
§ 195-11. Standards for suspension or revocation.
B. Prior to suspension or revocation, the City Council shall hold a public
hearing to determine all the facts relating to the suspension or
revocation of the license. The holder of the license shall be given notice
of the proposed action to be taken and shall have an opportunity to be
heard before the City Council at the hearing to consider suspension or
revocation.
A. Any license issued under the terms of this section may be suspended or
revoked by the City Council upon a determination by the City Council
that the licensee:
(1) Knowingly took a longer route to his or her destination than was
necessary, unless so requested by the passenger;
(2) Knowingly conveyed any passenger to a place other than that
which the passenger specified;
(3) Solicited or caused another person to solicit taxicab passenger
business in any manner whatsoever when such proposed business
is not related to the provision of taxicab services;
(4) Transported any person other than the passenger first engaging
the taxicab without the express consent of such passenger;
(5) Drove a taxicab when not clean and neat in appearance;
(6) Failed to remain in the operator's compartment of the taxicab at all
times that the taxicab was in service or was waiting to be hired,
other than to assist a passenger or his or her bags into or out of the
taxicab, or permitted any person other than the operator and a
passenger or passengers to remain in the taxicab at any such time,
except a trainee, if a licensed taxicab operator;
(7) Refused to transport any orderly person upon request, unless all
licensed taxicabs are engaged (if no taxicab is available at the time
a request for taxicab service is telephoned to a dispatch center, the
dispatch service shall offer to arrange with the caller for
transportation by the next available taxicab);
(8) Charged more than the maximum fare specified in the application
on file with the City Clerk's office;
(9) Failed to notify the Clerk of any change of any material fact set
forth in the application for such license;
(10) Removed from a taxicab or obscured or caused to be removed from
a taxicab or obscured any notices required under this chapter;
(11) Knowingly gave incorrect information on the license application;
§ 195-10 SACO CITY CODE § 195-11
173:518
(12) Refused to provide and use a certified child safety seat when
transporting any child that would have been required to be in a
child safety seat in the child's parents' vehicle; or
(13) Refused transportation to any person based on age, sex, religion,
color, creed, national origin, destination, handicap or because of
the presence of children.
B. In addition to the provisions of Subsection A above, a taxicab operator's
license may be suspended or revoked upon a determination that the
driver engaged in any loud argument, fight or other disturbance;
harassed, threatened or assaulted another person; intentionally
damaged, destroyed or threatened to damage or destroy any property;
or in any other manner engaged in conduct detrimental to the orderly
and efficient transportation of passengers.
C. Maximum suspensions of taxicab operators' licenses shall be as follows:
three days for the first violation, seven days for the second violation and
15 days for the third violation within a twelve-month period. Fourth
violations shall result in revocation of the taxicab operator's license and
may be the basis for further action with respect to the taxicab vehicle
license.
D. In addition to the provisions of Subsection A above, a taxicab business
license may be suspended or revoked upon a determination that:
(1) The taxicab business licensee or any person employed or connected
with such licensee has operated a taxicab without a current and
valid taxicab operator's license;
(2) There have been repeated violations by the operators of vehicles
licensed to the same licensee resulting in more than four
suspensions in any twelve-month period;
(3) The taxicab business licensee permitted or caused a taxicab
operator to operate a taxicab with knowledge of or in disregard of
that operator's loss or suspension of his motor vehicle license by
the Secretary of State;
(4) The taxicab business licensee permitted or caused a taxicab
operator to operate a taxicab with knowledge of or in disregard of
that operator's intoxication; or
(5) The taxicab business licensee permitted or caused a taxicab to
operate within the City which was unsafe or in unsound condition.
E. A taxicab vehicle license may be suspended or revoked upon a finding
by the City Council that:
(1) The City has been notified by the licensee's insurance carrier that
the insurance policy covering the vehicle in question has lapsed,
been suspended or has been terminated; or
§ 195-11 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 195-11
173:519
§ 195-12. Maintenance of taxicabs; required equipment.
All taxicabs operating within the City of Saco shall adhere to the following
requirements at all times:
(2) It has been determined by the license inspector that the vehicle in
question is no longer fit for service as a taxicab.
A. Taxicabs shall at all times be clean and in good repair inside and out
and shall be maintained at all times in compliance with the laws of the
State of Maine relating to passenger vehicles and the rules and
regulations of the State Commissioner of Transportation enacted
pursuant thereto.
B. Taxicabs that compute fare through the use of a taximeter shall have
those meters installed so as to give an accurate reading of all the car's
movements and so as not to be subject to tampering. Any meters used
shall be tested, approved and sealed by the State Sealer of Weights and
Measures. Said meters shall indicate fare and mileage by means of
legible figures which are electrically illuminated during the period
between sunset and sunrise, which fare shall be calculated in
accordance with the fare posted on the vehicle and on file in the
application on file with the City Clerk.
C. Every taxicab operating in the City shall be equipped with an exterior
light affixed to the roof thereof, which shall be covered with a
translucent fixture marked with the word "Taxi" in legible lettering and
which shall be operated during the period between sunset and sunrise.
D. Every taxicab shall be conspicuously marked, in letters not less than
1 1/2 inches in height, with the word "Taxicab," "Taxi" or "Cab" and the
owner's name or trade name or, in lieu of such name or trade name,
with a design or monogram containing the owner's name or trade name.
Such design or monogram shall be not less than eight inches in
diameter.
E. Every taxicab shall be conspicuously marked, in numbers not less than
1 1/2 inches in height, with a vehicle number, which shall correspond to
the vehicle license number issued by the City Clerk, such number to be
unique to all taxicabs licensed by the City of Saco.
F. All taxicabs shall have access to a certified child safety seat, for use
when transporting children required to be placed in such a seat.
G. All handicapped-accessible taxicabs licensed in the City of Saco to pick
up or drop off passengers must have a restraint system or straps
designed to hold a wheelchair and passenger securely in place. Every
operator of a handicapped-accessible taxicab licensed to operate within
the City is to be trained by the employer in the appropriate and safe
application of said restraint system or strap and to hold the passengers
securely in a wheelchair. [Added 11-4-2013]
§ 195-11 SACO CITY CODE § 195-13
173:520
§ 195-13. Display of license.
A taxicab operator shall display his or her taxicab operator's license,
complete with name and picture, in a place within the cab which is clearly
visible to passengers at all times when the cab is in service.
§ 195-14. Display of rates.
§ 195-15. Rates.
§ 195-16. Insurance.
A. All taxicabs shall have the rates to be charged clearly displayed on the
exterior of the vehicle, as well as on the interior of the vehicle, and be
clearly marked either "metered taxi" or "zone taxi" on the exterior of
the vehicle.
B. The maximum rate of fare charged by the taxicab and any lesser rate
actually charged by the taxicab shall be advertised on both back doors
of the taxicab, in lettering no less than one inch in height.
C. Every taxicab shall be equipped with a sign which shall be located in
the interior of the taxicab and maintained in such a manner as to be
clearly visible to all passengers therein and which shall state, in letters
no less than 1/4 inch in height, the following:
Passenger Information
If you have a complaint about the services you have received or the
fare you have been charged, please call the Chief of Police of the City
of Saco at 283-1845.
A. The fare to be charged by a taxicab business shall be clearly described
in the application for a taxicab business license. Upon any changes to
the rate, the City Clerk and Police Chief shall be notified.
B. There shall be no charge for the transportation of the carry-on bags or
parcels of a passenger.
A. No taxicab vehicle license shall be issued to any licensed taxicab
business until the applicant files with the Clerk satisfactory proof of
liability insurance coverage for liability arising out of the operation of
the taxicab. Insurance shall clearly cover the vehicle and all occupants
under all operating conditions, including but not limited to by
employees of the owner, lease arrangements or any other similar
arrangement. The insurance coverage shall be in conformance with
minimum state guidelines.
(1) In the case of vehicles constructed with capacity for more than four
persons behind the driver, permanent alterations to the vehicle
must be made in order to be considered a taxi.
§ 195-13 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 195-16
173:521
§ 195-17. Inspections; removal from service.
The license inspector may require any licensee to present a taxicab for
inspection whenever the inspector deems such inspection necessary. The
inspection shall be performed as soon as practicable, at a location to be
determined by the City of Saco. If a vehicle fails to pass this inspection,
the license inspector may, in writing, order a taxicab removed from service,
provided that a reinspection shall be scheduled as soon as possible, but in
no case more than three days thereafter. There shall be a charge of $10 for
the first reinspection and a charge of $25 for each reinspection thereafter of
any taxicab ordered removed from service for any violation which is deemed
by the license inspector to represent a serious threat to the health or safety
of passengers. Any licensee aggrieved by such an order may appeal the
decision of the license inspector to the City Council, which shall hear the
appeal at the next regularly scheduled meeting date.
§ 195-18. Notices.
When notice is required to be given to an applicant or holder of a license
issued pursuant to this chapter and notice by mail is used, the City Clerk
may use the address set forth in the application on file. Proof of a certified
or registered mailing to said address shall create the presumption of receipt
by the applicant on the expiration of three days from the date of mailing.
§ 195-19. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The Saco Police Department shall have the primary duty to enforce this
chapter. Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall pay a fine
not exceeding $50 for the first such offense in any calendar year and $100
for each subsequent offense in the same calendar year. Any licensed owner
or operator who violates any of the provisions of the foregoing sections
shall, in addition to said penalty, thereupon become subject to suspension
or forfeiture of his/her/its license thereafter.
(2) The City Council may require higher insurance liability coverage if
it deems necessary.
(3) The insurance company issuing the policy shall contain a provision
for the automatic and immediate notification by the insurance
company to the City of Saco of cancellation, amendment or
expiration of the insured's policy. If the insurance coverage
terminates, expires or is suspended, the taxicab vehicle license or
the taxicab operator's license shall terminate and expire and shall
be immediately returned by the owner to the Clerk. Thereafter, the
license may only be reinstated upon proof of retaining insurance as
required herein.
B. In all cases, the operator and the owner shall both be insured to the
limits established by this section or by a higher amount if deemed
necessary by the Council.
§ 195-16 SACO CITY CODE § 195-20
173:522
§ 195-20. Additional regulations.
During the life of the license, the licensee shall be required to conform to
any new regulations duly adopted by the City Council.
§ 195-21. (Reserved)80
§ 195-22. When effective; time limit for compliance
This chapter shall become effective 30 days from its adoption, as provided
by Section 2.09c of the Saco City Charter. For any initial vehicle license
issued under this chapter, the licensee shall have 60 days to conform to
the terms herein, excepting the requirements regarding the provision of
child safety seats, for which the applicant shall have 90 days to comply.
Subsequent licenses shall only be issued upon proof of compliance.
§ 195-23. Fees. 81 [Added 3-5-2001]
Fee shall be determined by Council after a public hearing.
Chapter 200
TOWERS AND WRECKERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire lanes — See Ch. 102, Art. III.
Licenses — See Ch. 132.
Towing provisions — See Ch. 211, Art. III.
§ 200-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHIEF OF POLICE — The executive head of the Police Department of the
City of Saco or anyone designated by him.
CITY — The City of Saco.
LICENSE — Written permission by the Chief of Police to be placed on the
towing list.
TOWING LIST — A list, maintained by the Police Department, containing
the names of those wreckers licensed by the City of Saco to respond to
requests for the towing of vehicles made by the Police Department.
80.Editor's Note: Former § 195-21, Transfer of vehicle licenses; fee, was repealed 3-5-2001.
Copies of the current fee schedule are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
81.Editor's Note: Copies of the current fee schedule are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 195-20 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 200-1
173:523
WRECKER — A person engaged in the business of or offering the services
of a vehicle wrecker or towing service whereby motor vehicles are or may
be towed or otherwise removed from one place to another by the use of a
motor vehicle adapted to and designed for that purpose.
§ 200-2. Application for license.
Any person desiring to perform towing work at police request shall submit
a letter to the Chief of Police, requesting to be placed on the towing list.
§ 200-3. Issuance of license.
Within 30 days after receiving an application for a wrecker service license,
the Chief of Police shall conduct an investigation to determine the truth and
accuracy of the information contained in said application, and if the wrecker
meets specifications and requirements set forth in this chapter, a license
shall be issued, in writing, by the Chief of Police. If the Chief of Police finds
the applicant qualified, the applicant's name will be placed on the towing
list.
§ 200-4. Insurance.
A. This letter shall include:
(1) The name of the owner, his home and business address, home
phone and the name under which the person does or will trade.
(2) The location, size and security features of the storage location
where towed vehicles will be stored.
(3) The location to which the public must go to claim a stored vehicle.
(4) A statement of willingness to provide wrecker service on a
continuous twenty-four-hour-a-day basis, each day of the year.
(5) A complete listing of the insurance policies, carriers and agents the
owner would place into effect upon license approval.
(6) A statement that the wrecker owner will accept responsibility for
any and all personal property left in towed and stored vehicles,
along with a description of the place he would use to adequately
protect the property left in towed or stored vehicles.
B. The equipment listed in this chapter shall be available.
A. No wrecker shall be issued a license until the applicant has deposited
with the Chief of Police a certified copy of the following policies:
(1) A garage keeper's policy, covering fire, theft, windstorm, vandalism
and explosion, in the amount of at least $25,000, with each vehicle
suffering damage or loss being deemed a separate claim.
§ 200-1 SACO CITY CODE § 200-4
173:524
§ 200-5. Duties and requirements of wrecker service.
(2) A garage keeper's liability policy, covering the operation of the
licensee's business, equipment or other vehicles, for any bodily
injury or property damage. This policy shall be in the minimum
amount of $250,000 for any one person injured or killed and a
minimum of $500,000 for more than one person injured or killed in
any accident and a minimum of $25,000 for property damage.
(3) Road service liability, covering the lifting, hoisting and towing of a
vehicle, in the minimum amount of $25,000.
B. Each policy required above shall contain an endorsement by the carrier
providing 30 days' notice to both the City and the insured in the event of
any change in coverage under or cancellation of the policy. Each policy
shall also contain an endorsement holding harmless the City or any of
its officers or employees.
C. The lapsing or cancellation of any policy as required hereinabove shall
result in the immediate termination of the wrecker's license without
any action on the part of the City.
A. Each service shall be equipped with a wrecker of sufficient size to
remove and tow any size passenger vehicle. All wreckers will be
equipped with the following:
(1) Adequate amber warning lights (state law).
(2) CB radio (to be able to communicate with the Police Department).
(3) Dolly wheels.
(4) Pry bars.
(5) Jacks (bumper).
(6) Jumper cables.
(7) Gasoline (or availability).
(8) Flares or reflectors.
(9) Fire extinguisher (state-approved).
(10) Broom and shovel.
B. All of the above are mandatory and shall be in good working order, well
maintained and subject to City inspection, not only prior to granting the
license but at any time by the Chief of Police.
C. The owner will provide service 24 hours a day each day of the year and
have an attendant available to receive calls and release stored vehicles.
§ 200-4 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 200-6
173:525
§ 200-6. Towing list.
The towing list will be maintained by the Chief of Police. The list will be used
on a rotating basis. If a wrecker is called out of sequence for any justifiable
reason, the service will not be credited on the list for that call.
§ 200-7. Schedule of towing rates. [Amended 5-15-2000]
A schedule of maximum rates to be charged vehicle owners by wreckers
for specified services shall be established by the City Council after a public
hearing.82
§ 200-8. Term of license; transferability.
Each license issued hereunder shall be effective upon receipt and
permanent. The license is nontransferable.
§ 200-9. Regulations.
The following minimum regulations will be met on a continuous basis by all
licensees:
A. To avoid discrimination against smaller wrecker services, no minimum
size will be placed on the wrecker to be used. When an incident is too
large for a particular service to handle, another service will be called
and neither service credited for the call.
B. For those wrecker services meeting all physical requirements set forth
in this chapter but not meeting the availability requirements of 24
hours a day, 365 days a year, they will be placed on an alternate list and
be called when the primary list has been exhausted.
A. The licensee shall operate and maintain storage facilities within the
City.
B. The licensee shall permit the Chief of Police to conduct one regular and
two random inspections of each towing vehicle during the term of the
license.
C. The licensee shall permit the Chief of Police to conduct inspections of
each storage area during the term of the license.
D. The licensee shall maintain such records as required by regulations
promulgated by the Chief of Police pursuant to § 200-7 and shall permit
their inspection by the Chief during normal business hours, including a
copy of this chapter.
E. The licensee shall arrive on the scene within 20 minutes of receipt of a
request for service from the police.
F. The vehicle must be towed, not driven, to a storage lot.
82.Editor's Note: Copies of the current fee schedule are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 200-6 SACO CITY CODE § 200-9
173:526
§ 200-10. Solicitation of business.
No wrecker may respond to the scene of an accident or emergency for the
purpose of towing vehicles unless specifically called there by the police or
person involved in the accident or emergency. This section is intended to
prohibit wrecker owners from soliciting business at the scenes of accidents
and emergencies and shall not be construed to prohibit any wrecker from
contracting with any person, firm or corporation, provided that the wrecker
owner, his agents and employees do not solicit towing contracts at the
scenes of accidents or emergencies.
§ 200-11. Revocation or suspension of license.
The Chief of Police may revoke or suspend any license when he finds that:
§ 200-12. Appeals.
Chapter 204
G. No vehicle shall be towed to a lot outside the City.
H. The licensee shall clean the accident area of all debris resulting from
the accident, if there is any.
I. The licensee shall not make any repairs to the vehicle without the
consent of the owner.
J. The licensee shall hold the City harmless from all claims for damages to
property and injuries to persons resulting from the licensee's
negligence in the towing or storage of vehicles pursuant hereto.
A. The license was secured by fraud or by the concealment of a material
fact by the wrecker owner and such fact, if known, would have caused
the refusal to issue a license;
B. The wrecker owner has violated any of the requirements or regulations
established herein under this chapter; or
C. The City is not satisfied with the general services of the wrecker owner
and/or employees or with the cooperation it has received while
rendering service.
A. Any licensee or former licensee aggrieved by the action of the Chief of
Police pursuant to §§ 200-3 and 200-11 may appeal to the City
Administrator, in writing, within 10 days of such action. After a hearing
thereon, the City Administrator may reverse, modify or uphold the
decision of the Chief of Police.
B. If the administrative appeal is unsatisfactory, the licensee or former
licensee may then appeal to the Council at its regular meeting, provided
that 10 days have lapsed since the administrative hearing.
§ 200-9 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 200-12
173:527
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
City property — See Ch. 81.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 163.
Street excavations — See Ch. Ch. 186, Art. I.
§ 204-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Municipal Tree
Regulations of the City of Saco."
§ 204-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply, unless
the context clearly indicates another meaning:
MUNICIPAL TREE WARDEN — The designated official of the City of Saco
assigned to carry out the enforcement of this chapter.
PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT — The designated department of
the City under whose jurisdiction park and/or street trees fall.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PROPERTY LINE — The outer edge of a street or highway right-of-way.
PROPERTY OWNER — The person owning such property as shown by the
Tax Maps of the City of Saco, unless proof to the contrary is available.
PUBLIC PLACES — All grounds owned by the City of Saco.
PUBLIC TREES — All shade and ornamental trees now or hereafter growing
on any street or any public areas or trees standing on the public and private
property line, in which case 1/2 or more of the tree trunk is standing on
public property.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width of every public way or right-ofway
when any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of
right.
TREE LAWN — That part of a street or highway, not covered by sidewalk or
other paving, lying between the property line and that portion of the street
or highway usually used for vehicular traffic.
TREES —
LARGE TREES — Designated as those attaining a height of 45 feet or
more.
A.
MEDIUM TREES — Designated as those attaining a height of 30 feet to
45 feet or more.
B.
§ 200-12 SACO CITY CODE § 204-2
173:528
§ 204-3. Duties of Parks and Recreation Department.
The duties of the Parks and Recreation Department shall be as follows:
§ 204-4. Tree Warden.
SMALL TREES — Designated as those attaining a height of 20 feet to
30 feet.
C.
A. To assist the properly constituted officials and citizens of the City in the
dissemination of news and information regarding the selection,
planting and maintenance of trees within the corporate limits, whether
the same shall be on private or public property, and to make such
recommendations to the City Council as to desirable legislation
concerning the tree program and activities for the municipality.
B. To provide regular and special public meetings at which the subject of
trees, insofar as it relates to the City, may be discussed.
A. Appointment and qualifications. The Municipal Tree Warden shall be a
person skilled and trained in the arts and sciences of municipal
arboriculture, landscape horticulture, park administration or a closely
related field.
B. Duties of the Tree Warden. The Municipal Tree Warden shall have the
authority to promulgate the rules and regulations of the arboricultural
specifications and standards of practice governing the planting,
maintenance, removal, fertilization, pruning and bracing of trees on
streets or other public sites in the City and shall direct, regulate and
control the planting, maintenance and removal of all trees growing now
or hereafter in any public area of the City of Saco. He/She shall cause
the provisions of this chapter to be enforced. In his/her absence these
duties shall be the responsibility of a qualified alternate designated by
the City Administrator.
C. Authority of the Tree Warden.
(1) General authority and jurisdiction. The Tree Warden shall have the
authority and jurisdiction of regulating the planting, maintenance
and removal of public trees on streets and other publicly owned
property to ensure safety or preserve the aesthetics of such public
sites.
(2) Supervision. The Tree Warden shall have the authority and it shall
be his/her duty to supervise or inspect all work done under a permit
issued in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
(3) Condition of permit. The Tree Warden shall have the authority to
affix reasonable conditions to the granting of a permit in
accordance with the terms of this chapter.
§ 204-2 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 204-4
173:529
§ 204-5. Permit procedure; emergencies; notice of completion.
§ 204-6. Replanting, removal and replacement; elm trees.
(4) Master Street Tree Plan. The Tree Warden shall have the authority
to formulate a Master Street Tree Plan with the advice and
approval of the appropriate committee. The Master Street Tree
Plan shall specify the species of trees to be planted on each of the
streets or other public sites of the City. From and after the effective
date of the Master Street Tree Plan, or any amendment thereof, all
planting shall conform thereto.
(a) The Tree Warden shall consider all existing and future utility
and environmental factors when recommending a specific
species for each of the streets and other public sites of the City.
(b) The Tree Warden, with the approval of the Tree Committee,
shall have the authority to amend or add to the Master Street
Tree Plan at any time that circumstances make it advisable.
A. Permit required. No person shall plant, spray, fertilize, preserve, prune,
remove, cut above ground or otherwise disturb any tree on any street or
City-owned property without first filing an application and procuring a
permit from the Tree Warden or otherwise specified municipal
authority. The person receiving the permit shall abide by the
arboricultural specifications and standards of practice adopted by the
Tree Warden. In emergency situations, such as storm damage to trees,
requiring immediate pruning or removal, the work may be done. The
Tree Warden must, however, be informed of such action within two days
thereafter.
B. Applications. Application for permits must be made at the office of the
Parks and Recreation Department not less than 48 hours in advance of
the time the work is to be done. Applications for planting shall state the
number of trees to be set out; the location, grade, species, cultivar or
variety of each tree; the method of planting; and such other information
as the Tree Warden shall find reasonably necessary to a fair
determination of whether a permit should be issued.
C. Standards of issuance. The Tree Warden shall issue the permit provided
for herein if, in his/her judgment, the proposed work is desirable and
the proposed method and workmanship thereof are of a satisfactory
nature. Any permit granted shall contain a definite date of expiration,
and the work shall be completed in the time allowed on the permit and
in the manner as therein described. Any permit shall be void if its terms
are violated.
D. Notice of completion. Notice of completion shall be given within five
days to the Tree Warden for his/her inspection.
§ 204-4 SACO CITY CODE § 204-6
173:530
§ 204-7. Trees causing obstructions; minimum clearance.
It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or occupying real
property bordering on any street upon which property there may be trees
to prune such trees in such manner that they will not obstruct or shade
the streetlights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, obstruct
vision of traffic signs or obstruct view of any street or alley intersection. The
minimum clearance of any overhanging portion thereof shall be 10 feet over
sidewalks and 12 feet over all streets, except truck thoroughfares, which
shall have a clearance of 16 feet.
§ 204-8. Abuse or mutilation of public trees.
Unless specifically authorized by the Tree Warden, no person shall
intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree; attach any
rope, wire, nails, advertising posters or other contrivance to any tree; allow
any gaseous liquid or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to come
in contact with them; or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or
the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree.
§ 204-9. Interference with Tree Warden.
No person shall hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with the Tree Warden
or any of his/her assistants while engaged in carrying out the execution or
enforcement of this chapter; provided, however, that nothing herein shall
be construed as an attempt to prohibit the pursuit of any remedy, legal
or equitable, in any court of competent jurisdiction for the protection of
property rights by the owner of any property within the City.
A. Replanting by City. Whenever it is necessary to remove a tree or trees
from a tree lawn in connection with the paving of a sidewalk or the
paving or widening of the portion of a street or highway used for
vehicular traffic, the municipality shall replant such trees or replace
them. Provided that conditions prevent planting on tree lawns, this
requirement will be satisfied if any equivalent number of trees of the
same size and species as provided for in the arboricultural
specifications are planted on the adjoining property.
B. Removal; permits and replacement required. No person or property
owner shall remove a tree from the tree lawn for the purpose of
construction or for any other reason without first filing an application
and procuring a permit from the Tree Warden and without replacing the
removed tree or trees in accordance with the adopted arboricultural
specifications. Such replacement shall meet the standards of size,
species and placement as provided for in a permit issued by the Tree
Warden. The person or property owner shall bear the cost of removal
and replacement of all trees removed.
C. Removal of elm trees. The City of Saco will prune and remove diseased
elm trees up to and including tree trunks standing 30 feet on private
property measured from the end of the public property line.
§ 204-6 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 204-10
173:531
§ 204-10. Protection of public trees.
§ 204-11. Placing materials on public property.
No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain upon any public place
of the City any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other materials which may
impede the free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any tree
growing therein, except by written permit of the Tree Warden.
Chapter 211
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ambulance service — See Ch. 60.
Bicycles, skateboards and roller skates — See
Ch. 69.
Fire lanes — See Ch. 102, Art. III.
Harbor and waterfront regulations — See Ch.
118.
Recreational vehicles — See Ch. 169.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 186.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 195.
Towers and wreckers — See Ch. 200.
Junked vehicles — See Ch. 214.
A. Guards. All trees on any street or other publicly owned property near
any excavation or construction of any building or structure or street
work shall be guarded with a good, substantial fence, frame or box not
less than four feet high and eight feet square or at a distance, in feet,
from the tree equal to the diameter of the trunk, in inches [diameter at
breast height (DBH)], whichever is greater, and all building material,
dirt or other debris shall be kept outside the barrier.
B. Construction permits required. No person shall excavate any ditches,
tunnels or trenches or lay any drive within a radius of 10 feet from any
public tree without first obtaining a written permit from the Tree
Warden.
§ 204-10 SACO CITY CODE § 204-11
173:532
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 211-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply, unless
the context clearly indicates another meaning:
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Vehicles of the Fire and Police
Departments and such ambulances and emergency vehicles as are
designated or authorized by the City Administrator.
BUSINESS DISTRICT — The territory contiguous to and including a
highway when 50% or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of 300
feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business.
CROSSWALK —
DRIVER — Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
INTERSECTION — The area embraced within the prolongation or
continuation of the lateral side lines of two highways which join one another.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Every vehicle which is self-propelled but not operated
upon rails.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES — All signs, signals, markings
and devices, whether immovable or whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, placed or erected by authority of a public body or
official having jurisdiction, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop
and proceed or for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
OPERATION — The act of controlling or exercising control over any vehicle
or any other device.[Added 9-2-2003]
PARK — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading.
PARKING SPACE — Any space which is duly designated for the parking of a
single vehicle by painted lines or other durable markings.
PEDESTRIAN — Any person on foot.
PERSON — Every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation.
That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the prolongation
or continuation of the lateral lines of sidewalks at intersections. Where
two or more streets intersect and only some of the crosswalks at such
intersection are marked for pedestrian traffic, the word "crosswalk," as
used in this chapter, shall include only such marked crosswalks at any
such intersection.
A.
Any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by
lines or other markings on the surface.
B.
§ 211-1 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 211-1
173:533
POLICE OFFICER — Every officer of the Police Department or any person
authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of
traffic regulations.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY — Every way or place in private ownership
and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or
implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
PUBLICLY OWNED PROPERTY — Property owned by the City when any
part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular or
pedestrian travel.
RAILROAD — A carrier of persons or property upon cars operated upon
stationary rails.
RAILROAD TRAIN — A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT — The territory contiguous to and including a
highway, not comprising a business district, when the property on such
highway for a distance of 300 feet or more is, in the main, improved with
dwellings or dwellings and buildings in use for residences.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel.
SAFETY ZONE — The area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked
or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street between the curblines or the lateral
lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
SOUND-CREATING DEVICE — Any electrical, mechanical or chemical
device or instrument, or combination thereof, that creates sound during its
operation by a person, including but not limited to motor vehicles, sound
systems and amplifiers.[Added 9-2-2003]
STANDARD TIME — Standard time or daylight savings time as may be in
current use in the City of Saco, Maine.
STANDING — Any stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.
STOP — Complete cessation of movement, when required.
STOP or STOPPING — Any stopping of a vehicle where prohibited, except
when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
direction of a Police Officer or other authorized person or traffic control sign
or signal.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between property lines of every
way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of
the public as a matter of right for purposes of traffic.
§ 211-1 SACO CITY CODE § 211-1
173:534
TRAFFIC — Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other
conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for purposes
of travel.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 211-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply in the use of streets and ways
and in the use of publicly owned property to every pedestrian; to the driver
of any vehicle, including those owned by or used in the service of the
United States government or this state, county or City; and to every person
propelling any pushcart, riding any animal or driving any animal-drawn
vehicle, except such provisions which, by their very nature, can have no
application and except as otherwise permitted by this chapter or by state
statute or as directed by a police officer or other authorized person.
§ 211-3. Emergency vehicles.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to authorized emergency
vehicles, as defined in this chapter, except as follows: A driver, when
operating any such vehicle in an emergency, except when otherwise
directed by a police officer, may park or stand notwithstanding the
provisions of this chapter.
B. The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any
such vehicle from the consequences of his reckless disregard of the
safety of others.
§ 211-1 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 211-3
173:535

ARTICLE II
Parking and Traffic Regulations
§ 211-4. Signs required.
No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced
against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation,
an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen
by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not
state that signs are required, such section shall be effective without signs
being erected to give notice thereof.
§ 211-5. Unauthorized signs, signals or markings.
§ 211-6. Turning movements.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left turn
or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions
of any such sign; and when authorized marks, buttons or other indications
are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by
vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions
of such indications.
§ 211-7. Sound on public ways. [Amended 9-16-2002; 9-2-2003]
Purpose. The Saco City Council finds that excessive sound on public ways
may cause distraction to other drivers and preclude the safe operation of
motor vehicles to the detriment of the general public. Furthermore, the
making, creation or maintenance of loud, unnecessary, excessive, annoying,
distracting or unnatural sound is an unreasonable infringement upon the
public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of the
residents of the City. Accordingly, it is the policy of the City of Saco to
prohibit the aforementioned types of sound on public ways within the City.
A. No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any
highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which
purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic
control device or railroad sign or signal or which attempts to direct the
movement of traffic or which hides from view or interferes with the
effectiveness of any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or
signal, and no person shall place or maintain any traffic sign or signal
bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This shall not be deemed
to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways of
signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be
mistaken for official signs.
B. Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway
is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed
without notice.
§ 211-4 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 211-7
173:537
§ 211-8. Play streets.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof
is a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street
or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose
residences are within such closed area, and then any said driver shall
exercise the greatest care in driving upon any said street or portion thereof.
§ 211-9. School crossing stop signs.
Whenever traffic is controlled by a school crossing stop sign exhibiting
the word "stop," vehicular traffic facing the sign shall stop before entering
the nearest crosswalk or at such other point as may be indicated by a
A. No person, while occupying any public way in the City, shall operate any
sound-creating device in such a manner that the sound is greater than
is reasonable with due regard to the location of the device, the time of
day, or the effect on persons in proximity to the device.
B. The prohibitions of this section shall include, but not be limited to, the
following activities or conduct:
(1) Sounding a horn, bell, whistle or other device in a manner that is
unreasonable or unnecessary.
(2) Rapid throttle advance and/or revving of an internal combustion
engine resulting in a harsh or objectionable sound from the engine.
(3) The use or operation of any engine brake, compression brake, or
mechanical exhaust device, unless necessary to stop a vehicle in an
emergency. This provision shall not apply to public safety vehicles.
C. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a “quiet zone,” no
person operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the
horn or other warning device of the vehicle, except in an emergency.
D. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following activities
or conduct:
(1) Expression or communication protected by the United States
Constitution, including the first amendment, or the Maine
Constitution.
(2) Any activity or conduct the regulation of which has been preempted
by Maine statute.
(3) Any sound created by a governmental entity in the performance of
an official duty.
(4) Any sound for which a permit has been issued by an authority
having jurisdiction to issue the permit.
(5) The sounding of any signaling device permitted by law.
§ 211-7 SACO CITY CODE § 211-9
173:538
clearly visible line and shall then proceed with due caution, having regard
to the safety of the pedestrians crossing at that point. The Police Chief shall
designate the time of placing such signs and the location thereof.
§ 211-10. No parking on narrow streets.
When authorized signs prohibiting parking are erected on narrow streets,
no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place.
§ 211-11. No parking in hazardous or congested places.
When authorized signs are erected upon approach to hazardous or
congested places, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such
designated place.
§ 211-12. No parking adjacent to schools.
When authorized signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of
the street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in
any such designated place.
§ 211-13. Snow emergency parking ban.
The provisions set forth below shall apply during snow emergencies
declared by the Public Works Director or his/her designated representative:
A. The Director of Public Works may declare that a snow emergency exists
any time during the calendar year. The snow emergency shall be
announced by notifying local radio and television media and by
notifying other Public Safety Departments of the City. The
announcement shall include the duration of the parking ban and that
parking is prohibited on any public way until the parking ban is lifted.
B. The Public Works Director shall also have the discretion to declare longterm
parking bans if snow accumulation or public safety issues warrant
emergency action in order to allow for the efficient removal of snow and
ice.
C. No vehicle shall be parked at any time during a declared snow
emergency so as to interfere with or hinder the removal of snow from
said public street or way. Any person restricting the City snow plowing,
loading and hauling operation or any person parking a vehicle in
violation of a "no parking" sign placed on any street or way by the
Public Works Department shall be subject to a fine under general
penalties.83 Notwithstanding the imposition of such a fine, the police
officer issuing the citation may also cause any vehicle so parked to be
removed from the street in accordance with the provisions of Article III,
Towing, of this chapter.
83.Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 211-9 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 211-14
173:539
§ 211-14. Bus stops.
§ 211-15. Parallel parking.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel
with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of traffic and with the
curbside wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the edge of the roadway,
except upon those streets which have been marked or signed for angle
parking, in which event vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb
indicated by such mark or signs.
§ 211-16. Unlawful parking on public streets and rights-of-way.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any public roadway or rightof-
way for the principal purpose of:
§ 211-17. Passenger zones.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period
of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers
in any place marked as a passenger zone during the hours when the
regulations applicable to such passenger zones are effective, and then only
for a period not to exceed 15 minutes.
A. The driver of any urban or interurban bus shall not stand or park in any
business district at any place other than at a bus stop, except that this
provision shall not prevent the driver of any such bus from temporarily
stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at
any place designated for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading passengers.
B. The driver of any other bus except those described in Subsection A shall
not stop or stand upon any street in any business district.
C. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus
stop when any such stop has been officially designated and
appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may
temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not
interfere with any bus waiting to enter or about to enter such zone.
A. Displaying it for sale or for the primary purpose of advertising.
B. Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicles, except for repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
C. Parking commercial trucks or vans for more than a two-hour period in
residential neighborhoods, unless loading or unloading.
§ 211-14 SACO CITY CODE § 211-18
173:540
§ 211-18. Stopping, standing or parking prohibited at specific
locations.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the following places,
nor shall any person move a vehicle not owned by him into any of these
places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer, other authorized person
or traffic control device:
A. On a sidewalk.
B. In front of or within 10 feet of the intersection of the side lines of a
public or private driveway with the nearest roadway edge of pavement.
C. Within an intersection.
D. Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
E. On a crosswalk or within 10 feet of any crosswalk, including unmarked
crosswalks, except on the approach to a signalized intersection, where
the distance shall be within 30 feet of any crosswalk, including
unmarked crosswalks.
F. Within 20 feet of the nearest corner of the curbs at an intersection.
G. Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or
traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
H. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points
on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the
Traffic Committee indicates a different length by signs or markings.
I. Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the
side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of
the entrance when properly signposted.
J. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
K. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street, or, double park, so called.
L. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway.
M. At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
N. In front of a place of business or in a parking space within an off-street
parking lot operated by the City of Saco for longer than two hours
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except for Sundays and
holidays, unless a more restricted regulation is provided elsewhere in
this chapter for such location.
O. In a parking space clearly marked as a handicapped parking space and
that does not bear a special registration plate or placard issued under
§ 211-18 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 211-18
173:541
§ 211-19. Obstruction due to lack of snow treads or chains.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this chapter for any
person to cause an obstruction to traffic by reason of inability to move a
vehicle being operated by him because of snow or ice accumulation in a
street when such vehicle has not been equipped with either snow-tread tires
or tire chains.
§ 211-20. Parking Control Officers.
Upon recommendation of the Chief of Police, the City Administrator is
authorized to appoint Parking Control Officers, who shall have the same
powers in the enforcement of parking regulations as are vested in members
of the Police Department of the City and who may order into court any
violator of parking regulations. Such Parking Control Officers shall not
be considered members of the Police Department of the City except for
administrative purposes.
§ 211-21. Traffic schedule.
The stopping, standing and/or parking of motor vehicles and movement of
traffic are hereby regulated on the streets or parts of streets and ways and
on publicly owned property on a traffic schedule established by the Traffic
Safety Committee in public session, and when signs are erected giving
notice thereof, the stopping, standing and/or parking of motor vehicles and
movement of traffic shall be regulated as set forth on said schedule for such
streets or parts of streets and ways and on such publicly owned property.
Notwithstanding the above, either member of the Council serving on the
Traffic Safety Committee may require any action taken under this section to
be reviewed and approved by the Council as a whole.
§ 211-22. Reservation of powers.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed as prohibiting the City from
providing for free parking space for loading and unloading, for taxicabs, for
bus stops and for other purposes of similar nature.
§ 211-23. Obstruction of public streets.
Any vehicle of any kind or description parked upon a public street of the
City at a place, in a manner or for a length of time prohibited by ordinance
is hereby declared to be an obstruction in such street and a menace to the
safe and proper regulation of traffic.
Title 29-A, § 521 or 523, or a similar plate issued by another state.
"Clearly marked" includes painted signs on pavement and vertical
standing signs that are visible in existing weather conditions. The Police
Department shall have the authority to enforce this provision in publicly
maintained areas as well as private off-street parking areas. [Added
5-3-2004]
§ 211-18 SACO CITY CODE § 211-24
173:542
§ 211-24. Prima facie evidence of operation.
No person shall allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his/her
name to stand or park in any street, way, highway, road or parkway under
the control of the City in violation of any provision of this chapter or any
ordinance of the City. The fact that a vehicle is unlawfully parked shall be
prima facie evidence of the unlawful parking of such vehicle by the person
in whose name such vehicle is registered.
§ 211-25. Traffic control signals.
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting the words
"go," "caution" or "stop" or exhibiting different colored lights successively,
the following colors only shall be used, and terms and lights shall indicate
as follows:
§ 211-26. Flashing signals.
Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require
obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
§ 211-27. Crosswalks and intersections not to be blocked.
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there
is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he/she is operating without obstructing the
A. Green alone or "go" shall mean vehicular traffic facing the signal may
proceed straight through or turn right or left, unless a sign at such
place prohibits either such turn; but, vehicular traffic shall yield the
right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection at the time such signal is exhibited.
B. Red alone or "stop" shall mean vehicular traffic facing the signal shall
stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at such
other points as may be indicated by a clearly visible line and shall
remain standing until green or "go" is shown alone.
C. Red with green arrow shall mean vehicular traffic facing such signal
may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement
indicated by such arrow but shall not interfere with other traffic.
A. Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated by rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, and
the right to proceed shall be subject to the rule applicable after making
a stop at a stop sign.
B. Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with
rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal only with caution.
§ 211-24 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 211-27
173:543
passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control
signal indication to proceed.
§ 211-28. Driving through processions.
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral
or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such
vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. This
provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by
traffic control signals or police officers or other authorized persons.
§ 211-29. Parades and processions.
No procession or parade containing 20 or more persons or five or more
vehicles, excepting the forces of the United States Army, Navy or Air Force,
the military forces of this state and the forces of the Police and Fire
Departments, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street except in
accordance with a permit issued by the Chief of Police and such other
regulations as are set forth herein which may apply, except that nothing
herein shall restrict through traffic traveling in convoy, provided that all
traffic laws are obeyed.
§ 211-30. Funerals.
§ 211-31. Turning around limited.
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall not upon
any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in
safety and without interfering with other traffic and provided that said turn
is not in conflict with posting duly erected under § 211-6.
§ 211-32. Driving out from curb.
No person shall drive a vehicle out from the curb on any street without
first looking to see that he/she shall not pull directly into the path of an
approaching vehicle nor without giving a signal by hand and/or turn signal
indicating that he/she is about to drive out from curb.
A. A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as
such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant of a
type designated by the Police Chief or displaying head- and taillights.
B. Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the
right-hand edge of the roadway as practicable and follow the vehicle
ahead as close as is practicable and safe.
§ 211-27 SACO CITY CODE § 211-33
173:544
§ 211-33. Backing limited.
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same into an intersection or over
a crosswalk and shall not in any event or at any place back a vehicle unless
such movement can be made in safety.
§ 211-34. Dimming of headlights.
Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with multiple-beam road lighting
equipment, during the time when lighted lamps are required, is being
operated on any street, way, highway, road or parkway or portion thereof
under the control of the City, which is sufficiently lighted to reveal a person
on the road at a distance of 200 feet ahead of the vehicle, the driver thereof
shall dim the headlights or tilt the beams downward so that the glaring rays
therefrom are not projected into the eyes of drivers of oncoming vehicles.
§ 211-35. Emerging from driveways.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private driveway, automobile
service station or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to
driving onto a sidewalk and, upon entering the roadway, shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway.
§ 211-36. Vehicles not to be driven on sidewalks.
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at a
permanent or temporary driveway.
§ 211-37. (Reserved)84
§ 211-38. Riding on handlebars.
The operator of a motorcycle, when upon a street, shall not carry any other
person upon the handlebars, frame or tank of any such vehicle, nor shall
any person so ride upon any such vehicle.
§ 211-39. Following fire apparatus.
The driver of any vehicle other than a City emergency vehicle shall not
follow closer than 500 feet to any fire apparatus traveling in response to
a fire alarm or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire
apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
§ 211-40. Crossing fire hose.
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the Fire
Department, when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at
any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department official
in command.
84.Editor's Note: Former § 211-37, Clinging to moving vehicles, was repealed 5-3-2004.
§ 211-33 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 211-41
173:545
§ 211-41. Driving through safety zone.
No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone.
§ 211-42. Striking unattended vehicles.
The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is
unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and there either locate
and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the name and address of
the driver and owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle or shall
leave in a conspicuous place in the vehicle struck a written notice giving the
name and address of the driver and of the owner of the vehicle doing the
striking.
§ 211-43. Striking fixtures on a highway.
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage
to fixtures legally upon or adjacent to a highway shall take reasonable steps
to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of such property of such
fact and of his/her name and address and of the registration number of the
vehicle he/she is driving and shall, upon request and if available, exhibit his/
her operator's or chauffeur's license and shall make report of such accident
when and as required in 29 M.R.S.A. § 891.85
§ 211-44. Accidents to be reported.
The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or
death of any person or property damage to the estimated amount of $200
or more only shall, within 24 hours after such accident, forward a written
report of such accident to the Police Department, which report may be a
copy of the accident report required to be filed with the State Police under
the laws of this state. The Police Department may require any driver of a
vehicle involved in an accident of which report must be made as provided
in this section to file supplemental reports whenever the original report is
insufficient in the opinion of the Department and may require witnesses of
accidents to render reports to said Department.
§ 211-45. Inability to report.
Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of making a
required accident report and there was another occupant in the vehicle at
the time of the accident capable of making a report, such occupant may
make or cause to be made said report.
85.Editor's Note: Said section was repealed by Chapter 683 of the Laws of 1993. See now 29-A
M.R.S.A. § 2251.
§ 211-41 SACO CITY CODE § 211-45
173:546
ARTICLE III
Towing86
§ 211-46. Removal and impounding of vehicles.
§ 211-47. Notice to owner.
The Police Department shall make every effort to notify, as promptly as
possible, the owner of any such vehicle of its removal from the streets of
the City, and as soon as possible, a written notice that such vehicle has
been impounded shall be sent by the Chief of Police to the owner at his/
her last known address as shown by the records of the Secretary of State.
If the owner is unknown, the Chief of Police shall cause to be published,
in any newspaper of general circulation in the City of Saco, notice of such
impounding, giving the registration number, the motor number and the
name, type and year of the vehicle.
§ 211-48. Release of vehicle.
Before the owner of such vehicle or his/her representative may remove it
from the possession of the person towing or storing it, the owner shall:
§ 211-49. Charges.
The City Administrator shall establish a schedule of charges for towing and
storage subject to approval of the City Council, and only those persons
agreeing to such schedule shall be called to remove the vehicle in
violation.87
A. Any vehicle parked in a manner described in § 211-23 may be removed
by or under the direction of or at the request of any police officer to a
garage or storage place within the limits of the City and impounded
therein. Such police officer may use such force as may be necessary to
enter such vehicle and cause the same to be placed in a condition to be
moved and may employ any reputable person engaged in the business
of towing or storing vehicles for such purpose.
B. Notwithstanding any language herein contained, the removal and
storage of a vehicle pursuant to this chapter and the payment of the
charges specified herein shall in no way relieve or prevent prosecution
for the violation of any provision of the ordinances of the City of Saco.
A. Furnish satisfactory evidence of his/her identity and of his/her
ownership of the vehicle to the officer in charge at the Saco Police
Department and to the person having possession of the vehicle.
B. Pay to the person having possession of the vehicle reasonable charges
for the towing and storing of the vehicle.
C. Sign a receipt for the vehicle.
86.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 200, Towers and Wreckers.
§ 211-46 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 211-50
173:547
§ 211-50. Outstanding violations; towing.
A. If any vehicle with three or more outstanding parking violations issued
by the Police Department is found to be in violation of any of the City's
parking ordinances, it shall be towed at the owner's expense. The
vehicle may be released to the owner or agent of the owner only when
the violations and tow charges are paid.
B. It will be prima facie evidence that the registered owner of the vehicle
committed the violations.
C. Towing under this section is subject to the provisions of §§ 211-46,
211-47 and 211-48.
87.Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Towers and Wreckers.
§ 211-50 SACO CITY CODE § 211-50
173:548
ARTICLE IV
Pedestrians
§ 211-51. Right-of-way at crosswalks and intersections.
Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver of a
vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to
so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk
or within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, except as otherwise
provided herein.
§ 211-52. Passing stopped or slowed vehicles at crosswalks or
intersections.
Whenever any vehicle is stopped or slowed at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped or slowed vehicle.
§ 211-53. Vehicle right-of-way; pedestrians to yield.
Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall
cross at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite
curb and shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
§ 211-54. Crossing at traffic control signals.
A. A pedestrian starting to cross a street in any crosswalk in the City on a
green or "go" signal or where a red and yellow "pedestrian interval"
signal is provided or where a police officer or other authorized person is
directing traffic shall have the right-of-way over all vehicles, including
those making turns, until such pedestrian has reached the opposite
curb. It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this
chapter for the operator of any vehicle to fail to yield the right-of-way to
any pedestrian who is crossing a street as herein provided.
B. In an intersection controlled by traffic signals where there is no
pedestrian interval, a pedestrian facing a yellow or "caution" signal is
thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the street, and
any pedestrian starting to cross shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles.
C. In an intersection controlled by traffic signals where there is no
pedestrian interval, it shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions
of this chapter for a pedestrian facing a red or "stop" signal or a red
with green arrow signal to cross the street, unless he is directed to do
so by a police officer or fireman directing traffic.
§ 211-51 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 211-55
173:549
§ 211-55. Driver to exercise due care.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, every driver of a vehicle
shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any
roadway, shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall
exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or
incapacitated person upon a roadway.
§ 211-56. Use of right half of crosswalk.
A pedestrian shall move, wherever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
§ 211-57. Standing in highway prohibited; exception.
It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to stand in any roadway, other than
in a safety zone, or in a crosswalk if such action interferes with the lawful
movement of traffic. This section shall not apply to any police officer,
surveyor, street sweeper or other person when necessarily upon a street in
the line of duty.
§ 211-58. Walking in highway prohibited; exception.
Where sidewalks are provided and their use is practicable, it shall be
unlawful for a pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent way. Where
sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a
highway shall walk only on the left side of the way or its shoulder, facing
traffic.
§ 211-59. Hitchhiking.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to hitchhike on the traveled portion
of any public highway or any portion of any limited access highway,
including but not limited to the Maine Turnpike or on any portion of any
public highway during the nighttime. Nothing in this section shall
prohibit the solicitation of aid in the event of accidents or by persons
who are sick or seeking assistance for the sick. The exception for
sickness shall apply only in cases of bona fide sickness in which an
emergency exists. Nighttime shall be defined as in 29 M.R.S.A. § 1259.
B. "Hitchhiking," as used in this section, shall mean to endeavor by words,
gestures or otherwise, beg, invite or secure transportation in any motor
vehicle not engaged in passenger carry for hire, unless said persons
know the driver thereof or any passenger therein.
§ 211-55 SACO CITY CODE § 211-59
173:550
ARTICLE V
Traffic Safety Committee
§ 211-60. Creation; membership; powers and duties. [Amended
3-15-2004]
There is hereby created the Traffic Safety Committee, to consist of two
members of the City Council, the Police Chief, Fire Chief, Street
Superintendent, Traffic Safety Officer and City Administrator. It shall be the
Committee's duty to:
§ 211-61. Traffic control devices.
§ 211-62. Regulatory powers of Police Chief and Committee.
A. Determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of all
traffic control devices;
B. Conduct engineering analyses of accidents and to devise remedial
measures;
C. Conduct engineering investigation of traffic conditions;
D. Cooperate with other City officials in the development of ways and
means to improve traffic conditions;
E. Consider requests for the closing of primary streets for special events
and adopt policy as it deems necessary for the fulfillment of this
provision;
F. Carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by other provisions
of this code or other ordinances of the City.
A. The Traffic Safety Committee shall place and maintain traffic control
devices when and as required under the ordinances of the City to make
effective the provisions of said ordinances and may place and maintain
such additional traffic control devices as it may deem necessary to
regulate traffic under the ordinances of this City or under state law or
to guide or warn traffic, subject to the same procedure as in § 211-21.
B. All traffic control devices shall conform to the manual and specifications
which may be approved by the State Highway Commission, but on such
devices as the State Highway Commission has issued no regulation,
they shall be such devices as are approved by the Traffic Safety
Committee. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent
with the provisions of state law or this section shall be official traffic
control devices.
A. Regulatory powers of the Police Chief and Traffic Safety Committee
shall be as follows:
(1) The Chief of Police, with approval of the Traffic Safety Committee,
shall have authority to designate and maintain, by appropriate
§ 211-60 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 211-62
173:551
devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks
at intersections where, in his/her opinion, there is particular
danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such other
places as he/she may deem necessary.
(2) The Chief of Police, with approval of the Traffic Safety Committee,
shall establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such
places as he/she may deem necessary for the protection of
pedestrians.
(3) The Chief of Police, with approval of the Traffic Safety Committee,
shall mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as
he/she may deem advisable, consistent with the ordinances of this
City.
(4) The Chief of Police, with approval of the Traffic Safety Committee,
shall designate a type of pennant to be displayed upon and to
identify the vehicles in funeral processions.
(5) The Chief of Police, with approval of the Traffic Safety Committee,
shall determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles
shall not make a right turn, left turn or U-turn and place proper
signs at such intersections.
(6) Whenever the Chief of Police shall issue a regulation prohibiting a
right turn or a left turn at an intersection, the Chief shall file a
report of said regulation with the City Clerk, who shall include it on
the agenda of the next regular meeting of the City Council. Said
regulation shall take effect 10 days after the meeting of the City
Council at which the report is received and accepted; provided,
however, that should the Council vote to table the report, the
regulation shall not take effect until 10 days after the report is
removed from the table and accepted.
(7) The Chief of Police, with approval of the Traffic Safety Committee,
shall place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to
intersections, indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles
turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so
indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or
ordinance.
(8) Zone of quiet.
(a) The Chief of Police, with approval of the Traffic Safety
Committee, shall establish a permanent zone of quiet upon any
street where there is a hospital or convalescent home when
requested so to do by the proper authorities of the hospital or
convalescent home, the zone of quiet to embrace such territory
adjacent to the hospital or convalescent home as the Chief
deems necessary.
§ 211-62 SACO CITY CODE § 211-62
173:552
(b) The Chief of Police, with approval of the Traffic Safety
Committee, shall temporarily establish a zone of quiet upon
any street where a person is seriously ill if requested so to do
by the written statement of at least one registered physician
certifying to its necessity. The temporary zone of quiet shall
embrace all territory within a radius of 200 feet of the building
occupied by the person named in the request of the physician.
The temporary zone of quiet provided in this subsection and in
Subsection A(8)(a) shall be designated by the placing in a
conspicuous place in the street of a sign or marking bearing
the words "quiet zone."
(9) The Chief of Police, with approval of the Traffic Safety Committee,
shall declare any street or part thereof a play street and place
appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping
to protect the same.
(10) The Chief of Police, with approval of the Traffic Safety Committee,
shall determine the location of passenger zones and freight loading
zones and place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the
same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this
subsection are applicable.
(11) The Chief of Police, with approval of the Traffic Safety Committee,
shall establish bus stops and stands for other passenger common
carrier motor vehicles on such public streets in such places and
such manner as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and
convenience to the public, and every such bus stop or other stand
shall be designated by appropriate signs.
(12) The Chief of Police, with approval of the Traffic Safety Committee,
shall erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street
adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his/
her opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.
(13) The Chief of Police, with approval of the Traffic Safety Committee,
shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted
and shall mark or sign such streets.
(14)Width of streets.
(a) The Chief of Police, with approval of the Traffic Safety
Committee, shall erect signs indicating no parking upon any
street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet
or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the
width of the roadway is between 20 and 30 feet.
(b) The width of the roadway shall be deemed not to exceed 30
feet or 20 feet, as hereinbefore set forth, if the usable width
thereof is reduced to these measurements by the piling up of
snow by snowplowing operations.
§ 211-62 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 211-62
173:553
(c) The Chief of Police is hereby authorized, whenever the width of
the roadway of any street is reduced by snow to the width as
described above, to erect signs as provided above and is also
authorized to make any street temporarily a one-way street
when, in his/her judgment, the usable roadway of said street is
reduced by snow to such width as to make such action
advisable.
(15) The Chief of Police, with approval of the Traffic Safety Committee,
shall determine and designate, by proper signs, distances not
exceeding 100 feet as places where the stopping or parking of
vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would
cause unusual delay to traffic.
(16) Stop signs and speed limit signs.
(a) The Chief of Police, with approval of the Traffic Safety
Committee, shall determine and designate intersections where
particular hazard exists upon other than through streets;
determine whether vehicles shall stop at one or more
entrances to any such intersection; and erect a stop sign at
every such place where a stop is required, or in the event that
the Chief determines that reduced speed rather than a stop is
adequate for safe operation at any such intersection, he/she
shall determine such safe speed by engineering investigation
and erecting signs upon the approaches to such intersection
giving notice of such speed.
(b) Every such stop shall bear the word "stop" in letters not less
than six inches in height and shall be reflectorized or selfilluminated.
Every stop sign shall be located as near as
practicable to the property line of the street at the entrance to
which the stop must be made or to the nearest line of the
crosswalk or, if none, to a limit line to be indicated by the Chief
of Police. The driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall
stop and, after having stopped, shall yield the right-of-way to
any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another
highway or which is approaching so closely on said highway as
to constitute an immediate hazard.
(17) Yield signs.
(a) The Chief of Police, with approval of the Traffic Safety
Committee, shall determine and designate intersections where
traffic conditions require some type of traffic control but where
traffic volumes, both vehicular and pedestrian, and other
factors indicate that neither traffic signals nor stop signs are
warranted and erect at every such place a sign stating "yield
right-of-way."
(b) Every such "yield right-of-way" sign shall conform in design
and color to specifications adopted by the State Highway
§ 211-62 SACO CITY CODE § 211-62
173:554
§ 211-63. Signs required.
Whenever any time limit parking is imposed, except when specifically
exempted, and wherever a one-way street is established, the Chief of Police
shall cause to be erected appropriate signs giving notice thereof, and no
such regulations shall be effective until and unless the signs are erected.
§ 211-64. Trial or experimental regulations.
The Police Chief may place appropriate signs establishing temporary rules
regulating traffic for purposes of trial or experiment. Such temporary rules
shall become effective immediately upon the placing of the signs and shall
continue for a period of not more than 90 days.
§ 211-64.1. Fees. [Added 5-3-2004]
Department of the State of Maine. Every such sign shall be
reflectorized to provide good visibility after dark.
(c) The driver of a vehicle approaching a "yield right-of-way" sign
shall slow to the legal speed for such intersection, yielding the
right-of-way to all traffic on the intersecting street which is so
close as to constitute an immediate hazard.
(18) When, in his/her best judgment, an emergency exists or is about to
exist because of snow, ice or other cause which will create an
especially hazardous condition, notwithstanding any other
provisions of this chapter, the Police Chief shall determine and
designate, by proper emergency signs, streets or portions of streets
on which no stopping or parking of vehicles may be permitted and
shall also determine and designate, by proper emergency signs,
streets or portions of streets on which no vehicular traffic may be
permitted or on which vehicular traffic may move only in one
direction.
B. Notwithstanding the above, any member of the Council attending the
Traffic Safety Committee meeting may require any action taken under
this section to be reviewed and approved by the Council as a whole.
[Amended 3-15-2004]
A. The application fee for any special event considered by the Traffic
Safety Committee shall be established by the City Council after a public
hearing.
B. The application fee for any neighborhood block party considered by the
Traffic Safety Officer shall be established by the City Council after a
public hearing.
§ 211-62 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 211-64.1
173:555

ARTICLE VI
Traffic Division
§ 211-65. Establishment; powers and duties.
§ 211-66. Record of violations; reports.
§ 211-67. Accident reports.
It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division to receive and properly file all
accident reports required to be filed under this chapter or state law, but
all such accident reports shall be for the confidential use of the Police
Department and the City Traffic Safety Committee, and no such report shall
be admissible in any civil or criminal proceeding other than upon request
of any person making such report or upon request of the court having
jurisdiction to prove a compliance with the laws requiring the making of any
such report.
§ 211-68. Investigation of accidents; filing of reports. [Amended
5-2-2004]
A. There is hereby established in the Police Department of this City a
Traffic Division to be under the control of an officer of the police
appointed by and directly responsible to the Chief of Police.
B. It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division, with such aid as may be
rendered by other members of the Police Department or other
authorized persons, to enforce the street traffic laws of this City and all
state laws applicable to street traffic in this City; to issue citations for
traffic violations; to investigate accidents and to cooperate with the
Police Chief and the Traffic Safety Committee and other officers of the
City in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and
means to improve traffic conditions; and to carry out those duties
specially imposed upon said Division by this chapter.
A. The Traffic Division shall keep a record of all traffic violations of the
ordinances of this City or of the state law of which any person has been
charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all such
alleged offenses.
B. Such record shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and
the total of each. Said record shall accumulate until a ten-year period is
covered, and from that time on the record shall be maintained complete
from the most recent ten-year period. All forms for such records of
violations and notices of violations shall be kept available to the public,
showing the disposal of all such forms.
C. All such records and reports shall be available for use and study by the
City Traffic Safety Committee.
§ 211-65 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 211-68
173:557
§ 211-69. Records.
The Traffic Division shall maintain a suitable record of all traffic accidents,
warnings, arrests, convictions and complaints in which the same shall be
filed alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned. Said Division
shall study the causes of all accidents.
§ 211-70. Annual report.
The Traffic Division shall annually prepare a traffic report to contain
information on traffic matters in the City as follows:
A. It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division to investigate traffic
accidents, and said Division shall maintain a suitable system of filing
traffic accident reports. Such accident reports or cards referring to
them shall be filed chronologically, and such reports shall be available
for use and information by the City Traffic Safety Committee. Whenever
the accidents at any particular location become numerous, said Division
shall cooperate with the City Traffic Safety Committee in conducting
studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures.
B. The Chief of Police or his designee may cause any accident involving a
fatality or significant injury or property damage to be investigated by a
certified accident reconstructionist. The fee for any report produced by
the accident reconstructionist shall be established by the Council after
a public hearing.
A. The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed or injured
and other pertinent traffic accident data.
B. The number of traffic accidents investigated, the number of drivers with
bad records interrogated and other pertinent data on the safety
activities of the Police.
C. The plans and recommendations of the Division for future traffic safety
activities.
§ 211-68 SACO CITY CODE § 211-70
173:558
ARTICLE VII
School Patrol
§ 211-71. Appointment.
Upon recommendation of the Chief of Police, the City Administrator is
hereby authorized to appoint sufficient personnel to establish a School
Patrol. Each such appointee shall be of good character and of acceptable
personality and shall be sworn to faithful performance of duties.
§ 211-72. Supervision by Chief of Police; removal; vacancies.
The Chief of Police shall have authority to assign such appointees to such
localities as shall be best suited to afford protection to those attending
school, shall fix their hours of service and shall familiarize each such
appointee with the duties to be performed, and he/she shall be sole
supervisor of the duties of each such appointee. Each such appointee shall
be responsible to the Chief of Police, and any such appointee may be
removed from service by the City Administrator when such removal is
recommended by the Chief of Police. Vacancies shall be filled in the manner
provided for original appointments.
§ 211-73. Appointees not considered members of Police
Department.
The appointees herein chosen shall not be considered to be members of the
Saco Police Department.
§ 211-74. Compensation.
The City Council shall fix the compensation to be paid all such appointees
and shall direct the manner of payment.
§ 211-75. Badge and equipment.
Each appointee shall, at the expense of the City, be supplied with a suitable
badge and such other equipment as shall be prescribed by the Chief of
Police.
§ 211-76. Enforcement of traffic regulations.
Such appointees shall be known as "School Patrol" and shall have the
same powers in the matter of traffic control as are now vested in members
of the Saco Police Department and may order into court any violator for
the violation of the traffic rules and regulations as now prescribed by the
provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the City of Saco and for the
violation of any laws of the State of Maine relating to traffic control.
§ 211-71 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 211-76
173:559

ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement; Violations and Penalties
§ 211-77. Compliance required.
Except when otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized
person, the driver of any vehicle and every pedestrian shall obey the
instructions of any traffic control device, signal, sign or marker installed
under the provisions of this chapter or state law, and every such person
shall obey each and every provision of this chapter.
§ 211-78. Providing false information.
It shall be unlawful for any person, when given a notice by any police officer
or other authorized person to appear to answer for an offense against any
provision of this chapter, to give other than his true name and true place
of his residence or address upon the request of such police officer or other
authorized person.
§ 211-79. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-3-2004]
Every person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine of not more than $100; specific fines follow:
Parking and Traffic
Violations Fine
Parking in a NO PARKING zone $25
Parking in a fire lane $100
Parking in a handicapped zone $100
Overtime parking $25
Parking too close to a hydrant $100
Parking too close or on a crosswalk $25
Parking on a sidewalk $100
Parking on wrong side of street
(facing traffic)
$25
Parking during snow emergency $25
Blocking driveway (upon complaint) $25
Tickets not paid within 5 days shall
double.
§ 211-77 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 211-79
173:561

ARTICLE IX
Permit Parking
[Added 4-30-2007]
§ 211-80. Free Street and Gooch Streets Lots.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow business owners,
employees and residents to park in the municipal parking lots,
exempted from the two-hour parking restriction.
B. Location of parking lots. Parking lots subject to this section include the
Free Street Lot and the Gooch Street Lots.
C. Parking permit regulations. Permittees shall be subject to the following
regulations:
(1) Permits for parking spaces in the parking lots shall be issued by the
City Clerk on either an annual or a month-to-month basis for a fee
established by the City Council at a public hearing. Annual permits
shall be valid for a single calendar year (January through
December). Annual permits may be purchased at any time during a
calendar year, and the fee will be prorated at a monthly basis for
the number of months remaining in that year. [Amended
3-3-2008]
(2) The number of permitted parking spaces at each location shall be
determined by the Traffic Safety Committee, and subject to any
existing agreements concerning said lots. [Amended 3-3-200888]
(3) Any permits not renewed by the 25th of the month for which the
permit was issued shall be considered available for the next month
and may be assigned to another user on a first-come, first-serve
basis.
(4) No one business, corporation or individual may hold more than
25% of the available parking permits in any given month or for any
given year.
(5) No vehicle shall be allowed to park in a spot designated "permit
parking only" unless properly displaying a City of Saco parking
permit. Parking permits must be clearly displayed in the windshield
of the vehicle, either by hanging the permit from the vehicle's
rearview mirror or affixing it to the windshield. Anyone receiving
an overtime parking ticket because the permit was not properly
displayed shall be responsible for paying the full violation amount.
(6) Permitted vehicles should be parked in the designated "permit
parking only" area; however, if the designated "permit parking
88.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated Subsection C(2) through (8) as subsection
C(3) through (9), respectively.
§ 211-80 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 211-80
173:563
only" area is full, permitted vehicles may park in any other space in
the parking lot that is available.
(7) Parking permits are issued to individuals and may be used only on
vehicles owned by the permittee.
(8) Permitted vehicles may not be parked overnight during the City's
winter parking ban, except as otherwise posted. [Amended
3-3-2008]
(9) The Police Chief shall have the authority to revoke any parking
permit if the holder of that permit fails to follow these regulations
or any other relevant provision of this Code. Any such revocation
may be appealed to the City Administrator.
D. Permit hours. Permit restrictions and regulations shall be in effect from
7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
E. Dedication of funds. All revenues collected for parking lot parking
permits shall be deposited into a dedicated reserve account to be used
for the maintenance and improvement of City parking lots and/or the
establishment, maintenance and improvement of other parking
facilities.
§ 211-80 SACO CITY CODE § 211-80
173:564
Chapter 214
VEHICLES, JUNKED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses — See Ch. 132.
§ 214-1. Deposit on private property.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property within the City or any
person, firm or corporation having such property in his control to deposit or
allow to be deposited any discarded, worn-out or junked motor vehicle on
such property or to allow any discarded, worn-out or junked motor vehicle
to remain on such property unless such person, firm or corporation has first
obtained from the City Council a permit to maintain a junkyard.
§ 214-2. Notice to remove.
The Chief of Police, upon discovery of any such discarded, worn-out or
junked motor vehicle, shall give notice to the owner of the premises upon
which such discarded, worn-out or junked motor vehicle is found or the
person having control of such premises to remove such vehicle within 10
days.
§ 214-3. Violations and penalties; recovery of fine.
Any person, firm or corporation, after having received such notice, who or
which fails to remove such discarded, worn-out or junked motor vehicle
shall be punished by a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $50, to be
recovered to the use of the City of Saco upon complaint in the District Court.
Chapter 219
VICTUALERS' LICENSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
License and registration — See Ch. 132.
§ 219-1. Purposes.
A. The City of Saco has historically regulated victualers doing business
within the City by licensing pursuant to specific legislative authority
found at 30-A M.R.A. § 3811 et seq. The State of Maine Legislature
recently repealed that part of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3811 concerning
victualers. The City Council believes that given the necessity of
§ 211-80 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 219-1
173:565
§ 219-2. License required; applicability.
§ 219-3. Standards for issuance.
protecting public health and safety, and assuring public confidence in
the sale of food, food stuff and food products by local merchants, that
it is prudent to enact a supplementary licensing ordinance to regulate
victualers.
B. Therefore, pursuant to Saco's Home Rule authority (see also 30-A
M.R.S.A § 3001), as well as the inherent police powers of the City to
protect public health, safety and welfare of its citizens, Saco enacts the
following ordinance provisions.
A. Any person, business, entity, corporation or association who or which
offers to sell, prepare, promote or otherwise provide to the public any
food, food stuff, food product or other edible materials must first secure
a license from the City Clerk to do so.
B. Undertaking the sale, promotion or providing of materials described
above in Subsection A without a license is a violation of this chapter
punishable by a fine of $100 for each and every day such violation
occurs. The City will treat each day as a separate violation, if additional
and/or subsequent violations occur.
C. This chapter applies to any person, business, entity, corporation, etc.,
who operates within the City of Saco and its boundaries unless
exempted by § 219-2D. Full-time businesses, seasonal businesses, as
well as short-term or one-time vendors must all secure victualer's
licenses. The duration of operation is irrelevant to the obligation to
secure a license. [Amended 12-3-2012]
D. Any public or private school; any booster group raising funds for school
activities or sports programs; any nonprofit organization selling food or
drink to raise funds for charitable causes, educational activities or
public agency programs; or any food sold only through vending
machines shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. [Added
12-3-201289]
E. Every person, business, entity, corporation, etc., which meets the
applicability of this chapter is herein deemed to require and need a
license. The failure to secure a license and the City's failure to detect
such violation shall not constitute permissive waiver of any obligation
under this chapter by the City.
A. Review by clerk. The clerk shall review all applications for victualers'
licenses. No license shall be granted by the clerk until the applicant has
satisfied the following conditions:
(1) Completed all requests for information required by the Clerk.
89.Editor's Note: This amendment also redesignated former Subsection D as Subsection E.
§ 219-1 SACO CITY CODE § 219-3
173:566
§ 219-4. Revocation or suspension of license.
(2) All personal property taxes are current and paid.
(3) All other City fees or charges such as sewer user fees, etc., are
current and paid.
(4) The applicant is operating, or proposes to operate, in an area
lawfully zoned for such activity.
(5) Evidence that the victualer and/or facility will assure the public
health as concerns: Fire safety. [Amended 12-3-2012]
(6) The application will comply with the State of Maine Rules Relating
to the Administration of Establishments Licensed by the Eating and
Lodging Program 10-144 CMR 201 and the Maine Food Code,
10-144 CMR 200 and 01-CMR 331, as prepared and published by
the Department of Health and Human Services and as amended
from time to time. Evidence of compliance shall be in the form of a
license issued to the applicant pursuant to said rules. [Amended
12-3-2012]
B. Fee and license form. Only upon satisfaction of the above conditions
and only upon payment of the license fee established by the City
Council after a public hearing shall the Clerk issue a license to the
applicant. The fee, if the applicant sells beer and wine, and if the
applicant serves alcohol other than beer and wine shall be established
by the City Council after a public hearing. The license shall state the
legal name of the person, business or entity licensed; the address of
their place of business; telephone number; term of license; and a
license number. The form of the license shall be uniform among license
holders and shall be determined by the Clerk. [Amended 4-7-2003]
C. Standards for denial. If the Clerk finds substantial and credible
evidence that one or more of the above conditions (Subsection A above)
have not been met by the applicant, then the Clerk shall deny the
applicant a license. However, the applicant may request a re-review
after an initial denial of license. If the applicant subsequently corrects,
abates, meets or otherwise satisfies the above conditions, the Clerk
shall then issue the applicant a victualer's license. Under all
circumstances, the Clerk shall provide to the applicant all material
supporting the decision to deny a license. [Amended 12-3-2012]
D. Time for review. The Clerk shall make a determination under
Subsection A of this section in a period of 30 days. [Amended
12-3-2012]
A. Grounds. A victualer's license may be suspended or revoked upon a
determination of the existence of one or more of the following grounds,
provided that there are serious and substantial incidents warranting
suspension or revocation:
§ 219-3 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 219-4
173:567
§ 219-5. Term of of license.
(1) Knowingly making an incorrect or false statement of a material
nature on the application form or failure to supply any additional
documentation required or reasonably necessary to determine
whether such license is issuable or failure to pay any fee required
hereunder.
(2) The license holder has caused or suffered more than one serious
breach of the peace on the premises;
(3) The business or persons patronizing the business present a clear
danger to the public;
(4) The license holder has willfully violated a provision of this chapter
or other ordinance of the City of Saco;
(5) Personal property taxes or sewer user, access or hook-up fees are
due and owing to the City and are determined to be in arrears as of
the date of the license request;
(6) The license holder has repeatedly violated and/or failed to correct
and comply with the standards set forth in the State of Maine Food
Code, 10-144 CMR 200 and 01-CMR 331. [Amended 12-3-201290]
B. Complaints. Any citizen or public official of the City can file and/or
initiate a complaint against a license holder. Complaints will be kept
and maintained by the Clerk and may be considered when and if a
license seeks a renewal of their license in a succeeding year.
C. Standards for suspension or revocation. If the Clerk finds substantial
and credible evidence that one or more of the conditions described in
§ 219-A have been met, then the Clerk shall notice the license holder of
the problem, and they shall have seven days to correct or abate the
situation. If the license holder has failed to correct or abate the
problems cited by the City, then the Clerk shall suspend the license. The
Clerk shall provide all materials supporting the decision to the
aggrieved party. [Amended 12-3-2012]
A. Expiration. All licenses shall expire May 31 of each calendar year.
B. Renewals. License holders may renew their licenses each year but must
reapply to the Clerk per § 219-3. The applicant seeking renewal must
meet all of the qualifying conditions set forth in §§ 219-3 and 219-6. In
processing applications, the Clerk shall give precedence to license
renewals over the issuance of new licenses.
90.Editor's Note: This amendment also repealed former Subsection A(7), regarding a license
holder with two or more violations of license conditions, and Subsection A(8), regarding
garbage or other health and safety risks, which subsections immediately and respectively
followed this subsection.
§ 219-4 SACO CITY CODE § 219-6
173:568
§ 219-6. License conditions. [Amended 12-3-2012]
A license holder must abide by the State of Maine Rules Relating to the
Administration of Establishments Licensed by the Eating and Lodging
Program 10-144 CMR 201 and the Maine Food Code, 10-144 CMR 200 and
01-CMR 331.
§ 219-7. Appeals.
§ 219-8. Assignment of licenses.
§ 219-9. Display.
§ 219-10. Enforcement.
A. Time period. An appeal to the City Council may be taken by any person
aggrieved by the denial, suspension or revocation of a license by the
Clerk by filing a notice of appeal within 30 days of the decision. Every
appeal should be in writing and shall state the basis for the appeal. The
City Council shall hear the appeal within two weeks after the filing of
the appeal and may affirm, reverse or modify the decision appealed
from.
B. Evidence. On appeal, the Council shall review the decision of the Clerk
to determine whether the decision was based upon substantial evidence
and compliance with the standards of the chapter. The Council may take
additional evidence with respect to such decision or action and, if
additional testimony or evidence is taken, shall determine the appeal
upon all of the evidence presented.
C. Appeal from City Council. Any person aggrieved by the Council's
decision on appeal may appeal to the Superior Court in accordance with
the provisions of Maine Rule of Civil Procedure 80B.
A. Assignment. A victualer's license may not be assigned, pledged, sold or
otherwise transferred by the license holder to any other person,
business or entity. The license belongs solely to the original applicant
and shall remain in the applicant's name for the duration of the license.
B. If any person, business or entity transfers or attempts to transfer their
license, such act shall result in immediate termination of the license.
Any sale, promotion or providing of any materials described in § 219-2
thereafter will be a violation of this chapter punishable by a fine of $100
per day.
A. The license holder shall display at all times their license in a place and
manner visible to the public for its review.
B. The failure to so display a victualer's license is a violation of this
chapter punishable by a fine of $100 per day for each violation.
§ 219-6 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 219-10
173:569
§ 219-11. Registration.
Those persons, businesses, corporations or entities who or which require
a victualer's license pursuant to this chapter need not secure a business
registration as required under Chapter 132 of this chapter. A license issued
pursuant to this chapter shall constitute registration as required by Chapter
132, and compliance with the terms of this chapter shall constitute
compliance with the terms of Chapter 132.
Chapter 220
VOLUNTEER PROGRAMS
A. The City shall enforce this ordinance by civil citation and summons
deliverable by the Saco Police Department.
B. Any and all fines or penalties secured from violations of this ordinance
shall be payable to the City's general fund.
§ 219-10 SACO CITY CODE § 219-11
173:570
ARTICLE I
Volunteer Citizen Work-off Program
[Adopted 12-15-2008; amended in its entirety 5-5-2014]
§ 220-1. Purpose.
Pursuant to 36 M.R.S.A. § 6232, Subsection 1-A, the City Council adopts
the volunteer program that permits claimants who are at least 60 years of
age to earn benefits up to a maximum of $750 by volunteering to provide
services to the City. The City Administrator or his/her designee shall
establish a policy to implement the program.
§ 220-2. General guidelines.91
A. Participant must be age 60 on April 1 of the first year of eligibility.
B. Participant must be a legal resident of the City of Saco.
C. Participant must be the owner of record as of April 1 and reside in the
dwelling the abatement will be applied to.
D. Limited to one abatement per household, with respect to this program.
E. Participant's household income cannot exceed the average median
income for the State of Maine as published by the Federal Department
of Housing and Urban Development.
F. On or about April 1, the City Council will approve to the Assessor the
amount of abatement funds to be drawn from the tax commitment
overlay for the ensuing fiscal year.
G. Volunteers are responsible for all federal or state tax reporting of tax
abatement benefits that accrue to them from the program.
91.Editor's Note: Implementation Policy for the Volunteer Program is also included as an
attachment to this program in the document entitled "Work Volunteer Program
Guidelines."
§ 220-1 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 220-2
173:571
Chapter 230
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult businesses — See Ch. 53.
Building construction — See Ch. 73.
Cost recovery — See Ch. 83.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 106.
Harbor, river and waterfront — See Ch. 118.
Industrial park — See Ch. 124.
Mobile homes — See Ch. 143.
§ 220-2 SACO CITY CODE § 220-2
173:572
ARTICLE I
Purpose
§ 230-101. Authority; purpose. [Amended 2-17-2004]
This chapter, first enacted in 1985 pursuant to authority set forth in 30
M.R.S.A. § 4953,92 as subsequently amended from time to time pursuant
to that authority set forth in the following statutes, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001
(Home Rule), 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3003 (Adoption of Codes by Reference), 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4352 (Zoning Ordinances) and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4403 (Subdivision
Regulations), is intended to encourage the most appropriate use of land
throughout the City; to promote traffic safety; to provide safety from fire
and other elements; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent
overcrowding of real estate; to promote a wholesome home environment; to
conserve natural resources; to provide for adequate public services; and to
encourage the formation of community units.
92.Editor's Note: 30 M.R.S.A. § 4953 was repealed by Laws 1971, c. 455, § 3; Laws 1971, c.
622, § 110, effective 3-15-1972.
§ 230-101 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-101
173:573

ARTICLE II
Title
§ 230-201. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance
of the City of Saco, Maine," and will be referred to herein simply as "this
chapter."
§ 230-201 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-201
173:575

ARTICLE III
Definitions
§ 230-301. Interpretation.
§ 230-302. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT IN A SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A small
apartment with more than 400 but less than 800 square feet of gross
floor area that meets the standards of § 230-727 and is located within
and is accessory to an owner-occupied single-family dwelling. An accessory
apartment shall not be considered to be a dwelling unit even if it allows fully
independent living.[Amended 6-18-2001; 10-20-2008]
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure which is
customarily both incidental and subordinate to the principal use or
structure.
ADDICTION TREATMENT FACILITY — A facility for the outpatient
treatment of chemically- or narcotic-dependent persons which administers
or dispenses narcotic drugs under the direction of a physician in a
A. In the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, all words other
than those specifically defined in the chapter shall have the meanings
implied by their context in the chapter or their ordinarily accepted
meanings. In the case of any difference of meaning or implication
between the text of this chapter and any map, illustration, or table, the
text shall control.
B. The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company, or corporation, as well as an individual or
any other legal entity.
C. The present tense includes the future tense; the singular number
includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular.
D. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory; the word "may" is
permissive.
E. The word "lot" includes the words "plot" and "parcel."
The term "incidental," in reference to the principal use or structure,
shall mean both:
Subordinate and minor in significance to the principal use or
structure; and
(1)
(2) Attendant to the principal use or structure.
A.
Such accessory uses, when aggregated, shall not subordinate the
principal use of the lot.
B.
§ 230-301 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-302
173:577
rehabilitative context in order to alleviate, suppress, or eliminate adverse
psychological or physiological effects associated with the continuous or
sustained use of chemical substances and/or a narcotic drug.[Amended
12-6-2010]
ADULT BUSINESS — Any business otherwise permitted as a retail business
or service establishment, a substantial or significant portion of which
consists of selling, renting, leasing, exhibiting, displaying, or otherwise
dealing in materials or devices of any kind which appeal to prurient
interests and which depict or describe specified sexual activities. If more
than 30% of the active display area of a facility is devoted to materials or
devices which depict or describe specified sexual activities, or videotapes
rated X, NC-17, or classified as suitable only for adults or persons 18 years
of age or older, or are displayed in a portion of a facility only open to
persons older than 18 years of age, it will be deemed to be a significant or
substantial portion of the business.[Amended 1-19-1993]
ADULT DAY-CARE CENTER — A program of care and activities licensed by
the Maine Bureau of Elderly and Adult Services, carried out on a regular
basis in a private dwelling or other facility, for a fee, for any part of the
day, for three or more adults, 19 years of age or older, who are not blood
relatives, as described in the licensing requirements of Section 61 of the
State Bureau of Elder Services Policy Manual. Type 1 accommodates five
or fewer clients. Type 2 accommodates more than five clients.[Amended
7-1-1991]
AGRICULTURALLY RELATED BUSINESS USE — A business that provides
goods and/or services, a substantial portion of the market for which is
agricultural or other natural resources businesses, including uses such as
farm equipment dealers, feed and grain stores, and similar uses. This does
not include convenience stores, gas stations, grocery stores, or other retail
or service businesses that cater primarily to the general public.[Amended
11-5-2001]
AGRICULTURE — The production, keeping or maintenance for sale or lease
of plants, including, but not limited to: forages and sod crops, grains and
seed crops, fruits and vegetables, and ornamental products; and, unless
expressly prohibited, the keeping of livestock, including, but not limited to:
dairy animals and dairy products, poultry and poultry products, cattle and
cattle products, or horses. Agriculture does not include forest management
and timber harvesting activities.[Amended 4-21-1992]
ALTERATION — Any addition, modification in construction or any change
in the structural members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns,
beams, or girders.
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURES — A non-tower mounting structure,
such as a clock tower, bell steeple, light pole, water tower or other structure
upon which an antenna may be mounted, and which camouflages or
conceals the presence of the antenna.[Amended 10-21-2002]
AMUSEMENT CENTER — Any private commercial premises which are
maintained or operated for the amusement, patronage, or recreation of the
§ 230-302 SACO CITY CODE § 230-302
173:578
public, containing four or more pinball machines, video games, or similar
mechanical or electronic games, whether activated by coins, tokens, or
discs, or through remote control by the management.
AMUSEMENT PARK — An outdoor facility, which may include structures
and buildings, where there are various devices for entertainment, including
rides, booths for conduct of games or sale of items and buildings for shows
and entertainment.[Amended 1-19-1993]
ANTENNA — Any exterior apparatus designed for the transmission or
reception of radio or electromagnetic frequency signals.[Amended
10-21-2002]
AQUACULTURE — The growing or propagation of harvestable freshwater,
estuarine, or marine plant or animal species.[Amended 4-21-1992]
ARTICULATION — The placing of emphasis on architectural elements such
as windows, entrances, recessed corners or dormers so as to create a
complementary pattern or rhythm, dividing large buildings into smaller,
identifiable pieces.[Amended 4-11-2005]
ARTIST OR CRAFTSPERSON STUDIO — The place of work of an artist,
craftsperson, photographer, or person similarly skilled in the production
of small craft or artistic products. A studio may include the retail sale of
items produced on the premises, but incidental items produced off premises
shall not be sold unless retail uses are permitted in the district. This
definition does not include building or industrial trades, automobile-related
uses, adult businesses, or the production of items larger than household
furniture.[Amended 1-17-1995]
AUTOMOBILE DEALER — An establishment engaged primarily in the retail
sale of automobiles and/or trucks, which may include repair, service and
parts facilities.[Amended 3-2-1992]
AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARD — A yard, field or other area used as a place
of storage, other than temporary storage by an establishment or place of
business which is engaged primarily in doing auto body repair work for
the purpose of making repairs to render a motor vehicle serviceable, of
discarded, worn out or junked motor vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR GARAGE — A building solely for the maintenance,
care, repair, or refinishing of motor vehicles, including paint, body,
mechanical, and auto upholstery work.[Amended 3-2-1992]
AUTOMOTIVE/TRANSPORTATION WAREHOUSE OR DISTRIBUTION
FACILITY — A four-season building intended for the shipping, receiving
and/or warehousing of automotive or transportation parts, equipment,
articles and material (but not whole vehicles themselves), which may
include some on-site assembly, finishing and packaging. Retail activity may
be allowed, provided no more than 15% of the available floor area is devoted
to such use. No outside storage of any parts, equipment, articles or material
is allowed.[Added 7-17-2017]
§ 230-302 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-302
173:579
BARN — A large farm building typically used for storing farm or agricultural
products and sheltering livestock, or similarly a very large garage for the
housing of vehicles.[Amended 3-4-2013]
BASEMENT — The enclosed area underneath a structure, typically having
a masonry floor, and the walls of which are typically part of the structure's
foundation. The clear height up to the joists supporting the floor directly
above is three feet or greater.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT — An owner-occupied residential
structure in which no more than six rooms are made available for a fee
to overnight travelers and which may provide guests with a morning meal.
Such establishments are further distinguished from a motel or hotel in that
they do not provide guests with the independent living quarters and eating
facilities normally associated with a motel or hotel.[Amended 9-5-1985;
3-18-1991]
BOARDING KENNEL — Any place, building, tract of land, abode, or vehicle
wherein or whereon privately owned dogs or other pets, or both, are kept
for their owners in return for a fee. This definition shall also include the
temporary keeping of animals for grooming purposes in return for a fee.
BOARDINGHOUSE — A residential structure where lodging alone, or
lodging in conjunction with meals, is provided for compensation for a period
of at least one week. There shall be no provisions for cooking in any
individual guest room. Such terms as tourist homes, lodging houses, and
terms suggesting a similar context shall be included under the term.
However, this definition shall not apply to private homes used as lodging
houses only, where no meals are served to guests, where no more than three
rooms are let to the public.[Amended 2-19-2002]
BOAT LAUNCHING FACILITY — A facility designed primarily for the
launching and landing of watercraft, and which may include an access
ramp, docking area, and parking spaces for vehicles and trailers.[Amended
4-21-1992]
BOTTLE CLUB — An establishment where no alcoholic beverages are sold,
but where members or guests provide their own alcoholic beverages, paying
a fee or other consideration for admission to the bottle club and/or for
setups.
BUSINESS SERVICES — A commercial activity which renders an actual
service (such as cleaning, repairing or consulting) where a business is the
end user and which involves no retail sales upon the premises.
CAMPGROUND — A parcel of land containing at least 10 acres where sites
are rented for short-term use for recreational vehicles or tents.
CAR WASH — A building or area that provides facilities for washing,
cleaning and polishing motor vehicles, which may use hand-washing or
production-line methods with mechanical devices.[Amended 3-2-1992]
CARETAKER UNIT — An accessory dwelling unit that is incorporated into,
and is part of, a nonresidential use and is occupied by an owner or an
§ 230-302 SACO CITY CODE § 230-302
173:580
employee of the business occupying the principal use, and having a gross
floor area of less than 2,000 square feet.[Amended 2-19-2002]
CHICKEN PEN — A wire enclosure connected to a henhouse for the purpose
of allowing chickens to leave the henhouse while remaining in an enclosed,
predator-safe environment.[Amended 7-20-2009]
CLUB (PRIVATE) — Any voluntary association of persons organized for
social, religious, benevolent, recreational, literary, scientific, or political
purposes; where facilities, especially a clubhouse, are open to members and
not the general public; and not generally engaged in activities customarily
carried on by a business or for pecuniary gain. Such term shall include
fraternities, sororities, teen centers, and social clubs generally.[Amended
3-16-1992]
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A development by a single developer for
essentially residential purposes, undertaken in a manner that treats the
developed area as an entirety to promote use of land, including the creation
of common open space, a reduction in the size of road and utility systems,
and the retention of the natural characteristics of the land. Cluster
developments shall be laid out in accordance with the relevant provisions of
this chapter and the City Subdivision Ordinance.
CO-LOCATION — The use of a wireless telecommunication facility by more
than one wireless telecommunication provider.[Amended 10-21-2002]
COASTAL WETLAND — All tidal and subtidal lands; all lands with
vegetation present that is tolerant of saltwater and occurs primarily in a
saltwater or estuarine habitat; and any swamp, marsh, bog, beach, flat or
other contiguous low land that is subject to tidal action during the highest
tide level for the year in which an activity is proposed, as identified in
tide tables published by the National Ocean Service. Coastal wetlands may
include portions of coastal sand dunes. Note: all areas below the maximum
spring tide level are coastal wetlands. These areas may consist of rocky
ledges, sand and cobble beaches, mud flats, etc., in addition to salt marches
and salt meadows.[Amended 4-21-1992; 6-29-2009]
COMMERCIAL COMPLEX — Any concentration of retail stores or service
establishments occupying premises which are owned or managed as a
single or corporate entity, which encompasses more than 12,000 square
feet of gross floor space. This definition shall also include large department
stores or grocery stores which meet the above floor space requirements.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION — Any commercial enterprise which receives
a fee in return for the provision of some recreational activity, including, but
not limited to: racquet clubs, gyms, amusement parks, and golf courses,
which are defined elsewhere. Freestanding golf-related facilities not
associated with golf courses, pitch and putt courses, miniature golf courses,
and driving ranges are categorized as commercial recreation.[Amended
3-2-1992; 12-7-1998]
COMMERCIAL USE — The use of lands, buildings, or structures, other
than a "home occupation," defined below, the intent and result of which
activity is the production of income from the buying and selling of goods
§ 230-302 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-302
173:581
and/or services, exclusive of rental of residential buildings and/or dwelling
units.[Amended 4-21-1992]
COMMUNITY DOCK — A dock owned, maintained, and used by a common
group of people, such as a subdivision or condominium
association.[Amended 4-21-1992]
COMMUNITY LIVING USE — A state-approved, authorized, certified or
licensed group home or intermediate care facility for eight or fewer
mentally handicapped or developmentally disabled persons.
COMMUNITY SEPTIC SYSTEM — A subsurface septic system which is not
administered by the City of Saco and which serves more than two dwelling
units.[Amended 6-19-1989]
CONDITIONAL USE — A use which would not be appropriate without
restriction but which would be allowed if controlled as to number, area,
location, relation to the neighborhood and similar criteria. The term
"conditional use" is used interchangeably with the term "special exception."
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT — A permit authorized by the Planning Board
for a conditional use, as defined above. Conditional use permits are subject
to the relevant application and review procedures in this chapter, in order
to ensure due process of law.
CONDOMINIUM — Real estate, portions of which are designated for
separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common
ownership solely by the owners of those portions under a declaration,
or an amendment to a declaration, duly recorded pursuant to the Maine
Condominium Act.93 Real estate is not a condominium unless the undivided
interests in the common elements are vested in the unit owners. Any real
estate development consisting exclusively of clustered, detached, singlefamily
residences is not a condominium, unless so designated in the
declaration.[Amended 2-17-2004; 3-18-2004]
CONFORMING USE — A use of buildings, structures or land which
complies with all applicable provisions of this chapter.
CONTRACTOR — A business that provides building construction or similar
services on a contract basis at a client's site and in which all material or
equipment storage at the place of business is contained within a building or
other screened area.[Amended 2-19-2002]
CONVENIENCE RETAIL USE — A business that sells prepackaged food
and beverages and/or food and beverages prepared on the premises for
consumption on the premises or for take-out, together with sundries,
household goods, and other convenience goods, primarily to residents or
occupants of a specific area, such as an employment center or residential
neighborhood. All activity shall occur within a fully enclosed building with
no provisions for drive-through service and/or the sale of motor
fuels.[Amended 9-4-2012]
93.Editor's Note: See 33 M.R.S.A. § 1601-101 et seq.
§ 230-302 SACO CITY CODE § 230-302
173:582
CRAWL SPACE — The nonhabitable area underneath a structure, where the
clear height up to the joists supporting the floor directly above is less than
three feet.
CUTOFF FIXTURE — A lighting fixture or luminaire that controls glare
by directing light well below the horizontal. A cutoff fixture shall limit the
direction of light so that a maximum of 2.5% of the total lamp lumens shines
above 90° or a line parallel to the surface of the ground and a maximum
of 10% of the lamp lumens shines above 80° as shown in the following
sketch.[Amended 10-15-2001]
Cutoff
fixture
DAY-CARE CENTER — A place providing day-care services to more than 12
children and fully meeting licensing requirements of the Maine Department
of Human Services.[Amended 8-1-1988]
DAY-CARE HOME — A dwelling or other place providing day-care or
babysitting services to seven to 12 children and fully meeting the licensing
requirements of the Maine Department of Human Services. (State
registration does not meet the requirements of this definition. State
licensing is required.)[Amended 8-1-1988]
DISTRIBUTION — The shipping and receiving of goods and articles, which
may include associated assembly, finishing, and packaging.
DISTURBED AREA — All land areas that are stripped, graded or grubbed at
any time during the site preparation for, or construction of, a project, unless
the areas are returned to a condition with the same drainage patterns and
vegetative cover type that existed prior to the disturbance. Both planting
conducted to restore the previous cover type and restoration of any altered
drainage patterns must occur within one year of disturbance.[Amended
6-18-2001]
§ 230-302 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-302
173:583
DOCK — A fixed or floating decked structure where a vessel or vessels
may be secured either temporarily or indefinitely.[Amended 4-21-1992;
6-2-2008]
DWELLING — Any building or structure or portion thereof designed or used
exclusively for residential purposes.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A structure containing only one
dwelling unit for occupancy by not more than one family. The term shall
include multisectional manufactured housing units but shall not be
deemed to include single-wide manufactured housing units or pre-1976
mobile homes. [Amended 5-9-1990]
A.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING (ATTACHED) — A building containing
single-family dwelling units, each with two or more fire separation
walls, or one fire separation wall in case of a dwelling unit at the end of
a group of attached units; which have no dwelling units above or below
them; and which have no common hallways. Single-family attached
dwellings are permitted as part of clustered residential developments
or in any district which allows multifamily dwellings and on the same
premises as such dwellings.
B.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A building containing only two dwelling
units, for occupation by not more than two families.
C.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A building containing three or more
dwelling units, such buildings being designed exclusively for residential
use and occupancy by three or more families living independently of
one another, with the number of families not exceeding the number
of dwelling units. The term also includes apartments located in
commercial structures containing commercial space as the principal
first-floor use.
D.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or suite of rooms containing independent
living, sleeping, kitchen, and bathroom facilities designed for and used
or held ready for use as a permanent residence by one family.
E.
SEASONAL RENTAL DWELLING — Single-family dwellings (detached),
two-family dwellings, and multifamily dwellings within the area east of
Seaside Avenue and Camp Ellis Avenue and areas within 400 feet to
the west of the center line of these streets may also be rented to one
family for periods of not less than six days and are subject to all other
standards of this chapter.
F.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT IN THE SHORELAND ZONE — A
room or group of rooms designed and equipped exclusively for use as
permanent, seasonal, or temporary living quarters for only one family
at a time, and containing cooking, sleeping and toilet facilities. The
term shall include mobile homes, and rental units that contain cooking,
sleeping and toilet facilities, regardless of the time period rented.
Recreational vehicles are not dwelling units. [Amended 12-7-1992;
4-5-1999; 2-7-2000; 6-29-2009]
G.
§ 230-302 SACO CITY CODE § 230-302
173:584
ELDER/DISABILITY CARE FACILITY - FULL SERVICE — A care facility
that provides housing, together with a program of supportive services and
meals, to some or all of its residents, including twenty-four-hour-a-day care
and/or medical oversight. In addition to the residential facilities, the project
includes common facilities, including common kitchen and dining facilities,
to provide services to residents. This use may include facilities that are
commonly referred to as nursing homes, hospices, rehabilitation centers,
Alzheimer's facilities, or assisted living facilities that provide a complete
package of care and support services.[Amended 5-21-2012]
ELDER NONCONGREGATE, DETACHED HOUSING — A planned
development, subject to the standards set out in § 230-705B, serviced only
by public sewer and water. Lots may be separately owned, or owned by one
person or entity and leased. At least one resident of each individual dwelling
shall be age 55 or older, and no resident shall be under age 18. Residences
are not congregated but are detached and shall be manufactured housing or
traditional on-site built homes. All such residences shall be fully insulated,
year-round homes, with all customary utilities, and may be sited within
a development serviced by private but paved streets. The planned
development may include a community center, an exercise and fitness
center for development residents and their guests only, management and
sales offices, and temporary storage of manufactured homes. Permitted
accessory uses and structures include, but are not limited to, stormwater
maintenance facilities, parking areas, utility services, site amenities and
outside recreational areas.[Added 7-17-2017]
ELDER/DISABILITY HOUSING FACILITY — A housing project or
development that provides housing in dwelling units for senior households
in which a head of household is at least 55 years old or for disabled
persons regardless of age. The project does not provide a regular program
of supportive services or meals to its residents but may include facilities for
outside agencies or programs to provide services to residents. "Disabled"
means having a physical or mental disability (including hearing, mobility
and visual impairments, chronic alcoholism, chronic mental illness, AIDS,
AIDS-related complex and mental retardation) that substantially limits one
or more major life activities, and having a record of such a disability or
regarded as having such a disability. Elder/disability housing facilities shall
not average more than 1.5 bedrooms per unit.[Amended 5-21-2012]
ELDER/DISABILITY HOUSING FACILITY – LIMITED SERVICE — A housing
project that provides housing in dwelling units or other accommodations
such as suites or individual rooms for senior households in which a head
of household is at least 55 years old or for disabled persons regardless of
age. The project provides a regular program of supportive services and/
or meals to some or all residents but does not provide twenty-four-houra-
day care or medical oversight. In addition to the residential facilities,
the project may include common facilities to provide services to residents.
This use may include facilities that are commonly referred to as retirement
housing, congregate housing, or independent living centers that provide
limited support services. Elder/disability housing facilities – limited service
shall not average more than 1.5 bedrooms per unit.[Amended 5-21-2012]
§ 230-302 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-302
173:585
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS — Operations conducted for the public health,
safety or general welfare, such as protection of resources from immediate
destruction or loss, law enforcement, and operations to rescue human
beings, property and livestock from the threat of destruction or
injury.[Amended 4-21-1992]
ENCLOSED SPORTS ARENA — A facility used for indoor sports, such as
hockey, figure skating, basketball and soccer, as well as social and business
functions, such as conventions, dances, home shows and similar events.
The facility can include as accessory uses eating and drinking places, a
retail sales area for sports-related merchandise, and other accessory uses if
permitted in the district.[Amended 3-1-1999]
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public and private utilities or municipal or other
governmental agencies of gas, electrical and communication facilities,
steam, fuel or water transmission or distribution systems, and collection,
supply or disposal systems. Electrical power transmission lines which carry
or have the capacity to carry more than 70,000 volts are not included
within this definition but shall fall within the definition of "high-voltage
transmission lines" herein. Essential services do not include radio or TV
transmission towers or cellular communications towers. Such systems are
exempt from the minimum lot and yard requirements of Table 412-194 and
shall include buildings under 400 square feet, except as noted below, which
are necessary for the furnishing of such services. Any buildings which are
over 400 square feet in size, except as noted below, must meet all setbacks
for the zone in which they are located. City sewer pump stations may be
up to 800 square feet and retain their exemption from the requirements
of Table 412-1 if they are in a business or industrial zone and at least
75 feet from a dwelling unit.[Amended 2-2-1988; 5-2-1994; 2-19-2002;
12-15-2008]
EXPANSION OF A STRUCTURE — An increase in the floor area or volume
of a structure, including all extensions such as, but not limited to, attached
decks, garages, porches and greenhouses.[Amended 4-21-1992]
EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRY — Any operation engaged in the removal of more
than 20 cubic yards, in a twelve-month period, of topsoil, sand, gravel,
clay, rock, peat or other like material from its natural location and for
transportation off lot within any twelve-month period, except as may be
exempted within the extractive industry performance standards in this
chapter.
FAMILY — A group of individuals, not necessarily related by blood,
marriage, adoption or guardianship, living together in a dwelling unit as
a single housekeeping unit, sharing common use and access to all living,
eating, and bathroom areas.[Amended 2-17-2004; 3-18-2004]
FARM STAND — An existing agricultural building or portion thereof or
a freestanding structure with a gross floor area of not more that 2,000
square feet, and including the outside area immediately adjacent to the
94.Editor's Note: Table 412-1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 230-302 SACO CITY CODE § 230-302
173:586
indoor sales space, for the retail sale of agricultural products, foodstuffs,
and handicrafts as part of a commercial agricultural business.[Amended
11-5-2001]
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT — An establishment whose primary business is
the sale of "fast food" for consumption on or off the premises. The term "fast
food" shall be interpreted as food which is:
FLEA MARKET — An outdoor market customarily involving tables or space
rented to vendors selling antiques, used household goods, curios, and the
like, at a frequency of more than four days in any six-month period.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a structure
enclosed by exterior walls, plus the horizontal area of any unenclosed
portions of a structure, such as porches and decks.[Amended 4-21-1992]
FOOD AND DRINK —
FOOD PROCESSING FACILITY — The use of land, buildings, or structures
for the preparation, processing, cooking, baking or other enhancement of
food, seafood, or agricultural products for use or consumption primarily off
the premises including such activities as commercial bakeries, breweries,
bottling facilities, daries, lobster pounds and facilities for commercial food
processing and/or packaging; excluding all products of a medicinal and/or
pharmaceutical nature. "Food processing facility" does not include a use in
which the principal activity is the rendering, storage, and/or treatment of
A. Primarily intended for immediate consumption;
B. Available upon a short waiting time; and
Prepackaged or presented in such a manner that it can be readily eaten
off the premises where it is sold.
C.
EATING ESTABLISHMENT — A business which sells prepared food and
which does not serve alcoholic beverages. No provisions shall be made
for drive-through service. [Amended 2-19-2002]
A.
DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT — A business or club where alcoholic
beverages are consumed on the premises, such as a tavern.
B.
EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT — A business where food
and alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises, such
as, but not limited to, a Class A restaurant. Eating and drinking places
shall offer a variety of meals at all hours they are open and shall be
equipped with a full commercial kitchen for the preparation of meals.
A full commercial kitchen includes a stove, a stovetop, refrigeration
equipment, a dishwasher, and numerous cooking utensils. No
provisions shall be made for drive-through service. [Amended
3-7-1994; 2-19-2002]
C.
DRIVE-THROUGH EATING ESTABLISHMENT — A business that serves
prepared food and includes provisions for drive-through service.
[Amended 2-19-2002]
D.
§ 230-302 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-302
173:587
animal or fish wastes. The processing of wastes created on the premises
is allowed as an accessory use to a food processing facility.[Added
3-12-201895]
FOREST MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES — Timber cruising and other forest
resource evaluation activities, pesticide or fertilizer application,
management planning activities, timber stand improvement, pruning,
regeneration of forest stands, and other similar or associated activities,
exclusive of timber harvesting and the construction, creation or
maintenance of roads.[Amended 4-21-1992]
FOUNDATION — The supporting substructure of a building or other
structure, excluding wooden sills and post supports, but including
basements, slabs, frostwalls, or other base consisting of concrete, block,
brick or similar material.[Amended 4-21-1992; 6-29-2009]
FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION — A group of people formally organized for
a nonprofit common interest, usually cultural, religious, or entertainment,
with regular meetings, rituals, and formal written membership
requirements. Examples of such groups include, but are not limited to, the
Masons, the Elks, and the Knights of Columbus.[Added 11-3-2003]
FRESHWATER WETLAND —
FRONT LOT LINE or FRONTAGE — The linear distance of the continuous
line separating the lot from a public road or private road meeting the
standards of § 230-724, but not including private driveways. Existing
interior lots of record without any road frontage as of January 2, 1985,
shall not be required to have street frontage.[Amended 12-7-1992;
10-15-2001]
FUNCTIONALLY WATER-DEPENDENT USES — Those uses that require,
for their primary purpose, location on submerged lands or that require
direct access to, or location in, coastal and inland waters and which cannot
be located away from these waters. The uses include, but are not limited
Freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas other than
forested wetlands, which are:
Of 10 or more contiguous acres; or of less than 10 contiguous acres
and adjacent to a surface water body, excluding any river, stream
or brook, such that, in a natural state, the combined surface area is
in excess of 10 acres; and
(1)
Inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a
frequency and for a duration sufficient to support, and which under
normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of wetland
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils.
(2)
A.
Freshwater wetlands may contain small stream channels or inclusions
of land that do not conform to the criteria of this definition. [Amended
4-21-1992]
B.
95.Editor's Note: This amendment provided an effective date of 4-12-2018.
§ 230-302 SACO CITY CODE § 230-302
173:588
to, commercial and recreational fishing and boating facilities, finfish and
shellfish processing, fish-related storage and retail and wholesale fish
marketing facilities, waterfront dock and port facilities, shipyards and boatbuilding
facilities, marinas, navigation aids, basins and channels, shoreline
structures necessary for erosion control purposes, industrial uses
dependent upon water-borne transportation or requiring large volumes of
cooling or processing water and which cannot reasonably be located or
operated at an inland site, and uses which primarily provide general public
access to coastal or inland waters. Recreational boat storage buildings
are not considered to be a functionally water-dependent use.[Amended
4-21-1992; 10-24-2016]
FUNERAL HOME — A building or part thereof used for human funeral
services.[Amended 3-2-1992]
GAS STATION — Buildings and premises where gasoline and other motor
fuels may be dispensed, and where oil, grease, batteries, tires and
automobile accessories may be sold at retail, and where repairs may be
made.[Amended 3-2-1992]
GASOLINE SALES ACCESSORY TO A RETAIL USE — The retail sales
of gasoline, other petroleum products, and related automotive products
by a retail business whose principal business activity is not the retail
sales of petroleum products, such as a convenience store, supermarket, or
automobile or equipment dealer.[Amended 2-19-2002]
GLARE — Excessive brightness that makes it difficult to see or that causes
discomfort. Glare includes direct glare, disability glare, and discomfort
glare as follows:
Such building may contain space and facilities for:
Embalming and the performance of other services used in
preparation of the dead for burial;
(1)
(2) The performance of autopsies;
The storage of caskets, funeral urns, and other related funeral
supplies;
(3)
(4) The storage of funeral vehicles; and
(5) Funeral chapels.
A.
B. It shall not include facilities for cremation.
GLARE, DIRECT — Glare resulting from insufficiently shielded light
sources or areas of excessive luminance within the field of view.
A.
GLARE, DISABILITY — The effect of stray light in the eye whereby
visibility and visual performance are reduced.
B.
GLARE, DISCOMFORT — Glare producing discomfort. It does not
necessarily interfere with visual performance or visibility. [Amended
10-15-2001]
C.
§ 230-302 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-302
173:589
GOLF COURSE — An area of at least 75 acres laid out for the playing
of golf, with a series of nine or 18 holes, including tees, fairways and
putting greens and often one or more natural or artificial hazards. A golf
course may include a building where food and beverages are served to golf
course patrons, members, and guests of members, a maintenance facility,
an associated golf practice range, shelter for players, and other accessory
structures, except where otherwise limited by this chapter. Additional
limitations on buildings at golf courses in residential and conservation
districts are included in § 230-722.[Amended 12-7-1998]
HAZARD TREE — A tree with a structural defect, combination of defects,
or disease resulting in a structural defect that, under the normal range of
environmental conditions at the site, exhibits a high probability of failure
and loss of a major structural component of the tree in a manner that
will strike a target. A normal range of environmental conditions does not
include meteorological anomalies, such as, but not limited to: hurricanes;
hurricane-force winds; tornadoes; microbursts; or significant ice storm
events. Hazard trees also include those trees that pose a serious and
imminent risk to bank stability. A target is the area where personal injury or
property damage could occur if the tree or a portion of the tree fails. Targets
include roads, driveways, parking areas, structures, campsites, and any
other developed area where people frequently gather and linger.[Amended
10-24-2016]
HEALTH CARE CLINIC FOR HUMANS — Any establishment where human
patients are admitted for examination and treatment by a group of
physicians, dentists, or other members of the healing arts practicing
together, but not hospitalized overnight.[Amended 2-19-2002]
HEALTH CLUB — An indoor facility including uses such as game courts,
gymnasiums, exercise equipment, locker rooms, sauna baths, and
swimming pools for use for a fee by the public. Eating and drinking
establishments are permitted as an accessory use within such
facilities.[Amended 3-2-1992]
HEAVY INDUSTRY — (See also § 230-411.) Includes:[Amended 3-2-1992]
HEIGHT OF STRUCTURE — The vertical distance between the existing
grade at the highest point around the footprint of the existing or proposed
structure and the highest point of the structure itself, excluding chimneys,
steeples, antennas, and similar appurtenances which have no floor
area.[Amended 3-2-1992; 7-17-2017]
Uses engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials
or products predominately from extracted or raw materials;
A.
Uses or manufacturing processes making extensive use of flammable
or explosive materials (other than gas welding) or which involve
commonly recognized offensive conditions;
B.
Uses involved in the storage of flammable or explosive or hazardous
materials.
C.
§ 230-302 SACO CITY CODE § 230-302
173:590
HENHOUSE — A structure for the sheltering of female chickens. An
existing shed or garage can be used for this purpose if it is a conforming
structure.[Amended 7-20-2009]
HIGH-VOLTAGE TRANSMISSION LINES — Electrical power transmission
lines which carry or handle more than 70,000 volts of electricity.[Amended
12-15-2008]
HOME BABYSITTING SERVICE — A dwelling providing day-care or
babysitting services for between three and six children, registered or
licensed by the State Department of Human Services.[Amended
4-21-1992]
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation or profession which is customarily
carried on in a dwelling unit or structure accessory to a dwelling unit
by a member of the family residing in the dwelling unit which is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes
and which does not change the character thereof; and which conforms with
the conditions set forth in § 230-711 of this chapter.
HOME-BASED RETAIL USE — A business in combination with an occupied
residence, involving the sale of retail goods, that has a low impact on
neighboring properties and low volume of vehicular traffic relative to other
retail uses of the same size. A home-based retail use shall meet the
following requirements:
HOSPITAL — An institution providing, but not limited to, overnight health
services, primarily for inpatients, and medical or surgical care for the sick
or injured, including as an integral part of the institution such related
facilities as laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities, central
service facilities, and staff offices.
HOTEL — A building containing guest rooms kept, used, maintained, or
held out to the public as a place where lodging alone or lodging and meals
are provided, with or without previous agreement, to the general public
for compensation for a period of from one day to an indefinite term. A
hotel may include general kitchen and dining room facilities open to the
public. The hotel may also contain accessory services and facilities such as
newsstands, and personal grooming facilities for the benefit of its guests,
and only incidentally for the general public.[Amended 2-19-2002]
All sales, storage and display of merchandise shall occur within a
building.
A.
The total floor area used for the business does not exceed 1,000 square
feet and does not exceed 50% of the total existing building floor space.
B.
The business sells only products of a specialized nature (large in size
or high value per unit, for example) that are purchased by limited
segments of the public, such that less traffic is generated per square
foot of area than other retail uses.
C.
D. No food or beverages are sold by the business.
§ 230-302 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-302
173:591
HUMAN-SCALED — An architectural principle that refers to proportions
of both building components and overall form. A building may be humanscaled
if the units of which it is composed bear a relationship to the human
body. Elements of a building that contribute to being human-scaled include
windows, doors, recessed entryways, bands of storefront windows, dividedlight
windows, signs and light fixtures.[Amended 4-11-2005]
IMPERVIOUS AREA — [Amended 6-18-2001]
INDOOR RECREATION — Nonprofit, governmental, or for-profit facilities
designed and equipped for the conduct of indoor sports, leisure-time and
recreational activities, and similar activities in which all activity occurs
within a building or fully enclosed structure. Indoor recreation includes, by
way of example only, skating rinks, bowling alleys, gymnasia, racquetball
clubs and indoor tennis facilities.[Amended 2-19-2002]
JUNKYARD — A yard, field, or other parcel of land used as a place for
disposal or long-term storage of:[Amended 2-19-2002]
KENNEL — Except as provided for in the definition of "boarding kennel,"
the term "kennel" shall apply to four or more dogs or four or more cats
owned singly or jointly and living on a single premises, for any purpose,
including, but not limited to, breeding, hunting, show, training, hobby, trails
or exhibition purposes. This definition shall not apply to dogs or cats under
the age of six months.[Amended 6-21-1993]
LIGHT INDUSTRY — A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly
from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including
processing, fabrication, assembly, packaging, incidental storage, sales, and
distribution of such products. The use includes, by way of example only,
the following: bakeries, bottling, printing and publishing, pharmaceutical,
The area that is or will be covered by:
(1) Buildings and associated constructed facilities;
(2) A low-permeability material such as asphalt or concrete; and/or
Gravel roads and parking areas that will be compacted through use
or design so as to reduce their permeability.
(3)
A.
Common impervious areas include, by way of example, rooftops,
walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, concrete or
asphalt paving, compacted gravel, packed earthen materials, macadam,
and other surfaces that impede the natural infiltration of stormwater.
B.
Discarded, worn-out or junked plumbing and heating supplies or
household appliances and furniture;
A.
B. Discarded scrap and junked lumber;
Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, rubber, and all
scrap iron, steel and other ferrous or nonferrous material, including
motor vehicles.
C.
§ 230-302 SACO CITY CODE § 230-302
173:592
machine shops, precision instruments, watchmakers, wood products,
assembly of electrical components, canteen services, tool and die shops,
and the packaging of foods. Light industrial uses do not include the
processing of raw materials or salvaging operations.[Amended 3-2-1992]
LOT — A continuous parcel of land in single or joint ownership, described
on a deed, plot plan, or similar legal document and having frontage.
LOT AREA — The area of land enclosed within the boundary lines of a lot,
minus land below the normal high-water line of a water body and areas
within rights-of-way serving more than two lots.[Amended 4-21-1992;
3-7-2005; 4-6-2005]
LOT COVERAGE — The percentage of the lot area covered or occupied by
principal and accessory structures. In the Mandatory Shoreland Zone, lot
coverage shall also include all nonvegetated areas, i.e., driveways, patios,
pools, etc.[Amended 4-21-1992]
LOT LINES — The lines bounding a lot as defined below:
LOT OF RECORD — A parcel of land, a legal description of which or the
dimensions of which are recorded on a document or map on file with the
County Register of Deeds.
LUMBERYARD and MATERIAL SUPPLY YARD — A commercial
establishment storing or offering for sale building supplies, including, but
not limited to, lumber, raw earthen materials, steel supplies, coal, heavy
equipment, feed and grain, and similar goods. The term does not include
the wrecking, salvaging, dismantling or storage of automobiles and similar
vehicles.[Amended 2-19-2002]
MANUFACTURED HOUSING — A structural unit or units designed to be
used as a dwelling or dwellings and constructed in a manufacturing facility
and then transported, by the use of its own chassis or placement on an
independent chassis, to a building site. The term includes any type of
building that is constructed at a manufacturing facility and then transported
to a building site where it is utilized for housing and that may be purchased,
sold, offered for sale or brokered by a licensee in the interim. If located
outside of a mobile home park, a manufactured housing unit shall meet
the requirements of § 230-705 of this chapter. For purposes of this chapter,
three types of manufactured housing are included. They are:[Amended
5-9-1990; 7-17-2017]
A. FRONT LOT LINE — See "front lot line or frontage."
REAR LOT LINE — The line opposite the front lot line, which, if
extended in either direction, would not cross the lot.
B.
SIDE LOT LINE — Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot
line.
C.
HUD-code homes, which are those units constructed after June 15,
1976, that the manufacturer certifies are constructed in compliance
with the HUD standard, meaning structures, transportable in one or
A.
§ 230-302 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-302
173:593
MANUFACTURING — The making of goods and articles by hand or
machinery. Manufacturing shall include assembling, fabricating, finishing,
packaging or processing, and reconditioning or remanufacturing.
MARINA — A facility on or adjacent to the water which is available for
mooring or berthing of five or more vessels, with provisions for one or
more of the following: boat storage, boat launching, and mooring, or the
sale of fuel, supplies and services for watercraft and their equipment and
accessories.[Amended 6-2-2008]
MARINA, EXISTING — Any marina, as defined herein, that existed as of
April 1, 2008.[Amended 6-2-2008]
MARINE STRUCTURE — Any nonhabitable structure, whether permanent
or temporary, built on or over a water body, including, but not limited to,
piers, docks, wharves, breakwaters, culverts, jetties, groins, bridges, soil
erosion retaining walls, or bait sheds.[Amended 4-21-1992]
more sections, that, in the traveling mode, are eight body feet or more
in width and 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site,
are 320 or more square feet, and are built on a permanent chassis
and designed to be used as dwellings, with or without permanent
foundations, when connected to the required utilities, including the
plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained
therein; except that such term shall include any structure that meets all
the requirements of this subsection except the size requirements and
with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification
required by the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development and complies with the standards established
under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. § 5401 et seq. [2005, c. 344, § 4
(AMD)].
State-certified modular homes, which are those units that the
manufacturer certifies are constructed in compliance with the state's
Manufactured Housing Act96 and regulations, meaning structures,
transportable in one or more sections, that are not constructed on
a permanent chassis and are designed to be used as dwellings on
foundations when connected to required utilities, including the
plumbing, heating, air-conditioning or electrical systems contained
therein [2005, c. 344, § 4 (AMD)].
B.
Pre-HUD-code homes, which are those units constructed prior to June
15, 1976, meaning structures, transportable in one or more sections,
that are eight body feet or more in width and are 32 body feet or
more in length and are built on a permanent chassis and designed to
be used as dwellings, with or without permanent foundations, when
connected to the required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, airconditioning
or electrical systems contained therein.
C.
96.Editor's Note: See 10 M.R.S.A. § 9001 et seq.
§ 230-302 SACO CITY CODE § 230-302
173:594
MECHANICAL REPAIR SERVICES — A commercial activity which renders
an actual mechanical repair service for vehicles or equipment used as part
of land uses which are otherwise permitted, as of right or conditionally,
within the same zoning district and which involves no retail sales upon the
premises.[Amended 8-1-1985]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA CAREGIVERS, GROWING — An individual or
business that has registered with the state pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 2422,
Subdivision 8-A, as a caregiver. The individual or business has established
patients and is engaged in growing medical marijuana outside of the
caregiver's primary residence (see "growing facility") pursuant to 22
M.R.S.A. § 2423-A, Subdivision 2B.[Amended 9-19-2016]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA CAREGIVERS, GROWING FACILITY — A building
where plants are stored and cultivated, and may have patient rooms on
site separate from plant cultivation and processing. The facility must be
locked and secured. The facility cannot contain more than three separate
licensees. The facility is located separately from the caregiver's primary
residence.[Amended 9-19-2016]
MINERAL EXPLORATION — Hand sampling, test boring, or other methods
of determining the nature or extent of mineral resources which create
minimal disturbance to the land and which include reasonable measures to
restore the land to its original condition.[Amended 4-21-1992]
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH — The closest distance between the side lot lines of
a lot.[Amended 4-21-1992]
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land under unified ownership designed
and/or used for the placement of three or more manufactured housing
units. Unified ownership does not include condominium associations,
homeowners' associations, or similar organizations. Mobile home parks are
subdivisions.[Amended 5-9-1990]
MOBILE HOME PARK LOT — The area of land on which an individual home
is situated within a mobile home park and which is reserved for use by the
occupants of that home.[Amended 5-9-1990]
MOORING — A stationary underwater device, such as a granite block or
mushroom anchor, which, with chains, lines and mooring buoy, is intended
to hold fast a vessel, aircraft, floating dock or buoy.[Amended 6-2-2008]
MOTEL — A building or group of attached or detached buildings containing
guest rooms, most of which have outside entrances and automobile storage
or parking spaces nearby, and intended to be used primarily by automobile
transients or travelers for short periods of time and for compensation. The
term shall include motor or tourist courts, cabins, and motor lodges.
MULTI-UNIT RESIDENTIAL PROJECT — A residential development
consisting of three or more dwelling units in which the buildings are
designed and constructed as part of the overall development. The
distinguishing characteristic of a multi-unit residential project is that it
is designed and developed with a common, consistent architectural style.
The dwelling units in a multi-unit residential project may be in single-
§ 230-302 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-302
173:595
family dwellings, two-family dwellings, or multifamily dwellings, or any
combination thereof, and may be located on a single lot or on multiple
lots.[Amended 11-16-2011]
MUNICIPAL ANIMAL INCINERATORS — A facility run by the City to make
expeditious disposal of dead animals.[Amended 9-19-1988]
MUNICIPAL OFFICERS — The Mayor and City Council of Saco.
MUNICIPAL USES — Facilities which are owned or operated by the City
of Saco for the conduct of the City's business, including, but not limited
to, municipal office buildings, public schools, public works garages and
facilities, public safety buildings, parks and playgrounds, solid waste
disposal systems and sewerage facilities.[Amended 8-2-1993]
NET RESIDENTIAL ACREAGE — The total available acreage less the area
required for streets, access, and portions of the site which are not suitable
for development because of topography, natural drainage, or subsoil
conditions. The net residential acreage shall be determined by subtracting
unsuitable areas from the gross acreage of the parcel. The following original
land areas shall be considered unsuitable and shall be deducted in the
following order:
NET RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The housing density allowed on a tract of
land under the "net residential acreage" definition.[Amended 6-19-1988]
NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD — A single lot of record which, at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, does not meet the
Area of right-of-way for new access roads, and parking areas. Rightsof-
way or easements for landscaped buffer strips, and walking/bicycle
paths not part of a street right-of-way need not be deducted.
A.
Areas that are, because of existing land uses or lack of access, isolated
and unavailable for building purposes or for use in common with the
remainder of the parcel.
B.
Areas within Zone V or VE, coastal flood with velocity hazard, a
floodway or a one-hundred-year flood hazard area, as shown on the
Federal Flood Boundary and Floodway Map or Federal Flood Insurance
Rate Map.
C.
D. Wetlands.
Stream channels, as measured from the top of banks, and other surface
water bodies, as measured from the high-water mark.
E.
Areas with a sustained slope of 33% or more. Slope areas of 20% to
33% shall also be deducted unless the developer can demonstrate to the
Planning Board's satisfaction that these slopes will be used as part of
the overall plan for the development, that they are stable for structures,
if so utilized, and that any slope development will minimize soil erosion
and comply with the Maine State Plumbing Code. [Amended
3-7-2005; 4-6-2005]
F.
§ 230-302 SACO CITY CODE § 230-302
173:596
lot area, lot area per dwelling unit, lot coverage, or frontage requirements
of the district in which it is located. It is allowed solely because it was in
lawful existence at the time this chapter or subsequent amendment took
effect.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure that does not meet one or
more of the space and bulk standards of the district in which it is located,
including those for setbacks and height. It is allowed solely because it was
in lawful existence at the time this chapter or subsequent amendments took
effect.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use of premises that is not permitted in the
district in which it is located but which is allowed to remain solely because it
was in lawful existence at the time this chapter or subsequent amendments
took effect.
NORMAL HIGH-WATER LINE (NONTIDAL WATERS) — [Amended
6-29-2009]
NORMAL HIGH-WATER MARK OF COASTAL OR TIDAL WATERS — Along
coastal or tidal waters, the elevation at which vegetation changes from
predominately aquatic to predominately terrestrial. By way of illustration,
coastal or tidal vegetation includes, but is not limited to: salt marsh grass,
salt meadow hay, black arrowgrass, seaside lavender, silverweed, salt marsh
bulrush, seaside plantain, orach, salt marsh sedge, and salt marsh aster.
NURSERY SCHOOL — A house or other place licensed by the state as a
nursery school in which a person or combination of persons maintains for
consideration during the day a regular program which provides care for
three or more children under eight years of age. Sessions shall be no longer
than 3 1/2 hours, and no more than two sessions shall be conducted each
day.[Amended 7-6-1993]
That line which is apparent from visible markings, changes in the
character of soils due to the prolonged action of the water or changes
in vegetation, and which distinguishes between predominantly aquatic
and predominantly terrestrial land. Areas contiguous with rivers and
great ponds that support nonforested wetland vegetation and hydric
soils and that are at the same or lower elevation as the water level
of the river or great pond during the period of normal high water are
considered part of the river or great pond.
A.
By way of illustration, aquatic vegetation includes, but is not limited
to, the following plants and plant groups: water lily, pond lily,
pickerelweed, cattail, wild rice, sedges, rushes, and marsh grasses; and
terrestrial vegetation includes, but is not limited to, the following plants
and plant groups: upland grasses, aster, lady slipper, wintergreen,
partridge berry, sarsaparilla, pines, cedars, oaks, ashes, alders, elms,
and maples. In places where the shore or bank is of such character that
the high-water line cannot be easily determined (rockslides, ledges,
rapidly eroding or slumping banks), the normal high-water line shall
be estimated from places where it can be determined by the above
method.
B.
§ 230-302 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-302
173:597
OFFICE OF A CONTRACTOR OR TRADESMAN — The principal place of
business for a contractor or tradesman where administrative, marketing,
and financial operations occur. No outdoor storage of materials or
equipment shall occur as part of this use.[Amended 2-19-2002]
OFFICE-BUSINESS — A place of business where activities such as general
management, bookkeeping, accounting, telephone sales, and
telecommunications take place but where no consumer retail services are
performed and no retail consumers use the premises.[Amended
2-19-2002]
OFFICE-PROFESSIONAL — A place of business used exclusively to perform
administrative, professional or clerical services, including limited sales
incidental to medical diagnostic services, and including the offices listed
below and similar offices: accountants and bookkeepers, architects and
landscape architects, computer services such as desktop publishing or
recordkeeping, engineers, insurance agents, land surveyors, lawyers,
psychologists, social workers and substance abuse counselors, real estate
brokers, speech pathologists and audiologists, and medical professionals,
including physicians, chiropractors, dentists, dietitians, nurses,
occupational and physical therapists, and optometrists.[Amended
5-7-1993; 2-19-2002]
ORNAMENTAL TREE — A deciduous tree that provides seasonal interest
through spring blossoms, summer fruit, or fall foliage that has a height at
maturity of 10 feet to 25 feet.[Amended 2-19-2002]
OUTDOOR COMMERCIAL RECREATIONAL FACILITY — A facility for
outdoor recreational activity operated by an entity other than the City of
Saco, including cross country ski centers, ballfields, parks and playgrounds,
and similar uses, but not including motorized rides and uses allowed as part
of an amusement park.[Amended 2-19-2002]
OUTDOOR SALES — The regular display by a retailer of stock-in-trade
outside of an enclosed structure. The term includes, but is not necessarily
limited to, businesses which involve an outside parking or display area for
the sale of cars, trucks, motorcycles, campers, farm equipment, recreational
vehicles, or mobile homes; businesses involved in the outdoor sale of used
merchandise, other than at flea markets, which is separately defined; and
similar outdoor sales activities. For purposes of this chapter, the serving of
food by an eating and drinking place at outside tables shall not constitute
outdoor sales.
PARKING LOT (COMMERCIAL) — Any premises used for the storage of four
or more motor vehicles at any one time for compensation and on or in which
no gasoline or automobile accessories or other business is located. Such
commercial lots shall be operated as private business ventures in and of
themselves and not accessory to another commercial enterprise, such as
shopping centers and restaurants.
PASSENGER TRAIN STATION — A place or building adjacent to a railroad
line which provides access to the train for passengers and/or goods. A
station may include such uses as ticket counters, restaurant and coffee
§ 230-302 SACO CITY CODE § 230-302
173:598
shops, travel agents, postal services, retail uses and other uses normally
associated with train stations.[Amended 6-29-1992]
PERMANENT STRUCTURE — A structure which is placed on or in the
water or shore for a period of seven months or longer in any twelve-month
period.[Amended 4-21-1992]
PERSON — An individual, corporation, governmental agency, municipality,
trust, estate, partnership, association, two or more individuals having a joint
or common interest, or other legal entity.[Amended 4-21-1992]
PERSONAL SERVICES — Establishments engaged in providing services
involving the care of the person or personal apparel, including, but not
limited to, barbershops, beauty shops and manicurists, tailors, laundromats,
shoe repair shops, tattoo parlors, massage therapists, and photographic
portrait studios.[Amended 8-17-1992]
PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY OR ENTERTAINMENT — A commercial,
nonprofit, or governmental use that is fully enclosed within a building that
provides a place for public gatherings and events, such as theaters, concert
halls, auditoriums, function halls, clubs, and similar venues. A place of
public assembly or entertainment may include facilities for the provision or
sale of food and beverages to people attending activities or events or the
sale of related merchandise, such as souvenirs, specialty apparel, or items
related to the activities occurring at the site.[Amended 9-4-2012]
PLACES OF WORSHIP — A building or structure, or groups of buildings or
structures, that, by design, construction or intent, are primarily intended
for conducting organized religious services and associated accessory uses.
A place of worship may include but is not limited to a church, synagogue,
temple, mosque or other facility that is used for prayer by persons of similar
beliefs.[Amended 7-16-2012]
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — A land development project comprehensively
planned as an entity via a unitary site plan which permits flexibility in
building siting, mixtures of land uses, usable open spaces and the
preservation of significant natural features.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — The building in which the principal use of the
lot is conducted.
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary use to which the premises are devoted, and
the main purpose for which the premises exist.
PRIVATE DOCK — A dock owned, maintained, and exclusively used by
a private entity, such as an individual, trust, association, or
corporation.[Amended 4-21-1992]
PRIVATE ROAD — A category of road not owned by the City or state which
provides frontage to a lot or lots. Such private roads shall not provide
frontage to more than four lots created after October 15, 2001. Any private
road which provides frontage for a lot created after October 15, 2001, shall
be constructed to the standards of § 230-724. Existing private roads are
private roads which already provide frontage to a lot on October 15, 2001.
Private roads are not designed for and are not eligible for acceptance as a
§ 230-302 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-302
173:599
City street unless improved to City standards at the time of the proposed
acceptance.[Amended 10-15-2001]
PRIVATE SLIPS OR RAMPS — Facilities that are not part of a marina, serve
a single residence, and are constructed exclusively for the personal use of
the occupants of that residence.[Amended 6-2-2008]
PUBLIC FACILITY — Any facility, including, but not limited to, buildings,
property, recreation areas, and roads, which is owned, leased, or otherwise
operated, or funded by the governmental body or public entity.[Amended
4-21-1992]
PUBLIC RIDING STABLE — An establishment where the public is permitted
to ride horses for a fee. Horse riding lessons may also be
provided.[Amended 4-20-1993]
PUBLIC UTILITY BUILDINGS — A building necessary for the furnishing of
essential services (as defined herein). This building shall not be intended
for personnel, but for such things as, but not limited to, switching stations,
relay stations and sewage pumping stations.
QUASI-MUNICIPAL OR PUBLIC USE — A facility for a recognized public
purpose, such as an auditorium, library, or park, which is operated by
a nonprofit organization or by a public agency other than the
municipality.[Amended 5-4-1987; 2-19-2002]
RECENT FLOODPLAIN SOILS — The following soils series as described
and identified by the National Cooperative Soil Survey: Alluvial, Cornish,
Charles, Podunk, Sunday, Fryeburg, Hadley, Limerick, Suncook, Saco,
Lovewell, Medomak, Ondawa, Rumney, Winooski.[Amended 4-21-1992]
RECREATIONAL FACILITY — A place designed and equipped for the
conduct of sports, leisure-time activities, and other customary and usual
recreational activities, excluding boat launching facilities.[Amended
4-21-1992]
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle or vehicular attachment designed
for temporary sleeping or living quarters for one or more persons, which is
not a dwelling and which may include a pick-up camper, travel trailer, tent
trailer and motor home.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE ACCESSORY ENCLOSURE — A factorymanufactured
rigid metal or vinyl enclosure, with the dimensions not
exceeding eight feet in width nor the length of the recreational vehicle,
and designed for use with recreational vehicles. The term shall not include
decks, patios, awnings, awning tents, screen panels or unenclosed roof
projections.[Amended 11-7-2005]
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE, PARK MODEL (CAMP MODEL) — A
recreational vehicle containing no more than 400 square feet of floor area,
not counting recreational vehicle accessory enclosures.[Amended
11-7-2005]
RECYCLING CENTER — A facility for the collection and processing of
recyclables, excluding sewage sludge, into marketable resources. Such
§ 230-302 SACO CITY CODE § 230-302
173:600
facilities would include, but not be limited to, materials recovery facilities
and recycling dropoff centers. The term does not include incinerators,
other disposal facilities, or facilities that process general municipal solid
waste.[Amended 4-1-1991]
REGISTERED DISPENSARY or DISPENSARY — A not-for-profit entity
registered under 22 M.R.S.A. § 2422, Subdivision 6, that acquires,
possesses, cultivates, manufactures, delivers, transfers, transports, sells,
supplies or dispenses marijuana or related supplies and educational
materials to registered patients who have designated the dispensary to
cultivate marijuana for their medical use and the registered primary
caregivers of those patients. Accessory uses are limited to commercial
kitchen facilities for preparing food, drinks, tinctures, and balms containing
medical marijuana; counseling services for medical marijuana patients;
alternative therapies for medical marijuana patients, such as massage and
acupuncture; and the sale of medical marijuana delivery
appliances.[Amended 7-19-2010]
REGISTERED DISPENSARY, GROW-ONLY — A not-for-profit entity
registered under 22 M.R.S.A. § 2422, Subdivision 6, that possesses and
cultivates marijuana for medical use in conjunction with a "registered
dispensary" or a "registered dispensary, nongrowing," at another site, but
which does not dispense medical marijuana. Accessory uses are limited
to commercial kitchen facilities for preparing food, drinks, tinctures, and
balms containing medical marijuana.[Amended 7-19-2010]
REGISTERED DISPENSARY, NONGROWING — A not-for-profit entity
registered under 22 M.R.S.A. § 2422, Subdivision 6, that acquires,
manufactures, delivers, transfers, transports, sells, supplies or dispenses
marijuana or related supplies and educational materials to registered
patients who have designated the dispensary to cultivate marijuana for
their medical use and the registered primary caregivers of those patients.
The cultivation must take place off site and, if in Saco, at a "registered
dispensary" or "registered dispensary, grow only." Accessory uses are
limited to commercial kitchen facilities for preparing food, drinks, tinctures,
and balms containing medical marijuana; counseling services for medical
marijuana patients; alternative therapies for medical marijuana patients,
such as massage and acupuncture; and the sale of medical marijuana
delivery appliances.[Amended 7-19-2010]
RELIGIOUS CONFERENCE CENTER — A church-affiliated building or
complex, including sleeping facilities and common dining facilities, at which
meetings of a religious or educational nature are held.[Amended
6-19-1989]
REMANUFACTURING — The remaking of unfinished goods and articles by
hand or machinery. It shall include reassembly, refabricating, refinishing
and repackaging or reprocessing, but shall not include retailing.
REPAIR SERVICE — A business providing for the repair of personal and
business property, such as radios and televisions; electrical and electronic
equipment; computers; watches, clocks, and jewelry; furniture and
upholstery; sporting equipment; musical instruments; and similar items,
§ 230-302 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-302
173:601
but not including the repair of motor vehicles, boats, or heavy equipment.
Retail sales of parts and supplies shall be allowed, provided such sales are
accessory to the repair service.[Amended 4-7-2003; 5-7-2003]
RESEARCH AND TESTING LABORATORY — A building or group of
buildings in which are located facilities for scientific research, investigation,
testing, or experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale
of products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the
laboratory.[Amended 3-2-1992]
RETAIL USE — The sale of goods and services to end users of the goods
and services. For purposes of this chapter, eating and drinking places are
defined separately.
RIVER or BROOK — [Amended 4-21-1992; 2-17-2004; 3-18-2004]
ROAD — A route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil,
gravel, asphalt, or other surfacing material constructed for or created by
the repeated passage of motorized vehicles.[Amended 4-21-1992]
SALT MARSH — Areas along coastal waters (most often along coastal
bays) which support salt-tolerant plant species and where, at average tide
during the growing season, the soil is regularly inundated by tidal waters.
The predominant species is saltmarsh cordgrass (Spartina alterniflora).
More open areas often support widgeon grass, eelgrass, and Sago
pondweed.[Amended 4-21-1992]
SALT MEADOW — Areas which support salt-tolerant plant species
bordering the landward side of salt marshes or open coastal water, where
A channel between defined banks. A channel is created by the action of
surface water and has two or more of the following characteristics:
It is depicted as a solid or broken blue line on the most-recent
edition of the United States Geological Survey 7.5-minute series
topographic map or, if not available, a fifteen-minute series
topographic map;
(1)
It contains or is known to contain flowing water continuously for a
period of at least three months of the year in most years;
(2)
The channel bed is primarily composed of mineral material such
as sand and gravel, parent material or bedrock that has been
deposited or scoured by water;
(3)
The channel contains aquatic animals such as fish, aquatic insects
or mollusks in the water or, if no surface water is present, within
the stream bed;
(4)
The channel contains aquatic vegetation and is essentially devoid
of upland vegetation.
(5)
A.
River or brook does not mean a ditch or other drainageway constructed,
or constructed and maintained, solely for the purpose of draining
stormwater, or a grassy swale.
B.
§ 230-302 SACO CITY CODE § 230-302
173:602
the soil is saturated during the growing season but which is rarely
inundated by tidal water.[Amended 4-21-1992]
SALVAGE YARD — A yard, field, or similar area used as a place of storing
material salvaged or extracted from wreckage or damaged or discarded
property with the intent of reselling the salvaged material commercially.
For the purpose of this chapter, salvage yard shall be distinguished from
automobile graveyard.[Amended 9-5-1985]
SCHOOLS —
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY — A building or structure
accommodating individual storage rooms or area leased or rented to the
general public exclusively for the storage of personal or business-related
property, such rooms or areas being accessible though individual private
entrances. The storage of chemicals, explosives, or hazardous items, as
defined by the National Fire Protection Association Code 704, Class 3 or 4
material, is not permitted. Accessory uses are limited to those uses which
are permitted or conditional in the zone, and they are subject to Planning
Board review as an amendment of the conditional use approval. This use
does not fall within "wholesale trade and warehousing" herein defined.
SERVICE STATION PUMP ISLAND CANOPY — A roof structure to provide
shelter to persons using fuel pumps.[Amended 5-17-1993]
SEWERED — Lots connected to the municipal sewer system.[Amended
4-3-1989]
SHADE TREE — A species of tree, typically deciduous, that provides shade,
has a branch structure that does not conflict with or obstruct vehicle sight
distances or pedestrian circulation, and that has a height at maturity in
excess of 35 feet.[Amended 2-19-2002]
SHED — A subordinate detached building used for residential storage. In
residential zoning districts, if the shed is under 120 square feet and is
not served by electricity, the shed need meet only a five-foot side or rear
yard setback requirement, rather than the setback designated for other
buildings in Table 412-1.97 No dimension (length, width, height) of the
building shall exceed 12 feet. Only one shed per lot shall be permitted to
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE (INCLUDING PAROCHIAL SCHOOLS) —
Institutions for education or instruction in any branch or branches of
knowledge or a place where knowledge is imparted and which satisfies
either of the following requirements:
(1) The school is not operated for a profit or as a gainful business; or
The school teaches courses of study which are sufficient to qualify
attendance there as compliance with state compulsory education
requirements.
(2)
A.
COMMERCIAL SCHOOLS — Schools or institutions which are
commercial or profit-oriented. Examples thereof are dancing, music,
riding, correspondence, aquatic schools, driving or business.
B.
§ 230-302 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-302
173:603
meet this five-foot setback standard. Sheds shall be erected no closer to the
front lot line than the extension of the line created by the front wall of the
principal structure on the lot. Any other sheds or outbuildings shall meet
the standards of Table 412-1. No variance of the minimum five-foot setback
requirement shall be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.[Amended
4-7-2003; 5-7-2003]
SHORE FRONTAGE — The length of a lot bordering on a water body or
wetland, measured in a straight line between the intersections of the lot
lines with the shoreline.[Amended 4-21-1992; 6-29-2009]
SIGNIFICANT WILDLIFE HABITAT — [Amended 4-21-1992]
SMALL ENGINE REPAIR — A business that services and repairs small
equipment, such as snow blowers, lawnmowers, rototillers, chainsaws,
trimmers, garden tractors, and similar equipment powered by a gasoline
engine or motor of less than 20 horsepower or its equivalent. Small engine
repair includes the sales of parts, supplies, and accessories for small
equipment. Small engine repair does not include the repair or servicing of
motor vehicles, motorcycles, boats or marine engines, all-terrain vehicles
(ATVs), or heavy equipment.[Amended 4-7-2003]
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A structure consisting of a wind turbine,
a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics, and which is
intended to primarily reduce the on-site consumption of utility-supplied
power. An SWES may also be mounted on an existing structure, such as a
roof, chimney, or wall of a building.[Amended 6-2-2008]
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A system designed and used to obtain energy
from the sun in order to supply energy to a principal use or structure
located on the same lot as the system, or on an abutting lot in the case
of a common system serving more than one principal use or structure, for
the purpose of reducing the consumption of fuel for heating or electricity.
A solar energy system may include but is not limited to solar hot water, or
air heating, or photovoltaic systems. Solar energy systems are allowed only
as accessory uses or structures. Solar energy systems shall comply with all
applicable building, plumbing and electrical codes and with all applicable
dimensional requirements of this chapter.[Amended 12-1-2008]
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Human genitals in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse,
Habitats for animal species appearing on official state or federal lists of
endangered or threatened species.
A.
High- or moderate-value deer wintering and travel corridors, waterfowl
and wading bird habitats (including nesting and feeding areas), and
shorebird habitats (including nesting, feeding and staging areas), as
defined by the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife.
B.
Critical spawning and nursery areas for Atlantic sea run salmon, as
defined by the Atlantic Sea Run Salmon Commission.
C.
97.Editor's Note: Table 412-1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 230-302 SACO CITY CODE § 230-302
173:604
fellatio or sodomy; and fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic regions, buttocks or female breast.[Amended 1-19-1993]
STABLE — A structure where two or more horses are sheltered and fed.
This definition includes operations which chiefly board, train and show
horses, but does not include riding stables open to the public.
STORM-DAMAGED TREE — A tree that has been uprooted, blown down, is
lying on the ground, or that remains standing and is damaged beyond the
point of recovery as the result of a storm event.[Amended 10-24-2016]
STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS) — Methods,
techniques, designs, practices, and other means to control the quality and
quantity of stormwater that are approved by the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection. Stormwater BMPs are identified in "Stormwater
Management in Maine: Best Management Practices," which is published
periodically by the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection.[Amended 6-18-2001]
STREAM — (See "river or brook.")[Amended 4-21-1992; 2-17-2004]
STREET WALL — A "wall" that generally abuts the sidewalk and helps to
define and enclose the street corridor, creating a sense of activity, intensity
and spatial containment. In Saco, Main Street from the railroad tracks to
Beach Street, and several other downtown streets, provide examples of
desirable street walls.[Amended 4-11-2005]
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
a fixed location on or in the ground, or an attachment to something having
a fixed location on the ground, including buildings, billboards, signs,
commercial park rides and games, carports, porches, and other building
features, but not including sidewalks, fences, driveways, parking lots and
noncommercial swimming pools (whether aboveground or in-ground).
STRUCTURE IN THE SHORELAND ZONE — Anything temporarily or
permanently located, built, constructed or erected for the support, shelter
or enclosure of persons, animals, goods or property of any kind or anything
constructed or erected on or in the ground. The term includes structures
temporarily or permanently located, such as decks, patios, and satellite
dishes. Structure does not include fences; poles and wiring and other aerial
equipment normally associated with service drops, including guy wires and
guy anchors; subsurface wastewater disposal systems as defined in 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4201, Subdivision 5; geothermal heat exchange wells as defined
in 32 M.R.S.A. § 4700-E, Subdivision 3-C; or wells or water wells as defined
in 32 M.R.S.A. § 4700-E, Subdivision 8.
SUPPLY YARD — A commercial establishment storing or offering for sale
building supplies, including, but not limited to, lumber, raw earthen
materials, steel supplies, coal, heavy equipment, feed and grain, and similar
goods. The term does not include the wrecking, salvaging, dismantling or
storage of automobiles and similar vehicles.
§ 230-302 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-302
173:605
SUSTAINED SLOPE — A change in elevation where the referenced percent
grade is substantially maintained or exceeded throughout the measured
area.[Amended 4-21-1992]
TEEN CENTER — A private club organized for teenagers.[Amended
3-16-1992]
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — A structure that is placed on or in the water
or shore for a period no greater than seven months in any period of 12
consecutive months. These structures include, but are not limited to, docks,
floats, or ramps.[Amended 4-21-1992]
TIMBER HARVESTING — The cutting and removal of trees from their
growing site, and the attendant operating of cutting and skidding
machinery, but not the construction or creation of roads. Timber harvesting
does not include the clearing of land for approved construction.
TOWER — A vertical structure upon which can be located one or more
antennas for the purpose of transmitting or receiving telecommunications
as authorized by the Federal Communications Commission. The term
includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers,
common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower
structures, and similar structures.[Amended 10-21-2002]
TOWER, SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — The vertical component of a
small wind energy system that elevates the wind turbine generator and
attached blades above the ground.[Amended 6-2-2008]
TRIBUTARY STREAM — A channel between defined banks created by the
action of surface water, whether intermittent or perennial, and which is
characterized by the lack of upland vegetation or presence of aquatic
vegetation and by the presence of a bed devoid of topsoil containing
waterborne deposits or exposed soil, parent material or bedrock, and which
flows to a water body or wetland as defined. This definition does not include
the term "stream," as defined elsewhere in this chapter, and only applies
to that portion of the tributary stream located within the shoreland zone
of the receiving water body or wetland. This term is used solely in the
shoreland development section of this chapter. The rest of this chapter uses
this definition to define stream.[Amended 4-21-1992; 6-29-2009]
TRUCK TERMINAL — Land or buildings used as a relay station for the
transfer of a load from one vehicle to another or one party to another. The
terminal cannot be used for permanent or long-term accessory storage for
principal land uses at other locations. The terminal facility may include
facilities for the repair of those trucks associated with the
terminal.[Amended 3-2-1992]
UNSEWERED — Lots not connected to the municipal sewer
system.[Amended 4-3-1989]
UNUSUAL NATURAL AREA — Any land or water area, usually only a few
acres in size, which is undeveloped and which contains natural features
of unusual geological, botanical, zoological, ecological, hydrological, other
scientific, educational, scenic, or recreational significance. By way of
§ 230-302 SACO CITY CODE § 230-302
173:606
illustration, and not limitation, such areas may include: rare or exemplary
plant communities; individual plant species of unusual interest because
of size, species or other reasons; unusual or exemplary bogs; unusually
important wildlife habitats, particularly those of rare or endangered
species; unusual landforms; fossils and other deposits of importance to
geologists; outstanding scenic areas; and others of similar
character.[Amended 2-17-2004; 3-18-2004]
UPLAND EDGE — The boundary between upland and wetland.[Amended
4-21-1992]
VARIANCE —
VOLUME OF A STRUCTURE — The volume of all portions of a structure
enclosed by roof and fixed exterior walls as measured from the exterior
faces of these walls and roof.[Amended 4-21-1992]
WASTE COMPOSTING FACILITY — A building or area for the biological
decomposition and stabilization of organic matter under aerobic conditions
of high temperature resulting in a humus-like product that can be used as a
soil amendment.[Amended 3-2-1992]
WATER BODY — Any pond, lake, river, stream, brook or tidal
area.[Amended 4-21-1992]
WATER CROSSING — Any project extending from one bank to the opposite
bank of a river or stream, whether under, through, or over the watercourse.
Such projects include but may not be limited to roads, fords, bridges,
culverts, water lines, sewer lines, and cables as well as maintenance work
on these crossings.[Amended 4-21-1992]
A relaxation of the terms of this chapter where such variance would not
be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to the conditions
peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the
applicant, a literal enforcement of the chapter would result in
unnecessary or undue hardship. The words "undue hardship," as used
in this chapter, shall mean:
That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a
variance is granted;
(1)
That the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of
the property and not the general conditions in the neighborhood;
(2)
That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character
of the locality; and
(3)
That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant
or a prior owner.
(4)
A.
Hardship is not, therefore, a condition experienced by an individual.
It is a characteristic of the property itself. Moreover, when a variance
is granted, it attaches to that property and can be transferred to
subsequent owners.
B.
§ 230-302 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-302
173:607
WETLANDS — Areas which are inundated or saturated by surface water
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal conditions do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically
adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands shall be delineated
according to the current version of the "Army Corps of Engineers Wetland
Delineation Manual (1987)." Delineations done using the 1989 "Federal
Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands" are also
acceptable. (For definitions related to shoreland zoning, see "freshwater
wetlands," "coastal wetlands," and "wetlands associated with
rivers.")[Amended 8-2-1993]
WETLANDS ASSOCIATED WITH RIVERS — Wetlands contiguous with or
adjacent to a river and which, during normal high water, are connected by
surface water to the river. Also included are wetlands which are separated
from the river by a berm, causeway, or similar feature less than 100 feet in
width and which have a surface elevation at or below the normal high-water
line of the river. Wetlands associated with rivers are considered to be part
of that river.[Amended 4-21-1992]
WHOLESALE TRADE AND WAREHOUSING — The shipping, receiving and
storing of finished goods and articles. Retailing activity shall constitute no
more than 10% of the total floor area.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY OR FACILITY — Any
structure, antenna, tower or other device which provides radio/television
transmission, commercial mobile wireless services, unlicensed wireless
services, cellular phone services, specialized mobile radio communications
(SMR), common-carrier wireless exchange phone services, personal
communications service (PCS) or pager services. Wireless
telecommunications facilities shall be considered a principal
use.[Amended 10-21-2002]
YARD — The horizontal area of land on a lot not occupied by a structure.
The three types of yards are as below:
YARD (OR GARAGE) SALE — A sale, conducted indoors or out-of-doors,
of used household goods, curios, and the like. Yard (or garage) sales, as
distinguished from flea markets, shall be considered to be accessory uses
under this chapter and shall not be conducted more frequently than four
days in any six-month period.
YARD, FRONT — The area of land between the front lot line and the
nearest part of the principal building, and the two side lot lines.
A.
YARD, SIDE — The area of land between the side lot line and the
nearest part of the principal building.
B.
YARD, REAR — The area of land between the rear lot line and the
nearest part of the principal building, and the two side lot lines.
C.
§ 230-302 SACO CITY CODE § 230-302
173:608
ARTICLE IV
District Regulations
§ 230-401. Zoning Maps. [Amended 4-21-1992; 4-4-2002;
10-3-2011]
A. General Zoning Map.
(1) A map entitled "City of Saco Zoning Map" is hereby adopted as part
of this chapter and hereafter shall be referred to as the "Official
Zoning Map." It shall be located in the Inspections Department and
shall be the final authority as to the current status of the land and
water areas, buildings and other structures in the City.
(2) The boundaries of the zoning districts set forth in § 230-403 shall
be as shown on the City of Saco Zoning Map, except as follows:
(a) Resource Protection District. The RP District shall include the
areas shown as RP on the Official Zoning Map and the
following areas when they occur within the limits of the
Shoreland Zone as mandated by the State of Maine Mandatory
Shoreland Zoning Act, 38 M.R.S.A. § 435 et seq., whether or
not such areas are shown on the Zoning Map:
[1] Areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland
edge of freshwater wetlands, salt marshes and salt
meadows, and wetlands associated with rivers, which are
rated "moderate" or "high" value by the Maine Department
of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (MDIF&W) as of January
1989 and the area within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of
the upland edge of the unrated mapped freshwater
wetlands along Stackpole Creek and the Nonesuch River.
[2] Land areas within the one-hundred-year floodplains
adjacent to tidal waters as shown on FEMA's Flood
Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps.
[3] Areas of two or more contiguous acres with sustained
slopes of 20% or greater.
[4] Areas of two or more contiguous acres with hydric soils
and supporting wetland vegetation that are not part of a
freshwater or coastal wetland as defined, and that are not
surficially connected to a water body during normal spring
high water.
[5] Land areas adjacent to tidal waters that are subject to
severe erosion or mass movement, such as steep coastal
bluffs.
[6] All land areas within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high-water line of a stream.
§ 230-401 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-401
173:609
[7] All land area within 250 feet, horizontal distance, from the
following natural features:
[a] Cascade Brook Falls.
[b] Nonesuch River Fault.
[c] Saco Heath.
[8] All land area known as "Stratton Island," "Bluff Island,"
"Ram Island" and "Eagle Island."
[9] All land area currently being used as general public access
to tidal beaches or the Saco River.
[10] All land area within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of
Philips Spring, Seal Rock Spring, Heath Road Spring and
Jenkins Road Spring.
(b) Saco River Overlay District. The Saco River Overlay District
includes all lands subject to the jurisdiction of the Saco River
Corridor Commission, whether or not such areas are shown on
the Zoning Map. The overlay district includes all lands
adjacent to the Saco River to a distance of 500 feet as
measured on a horizontal plane from the mean high-water line
of the river or to the edge of the one-hundred-year floodplain if
the floodplain extends beyond 500 feet, up to a maximum of
1,000 feet from the mean high-water line.
(c) Shoreland Overlay District. The Shoreland Overlay District
includes all lands subject to shoreland zoning as mandated by
the State of Maine Mandatory Shoreland Zoning Act, 38
M.R.S.A. § 435 et seq., that are not included in the Resource
Protection District or the Saco River Overlay District, whether
or not such areas are shown on the Zoning Map.
B. Applicability. Notwithstanding enactment of these amendments to the
Zoning Map, the property identified on the City Assessor's maps as Map
61, Lot 13, and described in a deed recorded in the York County
Registry of Deeds at Book 9554, Page 147, shall continue to be
governed by the zoning district regulations for the B-2a District in
effect on February 19, 2002, provided such property is developed as a
residential subdivision not exceeding 13 dwelling units in new
structures plus any dwelling units and/or bed-and-breakfast units
permissible in existing structures, and further provided that a sketch
plan review application under Section 4.2 of the City of Saco
Subdivision Regulations has been filed on or before February 19, 2002,
a complete application for preliminary subdivision approval and any
required applications for site plan and/or conditional use approval are
submitted within six months after the filing of the sketch plan
application, the subdivision is approved within two years of the filing of
the sketch plan application, and substantial construction of the
§ 230-401 SACO CITY CODE § 230-401
173:610
§ 230-402. Copies of Zoning Map.
Representative maps which may be appended to this chapter are for
reference only and shall not be construed to be Official Zoning Maps.
§ 230-403. Zoning districts. [Amended 5-9-1990; 3-2-1992;
2-19-2002; 4-4-2002; 10-3-2011; 9-4-2012; 7-1-2013]
The City is divided into the districts stated and described in this chapter
and as shown by the district boundary lines on the Official Zoning Map. The
district classifications are:
Residential Districts:
R-1 Low Density District
R-2 Medium Density District
R-3 High Density District
R-4 General Residential District
MHP Mobile Home Park Overlay District
Mixed-Use Districts:
MU-1 Downtown Residential Mixed-Use District
MU-3 Planned Mixed-Use District
MU-4 Planned Limited Mixed-Use District
Business Districts:
B-1 General Business District
B-2 Highway Business District
B-3 Downtown Business District
B-4 Planned Development District
B-5 Marine Business and Residential District
B-6 Highway Business and Commercial District
B-7 Limited Business/Residential District
B-8 Office Park District
BP Business Park District
Industrial Districts:
I-1 Industrial Park District
subdivision is commenced within two years after approval. [Note:
Amendments to the Zoning Map made by the City Council on February
19, 2002, on the fragmentary map entitled "Proposed Route 1 Zoning,
Council Alternate A," are subject to this provision.]
C. Historic Preservation District Map. The areas included in the Historic
Preservation District are shown on the adopted Historic Preservation
Map and are described in § 230-413F. [Amended 4-21-1992]
§ 230-401 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-403
173:611
I-2 Industrial Business District
I-3 Light Industrial-Business Park District
Conservation District:
C-1 Conservation District
Natural Resource Districts:
RP Resource Protection District
SR Saco River Overlay District
SO Shoreland Overlay District
CDOD Coastal Development Overlay District
§ 230-404. District boundaries.
A. Uncertainty of boundaries.
(1) Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the
various districts as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules
shall apply:
(a) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center
lines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow
such center lines.
(b) Boundaries indicated as approximately following wellestablished
lot lines shall be construed as following such lot
lines.
(c) Boundaries indicated as approximately following municipal
limits shall be construed as following municipal limits.
(d) Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be
construed to follow such shorelines, and in the event of natural
change in the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the
actual shoreline. Boundaries indicated as approximately
following the center lines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or
other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center
lines.
(e) Boundaries indicated as following or measured from natural
features such as the upland limit of wetlands or the limit of
floodplains shall be construed to follow or be measured from
the actual limit of the natural resource as located on the face of
the Earth even if such location is at variance with the location
shown on the Official Zoning Map.
(f) Boundaries indicated as being parallel to or extensions of
features indicated in Subsection A(1)(a) through (e) above
shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on
the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the
map.
§ 230-403 SACO CITY CODE § 230-404
173:612
§ 230-405. Residential districts: purposes.
Districts designated R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 are intended for primarily
residential uses. Other uses may be integrated where compatible. The
specific purpose of each of the residential districts is as follows:
(g) Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are
at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map,
except as provided in Subsection A(1)(e) above, or in
circumstances where the items covered by Subsection A(1)(a)
through (f) above are not clear, the Board of Appeals shall
interpret the district boundaries.
(2) The district boundaries located on the Zoning Map represent the
City of Saco's ordinance. In addition, areas along the Saco River
are also governed by the Saco River Corridor Commission.
Separate, and in some cases more-restrictive, regulations exist for
this area and must be consulted when development is
contemplated.
B. Division of lots by district boundaries. Where a zoning district boundary
line divides a lot or parcel of land of the same ownership of record at
the time such line is established by adoption or amendment of this
chapter, the regulations applicable to the less-restricted portion of the
lot may be extended up to 100 feet into the more-restricted portion of
the lot, subject to approval of the Planning Board pursuant to the
criteria for conditional uses. [Amended 12-7-1992]
A. R-1 Low Density District (includes R-1a, R-1b, R-1c and R-1d
designations). The R-1 classification is designated for areas which are
predominately single-family residential in character. It includes both
sewered and unsewered land, with appropriate lot size requirements
for each situation. New land uses in this district are restricted to lowdensity
residential and associated uses.
B. R-2 Medium Density District. The R-2 classification is designated for
land where central water and sewer facilities are available or where the
installation of these facilities is feasible and where new multifamily
developments can be harmoniously located within existing
neighborhoods.
C. R-3 High Density District. The R-3 classification is designated for land
that may be developed more intensively than in the R-2 District due to
its proximity to the central business area of Saco, the availability of
central water and sewer facilities, and the general character of existing
land uses.
D. R-4 General Residential District. The R-4 classification is designated for
land that, due to its availability of land, access to utilities, and existing
character, can support a mix of residential use at medium densities.
§ 230-404 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-405
173:613
§ 230-405.1. Mixed-use districts: purposes. [Amended 7-1-2013]
Districts designated as mixed-use districts are intended to accommodate
both residential uses and a range of nonresidential uses, depending on
the specific purpose of each district. The intention of these districts is to
allow for a mix of residential and nonresidential activity in a manner that
provides a quality environment for all uses. The specific purpose of each of
the mixed-use districts is as follows:
E. MHP Mobile Home Park Overlay District. The Mobile Home Park
Overlay District is designated for use by mobile home parks at densities
represented in Table 412-2,98 as prescribed by the state. [Amended
5-9-1990]
A. MU-1 Downtown Residential Mixed-Use District. The MU-1
classification is intended to allow older residential neighborhoods in the
downtown area to remain predominantly residential with a mix of
housing types while allowing for the reuse of existing buildings as well
as limited redevelopment that allows for an increase in the amount of
nonresidential use, such as small-scale specialty retail uses, services,
restaurants, and business and professional offices, especially on the
first floor of mixed-use buildings. At the same time, the amount of
residential use in the neighborhood is maintained or increased as a
result of more-intensive use of existing buildings and limited
redevelopment. The overall scale and character of rehabilitated or new
buildings should be compatible with the established character of the
neighborhood. [Amended 10-3-2011]
B. (Reserved)
C. MU-3 Planned Mixed-Use District. The MU-3 classification is intended
to allow for the development of high-quality mixed-use neighborhoods
on either side of Route 1 with a wide range of both residential and
nonresidential uses. The character of these neighborhoods is more
urban than suburban, and the neighborhoods are organized around an
internal street system rather than being primarily oriented to Route 1.
The neighborhoods are pedestrian-friendly and include a high level of
pedestrian and bicycle facilities that serve the neighborhoods and link
them to other areas of the City and the Eastern Trail. A substantial
portion of each neighborhood is set aside as open space, recreation
areas, and conservation land.
D. MU-4 Planned Limited Mixed-Use District. The MU-4 classification is
intended to allow for the development of the usable portions of the
district with a mix of high-density residential uses and lower-intensity
nonresidential uses, such as community services and professional
offices, that are related to and supportive of a residential use while a
large part of the district is retained as open space. The character of the
neighborhood is urban, higher density/intensity of use in limited areas
98.Editor's Note: Table 412-2 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 230-405 SACO CITY CODE § 230-405.1
173:614
§ 230-406. Business districts: purposes. [Amended 1-3-1995]
A district designated for business uses is limited to business, public, and
certain residential uses. By establishing a compact district for such uses,
better fire and police protection and less-costly utility networks may be
provided. Most industrial uses are excluded in order to reduce the hazards
caused by extensive rail and truck movements normally associated with
such uses. However, in some business districts, industrial research and
certain light industrial uses are permitted if they are of such a nature that
they do not cause any hazards and if they meet the specific requirements set
forth in this chapter. The specific purposes of each of the business districts
are as follows:
with the remainder preserved as open space and conservation land.
[Amended 7-1-2013]
A. B-1 General Business District. The B-1 classification permits uses which
would normally require more space than is available in an urban core
area. The purpose of this district is to encourage desirable businesses
in proximity to the urban core where they may be readily accessible and
to provide a variety of lot sizes and building types not generally
available in the central business district. [Amended 1-3-1995]
B. B-2 Highway Business District. The B-2 classification permits business
uses which require large areas or volumes of automobile traffic. The
purpose of this district is to locate these high traffic generators away
from the downtown core, along the major arterial traffic routes. The B-2
District includes the B-2a, B-2b, B-2c and B-2d designations.
[Amended 3-2-1992]
C. B-3 Downtown Business District. The B-3 classification permits highvalue
business and services of the type needed within walking distance
of high-density residential dwelling, and which may also serve a
regional financial, service, or retail role. The intent of this district is to
concentrate urban businesses and residences in a core area so that
each will complement the other.
D. B-4 Planned Development District. The B-4 classification is intended to
allow for large-scale, innovative, comprehensively designed, mixed
development and redevelopment of property in the area known as
"Factory Island." This classification recognizes the unique features of
this area, including proximity to downtown, frontage on the Saco River,
and its past intensive industrial use, and is meant to encourage flexible,
but carefully thought-out, reuse of the land and its building.
E. B-5 Marine Business and Residential District. The Marine Business and
Residential District is intended to encourage a mix of marine-oriented
uses, as well as residential uses, and small-scale tourist facilities in the
Camp Ellis area. [Amended 5-15-1989]
§ 230-405.1 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-406
173:615
§ 230-407. Industrial districts: purposes. [Amended 2-19-2002]
Districts designated I-1, I-2, or I-3 are intended for industries and their
expansions as well as for future industrial, office, and other nonresidential
development. Retail and residential uses are generally not permitted in
these districts. Performance standards, parking specifications, and yard
regulations are set forth in this chapter in order to ensure safe industrial
development that is compatible with adjacent uses. The specific purpose of
each industrial district is as follows:
F. B-6 Highway Business and Commercial District. The B-6 classification
permits a mix of business and commercial uses which prefer high-traffic
locations, as well as limited industrial and residential uses. [Amended
3-2-1992]
G. B-7 Limited Business/Residential District. The purpose of this district is
to provide an area for a mix of residential and low-impact business uses
appropriate to a traditionally residential area adjacent to the central
business district. [Amended 1-17-1995]
H. BP Business Park District. The purpose of the BP District is to provide
an area for the development of high-quality office, service, and fully
enclosed light industrial uses in a "business park" - like environment
while allowing for the continuation of traditional uses. [Amended
2-19-2002]
I. (Reserved)
J. B-8 Office Park District. The B-8 classification is intended to provide
attractive locations for high-quality economic growth in close proximity
to the Maine Turnpike. These areas develop as attractive office parks
that attract a range of business and professional offices, hotels and
related services, and indoor recreation/entertainment uses. A limited
amount of residential development is accommodated as part of mixeduse
developments. The areas have attractive visual environments with
well-designed buildings and attractive site design. The natural
environment is protected and green space is provided as part of the
development. [Amended 9-4-2012]
A. I-1 Industrial Park District. The I-1 classification is designed for areas in
which the establishment of industrial installations and offices in a
campus-like arrangement is promoted.
B. I-2 Industrial Business District. The I-2 classification is intended to
serve as a transitional zone between business and industry, allowing a
mix of certain nonretail commercial uses and manufacturing uses. The
I-2 family of districts includes the I-2 District and the I-2b District.
C. I-3 Light Industrial-Business Park District. The I-3 classification is
designed to allow a range of light industrial and commercial uses to
develop in a planned environment that limits most retail and residential
uses. [Amended 2-19-2002]
§ 230-406 SACO CITY CODE § 230-408
173:616
§ 230-408. Conservation District: purpose.
§ 230-409. Natural resource districts: purposes.
§ 230-410. Permitted and conditional uses in each district.
The permitted and conditional uses for each district are shown in the
following sections. Uses not specifically listed or defined to be included,
either according to definitions contained in this chapter or according to the
common meaning of the term, shall not be permitted.
§ 230-410.1. R-1 Low Density District [Note: includes R-1a, R-1b,
R-1c and R-1d, except where otherwise noted].
A. C-1 Conservation District. The C-1 District is designed to promote and
preserve agriculture and open space, while permitting low-density
residential uses that do not conflict with this overall purpose.
A. RP Resource Protection District. The RP District is designed to protect
fragile shoreline and other ecological systems, which, if developed,
would reduce water quality, disrupt wildlife and aquatic habitat and
biotic systems, or infringe upon areas necessary for natural flood
protection or storage of stormwaters. This district is meant to
encourage those uses that can be appropriately and safely located in
wetland areas.
B. SR Saco River Overlay District. The SR District identifies those areas
that are subject to the regulations of the Saco River Corridor
Commission in addition to the provisions of this chapter. This
designation is intended to foster the coordination of the City's land use
regulations with the regulations of the Commission.
C. SO Shoreland Overlay District. The SO District is intended to assure
that activities that occur within close proximity of the water bodies
subject to state-mandated shoreland zoning are carried out in a manner
that protects water quality, promotes wildlife movement, and preserves
the scenic quality of these shorelands.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Single-family dwellings.
(2) Agriculture, excluding livestock.
(3) Public parks and playgrounds.
(4) Public and private schools, excluding commercial schools.
(5) Places of worship. [Amended 7-16-2012]
(6) Essential services.
(7) Accessory uses.
§ 230-408 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-410.1
173:617
(8) Any use permitted in the Resource Protection District.
(9) Home babysitting service. [Amended 8-1-1988]
(10) Adult day-care center, Type 1. [Amended 7-1-1991]
(11) Accessory apartments in a single-family dwelling, R-1b only.
[Amended 8-6-2001]
(12) One accessory apartment in a single-family dwelling. [Amended
10-20-2008]
(13) Community living uses. [Amended 12-1-2008]
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Two-family dwellings (reviewed as minor conditional use).
[Amended 12-17-2002]
(2) Cemeteries.
(3) Home occupations.
(4) Nonprofit recreational uses.
(5) Nursery schools.
(6) Day-care centers.
(7) (Reserved)
(8) Municipal uses not listed under permitted uses.
(9) Public utility buildings.
(10) Commercial greenhouses and nurseries.
(11)Kennels.
(12) Stables.
(13) Quasi-public uses.
(14)Water recreation, including piers, docks, and boathouses related
thereto.
(15) (Reserved)
(16) Offices which comply with the standards of § 230-713 of this
chapter (R1-b District only). [Amended 5-7-1993]
(17) Bed-and-breakfast establishment, in the R1-b District only.
[Amended 9-5-1985]
(18) Day-care home. [Amended 8-1-1988]
§ 230-410.1 SACO CITY CODE § 230-410.1
173:618
§ 230-410.2. R-2 Medium Density District.
(19) Religious conference center in the R1-c District only. [Amended
6-19-1988]
(20) Adult day-care center, Type 2. [Amended 7-1-1991]
(21) (Reserved)
(22) Bed-and-breakfast establishments, in Historic Overlay Districts and
on historic sites only, subject to § 230-716 (R-1a only).
(23) Home-based retail use (R-1b District only with frontage on Main
Street, subject to § 230-721).
(24) Golf courses, in the R-1a District only, subject to § 230-722.
(25) High-voltage transmission lines. [Amended 12-15-2008]
(26) Elder/disability housing facility. [Amended 5-21-2012]
(27) Elder/disability housing facility - limited service. [Amended
5-21-2012]
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Single-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Places of worship. [Amended 7-16-2012]
(4) Essential services.
(5) Public parks and playgrounds.
(6) Public and private schools, excluding commercial schools.
(7) Agriculture, excluding livestock.
(8) Accessory uses.
(9) Any use permitted in the Resource Protection District.
(10) Home babysitting service. [Amended 8-1-1988]
(11) Adult day-care center, Type 1. [Amended 7-1-1991]
(12) One accessory apartment in a single-family dwelling. [Amended
10-20-2008]
(13) Community living uses. [Amended 12-1-2008]
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Multifamily dwellings limited to no more than eight units in each
building, unless a conversion of an existing building, within the
§ 230-410.1 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-410.2
173:619
§ 230-410.3. R-3 High Density District.
existing structure, except for minor additions such as stair towers,
entrances, dormers, and similar minor building features.
[Amended 4-28-2008]
(2) Elder/disability housing facility and elder/disability housing facility
- limited service. [Amended 5-21-2012]
(3) Hospitals and clinics.
(4) Boardinghouses.
(5) Home occupations.
(6) Parking lots. [Amended 1-3-1995]
(7) Funeral homes.
(8) Cemeteries.
(9) Elder/disability care facility - full service. [Amended 5-21-2012]
(10) Municipal uses not listed under permitted uses.
(11) Nursery schools.
(12) Day-care centers.
(13) Nonprofit recreational uses.
(14) Public utility buildings.
(15) Commercial greenhouses and nurseries.
(16)Water recreation, including piers, docks, and boathouses related
thereto.
(17) Private clubs.
(18) Offices which comply with the standards of § 230-713 of this
chapter.
(19)Kennels.
(20) Quasi-public uses.
(21) (Reserved)
(22) Day-care home. [Amended 8-1-1988]
(23) Adult day-care center, Type 2. [Amended 8-1-1988; 7-1-1991]
(24) High-voltage transmission lines. [Amended 12-15-2008]
(25) Campgrounds existing as of April 15, 2012. [Amended 8-6-2012]
§ 230-410.2 SACO CITY CODE § 230-410.3
173:620
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Single-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Places of worship. [Amended 7-16-2012]
(4) Essential services.
(5) Public and private schools, excluding commercial schools.
(6) Public parks and playgrounds.
(7) Accessory uses.
(8) Any use permitted in the Resource Protection District.
(9) Home babysitting service. [Amended 8-1-1988]
(10) Adult day-care center, Type 1. [Amended 7-1-1991]
(11) One accessory apartment in a single-family dwelling. [Amended
10-20-2008]
(12) Community living uses. [Amended 12-1-2008]
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Multifamily dwellings.
(2) Elder/disability housing facility and elder/disability housing facility
- limited service. [Amended 5-21-2012]
(3) Boarding homes.
(4) Home occupations.
(5) Hotels and motels.
(6) Tourist homes.
(7) Commercial parking lots.
(8) Funeral homes.
(9) Offices which comply with the standards of § 230-713 of this
chapter.
(10) Hospitals and clinics for humans.
(11) Quasi-public uses.
(12) Elder/disability care facility - full service. [Amended 5-21-2012]
(13) Nursery schools.
(14) Day-care centers.
§ 230-410.3 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-410.3
173:621
§ 230-410.4. R-4 General Residential District. [Amended 8-1-1988;
7-1-1991; 1-3-1995]
(15) Private clubs.
(16) Nonprofit recreational uses.
(17) Municipal uses not listed under permitted uses.
(18) Public utility buildings.
(19)Water recreation, including piers, docks, and boathouses related
thereto.
(20) (Reserved)
(21) Bed-and-breakfast establishments. [Amended 9-5-1985]
(22) Day-care home. [Amended 8-1-1988]
(23) Adult day-care center, Type 2. [Amended 9-5-1985; 8-1-1988;
7-1-1991]
(24) High-voltage transmission lines. [Amended 12-15-2008]
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Any use permitted as a matter of right in the R-2 District.
(2) Manufactured housing units.
(3) Multifamily dwellings in structures containing no more than eight
units each.
(4) (Reserved)
(5) Boarding homes.
(6) Any use permitted in the Resource Protection District.
(7) Home babysitting service.
(8) Adult day-care center, Type 1.
(9) One accessory apartment in a single-family dwelling. [Amended
10-20-2008]
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Any use permitted as a conditional use in the R-2 District and not
otherwise listed herein as a use permitted as a matter of right.
(2) High-voltage transmission lines. [Amended 12-15-2008]
(3) Campgrounds existing as of April 15, 2012. [Amended 8-6-2012]
§ 230-410.3 SACO CITY CODE § 230-410.5
173:622
§ 230-410.5. MU-1 Downtown Residential Mixed-Use District.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Single-family dwelling (existing as of April 1, 2011).
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Multifamily dwellings.
(4) Elder/disability housing facility and elder/disability housing facility
- limited service. [Amended 5-21-2012]
(5) Dwelling units above the first floor in a mixed-use building.
(6) One accessory apartment in a single-family dwelling.
(7) Home occupations.
(8) Retail businesses,1 excluding outdoor sales and drive-through
service.
(9) Eating establishments,1 excluding fast-food restaurants.
(10) Eating and drinking establishments.1
(11) Business offices.
(12) Professional offices.
(13) Financial institutions1 excluding drive-through service.
(14) Business services.1
(15) Personal services.1
(16) Repair services.1
(17) Artist or craftsperson studios.1
(18) Commercial schools.1
(19) Health care clinics for humans.1
(20) Home babysitting service.
(21) Day-care home.
(22) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(23) Places of worship.1
(24) Municipal uses.1
§ 230-410.5 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-410.5
173:623
§ 230-410.6. MU-3 Planned Mixed-Use District.
(25) Quasi-municipal or public uses.1
(26) Public utility buildings.1
(27) Essential services.
(28) Accessory uses.
(29) Any use permitted in the Resource Protection District.
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Offices of contractors and tradesmen.1
(2) Registered dispensary, nongrowing.1
(3) Health clubs.1
(4) Private clubs.1
(5) Nursery school.1
(6) Day-care center.1
(7) Adult day services.1
(8) Commercial parking lots.
(9) High-voltage transmission lines.
NOTE 1: Each retail or service establishment or use is limited to a
maximum of 4,500 square feet of floor area.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Hotels and motels.
(2) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(3) Retail businesses with less than 100,000 square feet of gross floor
area and related outside sales.
(4) Accessory retail sales of goods manufactured on the premises.
(5) Artist and craftsperson studios.
(6) Eating establishments.
(7) Eating and drinking establishments.
(8) Accessory food service facilities.
(9) Food processing facilities. [Added 3-12-201899 100]
§ 230-410.5 SACO CITY CODE § 230-410.6
173:624
(10) Health and fitness clubs.
(11) Financial institutions.
(12) Professional offices.
(13) Business offices.
(14) Offices of tradesmen or contractors.
(15) Personal services.
(16) Business services.
(17) Repair services.
(18) Funeral homes.
(19) Health care clinics for humans.
(20) Animal hospitals and veterinarian offices.
(21) Light assembly in which all activities occur within a fully enclosed
building with no exterior storage.
(22) Outdoor commercial recreational facilities.
(23) Commercial recreation.
(24) Indoor recreation/amusement centers.
(25) Nonprofit recreational uses.
(26) Public parks and playgrounds.
(27) Places of public assembly or entertainment as part of a mixed-use
building or mixed-use development.
(28) Places of worship.
(29) Municipal uses.
(30) Quasi-municipal or public uses.
(31) Day-care center.
(32) Adult care services.
(33) Agriculture.
(34) Accessory uses.
(35) Essential services.
99.Editor's Note: This amendment provided an effective date of 4-12-2018.
100. Editor's Note: This amendment also redesignated former Subsection A(9) through (37) as
Subsection A(10) through (38).
§ 230-410.6 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-410.6
173:625
§ 230-410.7. MU-4 Planned Limited Mixed-Use District.
(36) Public utility buildings.
(37) Any use permitted in the Resource Protection District.
(38) Mobile home parks in designated Mobile Home Park Overlay
Districts.
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Self-service storage units.
C. Additional uses permitted only as part of a master planned
development. The following uses are permitted only as part of a master
planned development reviewed and approved by the Planning Board in
accordance with the provisions of § 230-416:
(1) Single-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Multifamily dwellings.
(4) Elderly congregate housing.
(5) Dwelling units as part of a mixed-use building.
(6) Community living uses.
(7) Home occupations.
(8) Home babysitting service.
(9) Day-care home.
(10) One accessory apartment in a single-family dwelling.
(11) Research and testing laboratories fully enclosed within a building
that are compatible with a mixed-use neighborhood.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Single-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Community living uses.
(4) Places of worship.
(5) Public parks and playgrounds.
(6) Home babysitting service.
(7) Day-care home.
§ 230-410.6 SACO CITY CODE § 230-410.7
173:626
§ 230-410.8. B-1 General Business District.
(8) One accessory apartment in a single-family dwelling.
(9) Accessory uses.
(10) Home occupations.
(11) Essential services.
(12) Public utility buildings.
(13) Any use permitted in the Resource Protection District.
(14) The reuse of a building existing as of April 1, 2011, for a use that is
otherwise permitted only as part of a master planned development.
B. Permitted uses subject to a master planned development. The following
uses are permitted only as part of a master planned development
reviewed and approved by the Planning Board in accordance with the
provisions of § 230-416:
(1) Multifamily housing.
(2) Elderly congregate housing.
(3) Nursing homes.
(4) Health care clinics for humans.1
(5) Professional offices.1
(6) Municipal uses.
(7) Quasi-municipal or public uses.1
(8) Day-care center.1
(9) Adult care services.1
(10) Nonprofit recreational uses.1
NOTE 1: This use is allowed only as part of a mixed-use building or
development in which the nonresidential use occurs in conjunction
with a permitted residential use and is accessory and subordinate
to the primary residential use.
A. Permitted uses: [Amended 9-5-1985; 8-1-1988; 7-1-1991;
7-6-1993; 1-3-1995; 4-7-2003]
(1) Single-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
§ 230-410.7 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-410.8
173:627
(3) Elder/disability housing facility and elder/disability care facility -
limited service. [Amended 5-21-2012]
(4) Multifamily dwellings.
(5) Home occupations.
(6) Retail businesses, excluding outdoor sales.
(7) Eating establishments, excluding fast-food restaurants.
(8) Eating and drinking establishments.
(9) Hotels and motels.
(10) Tourist homes.
(11) Financial institutions.
(12) Business offices.
(13) Professional offices.
(14) Personal services.
(15) Business services.
(16) Repair services.
(17) Artist or craftsperson studios.
(18) Health club.
(19) Office of a contractor or tradesman.
(20) Funeral homes.
(21) Health care clinics for humans.
(22) Veterinarian offices.
(23) Places of worship. [Amended 7-16-2012]
(24) Public and private schools.
(25) Commercial schools.
(26) Essential services.
(27) Accessory uses.
(28) Municipal uses.
(29) Any use permitted in the Resource Protection District.
(30) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(31) Home babysitting service.
§ 230-410.8 SACO CITY CODE § 230-410.8
173:628
(32) Day-care home.
(33) Day-care center.
(34) Adult day-care center, Type 1 and 2.
(35) Nursery school.
(36) (Reserved)
(37) Quasi-public uses.
(38) One accessory apartment in a single-family dwelling. [Amended
10-20-2008]
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Boarding homes.
(2) Gas stations. [Amended 4-7-2003]
(3) Gasoline sales accessory to a retail use. [Amended 4-7-2003]
(4) Auto repair garages.
(5) Car washes.
(6) Private clubs.
(7) Public utility buildings.
(8) Commercial recreation.
(9) Quasi-public uses.
(10) Private clubs.
(11) Municipal uses not listed under permitted uses.
(12) Public utility buildings.
(13)Water recreation, including piers, docks, and boathouses related
thereto.
(14) Commercial recreation.
(15) Indoor recreation. [Amended 4-7-2003]
(16) Marinas.
(17) Commercial fisheries and related sales of fresh products.
(18) High-voltage transmission lines. [Amended 12-15-2008]
(19) Registered dispensary. [Amended 7-19-2010]
(20) Registered dispensary, nongrowing. [Amended 7-19-2010]
§ 230-410.8 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-410.9
173:629
§ 230-410.9. B-2a Highway Business District.
A. Permitted uses: [Amended 12-5-1994, 2-12-2002; 4-7-2003]
(1) One single-family dwelling on a lot of record.
(2) One accessory apartment in a single-family dwelling.
(3) Dwelling units above the first floor as part of a mixed-use building.
(4) One caretaker's apartment within a nonresidential use.
(5) Home occupations.
(6) Hotels and motels.
(7) Tourist homes.
(8) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(9) Retail businesses with less than 40,000 square feet of gross floor
area and related outside sales.
(10) Accessory retail sales of goods manufactured on the premises.
(11) Lumber and material supply yards.
(12) Artist and craftsperson studios.
(13) Eating establishments.
(14) Eating and drinking establishments.
(15) Drive-through eating establishments.
(16) Accessory food service facilities.
(17) Health and fitness clubs.
(18) Private clubs.
(19) Financial institutions.
(20) Professional offices.
(21) Business offices.
(22) Offices of tradesmen or contractors.
(23) Personal services.
(24) Business services.
(25) Repair services.
(26) Small engine repair.
(27) Funeral homes.
§ 230-410.9 SACO CITY CODE § 230-410.9
173:630
(28) Health care clinics for humans.
(29) Hospitals.
(30) Animal hospitals and veterinarian offices.
(31)Kennels.
(32) Boarding kennels.
(33) Research and testing laboratories.
(34) Wholesale trade and warehouses.
(35) Any use permitted in the Resource Protection District.
(36) Essential services.
(37) Accessory uses.
(38) Municipal uses.
(39) Public utility buildings.
(40) Quasi-public uses.
(41) Places of worship. [Amended 7-16-2012]
(42) Public parks and playgrounds.
(43) Public schools.
(44) Private schools.
(45) Commercial schools.
(46) Nursery school.
(47) Day-care center.
(48) Adult day-care center, Types 1 and 2.
(49) Agriculture.
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Automobile dealers.
(2) Auto repair garages.
(3) Gasoline sales accessory to a retail use.
(4) Car washes.
(5) Indoor recreation/amusement centers.
(6) Outdoor commercial recreational facilities.
§ 230-410.9 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-410.9
173:631
§ 230-410.10. B-2b Highway Business District.
(7) Commercial recreation.
(8) Campgrounds.
(9) Contractors.
(10) Public riding stables.
(11) Light industry in buildings less than 20,000 square feet with no
exterior storage.
(12)Radio or TV transmission towers.
(13) High-voltage transmission lines. [Amended 12-15-2008]
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Single-family dwelling.
(2) Two-family dwelling.
(3) Manufactured housing unit.
(4) One caretaker's apartment within a nonresidential use.
(5) One accessory apartment in a single-family dwelling.
(6) Home occupations.
(7) Hotels and motels.
(8) Tourist homes.
(9) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(10) Retail businesses with less than 40,000 square feet of gross floor
area and related outside sales.
(11) Accessory retail sales of goods manufactured on the premises.
(12) Lumberyards and material supply yards.
(13) Artist and craftsperson studios.
(14) Eating establishments. [Amended 4-7-2003]
(15) Eating and drinking establishments. [Amended 4-7-2003]
(16) Drive-through eating establishments. [Amended 4-7-2003]
(17) Accessory food service facilities.
(18) Health and fitness clubs.
(19) Private clubs.
§ 230-410.9 SACO CITY CODE § 230-410.10
173:632
(20) Financial institutions.
(21) Professional offices.
(22) Business offices.
(23) Offices of tradesman or contractors.
(24) Personal services. [Amended ]
(25) Business services.
(26) Repair services.
(27) Small engine repair. [Amended 12-5-1994; 4-7-2003]
(28) Funeral homes.
(29) Health care clinics for humans.
(30) Hospitals.
(31) Animal hospitals and veterinarian offices.
(32)Kennels.
(33) Boarding kennels.
(34) Any use permitted in the Resource Protection District.
(35) Research and testing laboratories.
(36) Wholesale trade and warehouses.
(37) Essential services.
(38) Accessory uses.
(39) Municipal uses.
(40) Public utility buildings.
(41) Quasi-public uses.
(42) Places of worship. [Amended 7-16-2012]
(43) Public parks and playgrounds.
(44) Public schools.
(45) Private schools.
(46) Commercial schools.
(47) Nursery school.
(48) Home babysitting service.
§ 230-410.10 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-410.10
173:633
§ 230-410.11. B-2c and B-2d Highway Business Districts.
(49) Day-care home.
(50) Day-care center.
(51) Adult day-care center, Types 1 and 2.
(52) Agriculture.
(53) Elder/disability housing facility. [Amended 5-21-2012]
(54) Elder/disability housing facility - limited service. [Amended
5-21-2012]
(55) Elder/disability care facility - full service. [Amended 5-21-2012]
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Multifamily dwelling.
(2) Automobile dealers.
(3) Auto repair garages.
(4) Gas stations.
(5) Gasoline sales accessory to a retail use.
(6) Car washes.
(7) Indoor recreation/amusements centers.
(8) Outdoor commercial recreational facilities.
(9) Commercial recreation.
(10) Campgrounds.
(11) Public riding stables.
(12) Contractors.
(13) Light industry in buildings less than 20,000 square feet with no
exterior storage.
(14)Radio or TV transmission towers.
(15) High-voltage transmission lines. [Amended 12-15-2008]
(16) Registered dispensary. [Amended 7-19-2010]
(17) Registered dispensary, grow-only. [Amended 7-19-2010]
(18) Registered dispensary, nongrowing. [Amended 7-19-2010]
A. Permitted uses:
§ 230-410.10 SACO CITY CODE § 230-410.11
173:634
(1) Single-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Dwellings above the first floor in a mixed-use building.
(4) Home occupations.
(5) Retail businesses.
(6) Eating establishments. [Amended 4-7-2003]
(7) Eating and drinking establishments. [Amended 4-7-2003]
(8) Hotels and motels.
(9) Places of worship.
(10) Financial institutions.
(11) Personal services.
(12) Business services.
(13) Offices.
(14) Research and testing laboratories.
(15) Wholesale trade and warehouses.
(16) Hospitals and clinics for humans.
(17) Animal hospitals and veterinarian offices.
(18) Quasi-municipal or public uses.
(19) Private and commercial schools.
(20) Private clubs.
(21) Municipal uses.
(22) Essential services.
(23) Public utility buildings.
(24) Elder/disability care facility - full service. [Amended 5-21-2012]
(25) Any use permitted in the Resource Protection District.
(26) Bed-and-breakfast establishments. [Amended 9-5-1985]
(27) Accessory uses. [Amended 9-5-1985]
(28) Repair services.
(29) Funeral homes. [Amended 6-4-1987]
§ 230-410.11 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-410.11
173:635
§ 230-410.12. B-3 Downtown Business District.
(See also special size limitations in portion of B-3 District, § 230-733A.)
(30) Home babysitting service. [Amended 8-1-1988]
(31) Day-care home. [Amended 8-1-1988]
(32) Day-care center. [Amended 8-1-1988]
(33) Adult day services.
(34) Nursery school. [Amended 7-6-1993; 1-3-1995]
(35) One accessory apartment in a single-family dwelling. [Amended
10-20-2008]
(36) Elder/disability housing facility. [Amended 5-21-2012]
(37) Elder/disability housing facility - limited service. [Amended
5-21-2012]
(38) Offices of contractors or tradesmen.
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Multifamily dwellings.
(2) Health club.
(3) Boardinghouses.
(4) Amusement centers.
(5) Commercial recreation.
(6) Masonry supply yards.
(7) Indoor recreation.
(8) Gas stations in B-2c only.
(9) Auto repair garages in B-2c only.
(10) Car washes in B-2c only.
(11) Small engine repair. [Amended 4-7-2003]
(12) High-voltage transmission lines. [Amended 12-15-2008]
(13) Campgrounds in B-2c only, existing as of April 15, 2012 [Amended
8-6-2012]
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Multifamily dwellings.
§ 230-410.11 SACO CITY CODE § 230-410.12
173:636
(2) Elder/disability housing facility and elder/disability housing facility
- limited service. [Amended 5-21-2012]
(3) Home occupation.
(4) Retail businesses, excluding outdoor sales.
(5) Eating establishments, except those listed as conditional uses and
excluding drive-in service. [Amended 4-7-2003]
(6) Eating and drinking establishments. [Amended 4-7-2003]
(7) Business offices. [Amended 4-7-2003]
(8) Professional offices. [Amended 4-7-2003]
(9) Offices of contractors and tradesmen. [Amended 4-7-2003]
(10) Financial institutions.
(11) Business services.
(12) Personal services. [Amended 12-5-1994]
(13) Repair services. [Amended 4-7-2003]
(14) Artist or craftsperson studios. [Amended 4-7-2003]
(15) (Reserved) [Amended 3-1-2010]
(16) Tourist homes.
(17) Health care clinics for humans. [Amended 4-7-2003]
(18) Places of worship. [Amended 7-16-2012]
(19) Commercial schools.
(20) Private clubs.
(21) Health and fitness clubs. [Amended 4-7-2003]
(22) Essential services.
(23) Public utility buildings.
(24) Municipal uses.
(25) Quasi-public uses.
(26) Accessory uses.
(27) Funeral homes.
(28) Any use permitted in the Resource Protection District.
(29) Bed-and-breakfast establishments. [Amended 9-5-1985]
§ 230-410.12 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-410.12
173:637
§ 230-410.13. B-4 Planned Development District.
(30) Home babysitting service. [Amended 8-1-1988]
(31) Day-care home. [Amended 8-1-1988]
(32) Day-care center. [Amended 8-1-1988]
(33) Single-family dwellings. [Amended 4-3-1989]
(34) Two-family dwellings. [Amended 4-3-1989]
(35) Adult day-care center, Type 1 and 2. [Amended 7-1-1991]
(36) Nursery school. [Amended 7-6-1993]
(37) One accessory apartment in a single-family dwelling. [Amended
10-20-2008]
(38) Drive-in windows are permitted only in association with financial
institutions. [Amended 3-1-2010]
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Commercial recreation.
(2) Indoor recreation. [Amended 4-7-2003]
(3) Fast-food restaurants, excluding drive through service. [Amended
4-7-2003]
(4) Elder/disability care facility - full service. [Amended 5-21-2012]
(5) Drinking establishments. [Amended 3-7-1994; 4-7-2003]
(6) Commercial parking lots.
(7) Marinas. [Amended 10-16-1985]
(8) Water recreation, including piers, docks and boathouses related
thereto. [Amended 10-16-1985]
(9) High-voltage transmission lines. [Amended 12-15-2008]
(10) Hotels and motels. [Amended 3-1-2010]
(11) Registered dispensary. [Amended 7-19-2010]
(12) Registered dispensary, grow-only. [Amended 7-19-2010]
(13) Registered dispensary, nongrowing. [Amended 7-19-2010]
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Planned developments, pursuant to the procedures and standards
contained in § 230-706 of this chapter.
§ 230-410.12 SACO CITY CODE § 230-410.13
173:638
§ 230-410.14. B-5 Marine Business and Residential District.
(2) Any use permitted in the Resource Protection District.
(3) Home babysitting service. [Amended 8-1-1988]
(4) Day-care home. [Amended 8-1-1988]
(5) Day-care center. [Amended 8-1-1988]
(6) Adult day-care center, Type 1 and 2. [Amended 7-1-1991]
(7) Accessory uses. [Amended 6-29-1992]
(8) Passenger train station. [Amended 6-29-1992]
(9) Marinas. [Amended 6-2-2008]
B. Conditional uses:
(1) High-voltage transmission lines. [Amended 12-15-2008]
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Single-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Home occupations.
(4) Retail uses.
(5) Eating establishments without drive-through service. [Amended
4-7-2003]
(6) Eating and drinking establishments. [Amended 4-7-2003]
(7) Places of worship. [Amended 7-16-2012]
(8) Small nonresidential facilities for educational, scientific or natural
interpretation.
(9) Essential services.
(10) Public parks and playgrounds.
(11) Quasi-public uses.
(12) Municipal uses.
(13) Public utility buildings.
(14) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(15) Artist or craftsperson studios. [Amended 4-7-2003]
(16) Wholesale fish and seafood sales.
§ 230-410.13 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-410.14
173:639
§ 230-410.15. B-6 Highway Business and Commercial District.
[Amended 3-2-1992; 1-6-1993; 12-5-1994; 2-12-2002; 2-19-2002;
4-7-2003]
(17) Excursion and charter boat terminals.
(18) Offices for the marine patrol, the harbormaster, and other
enforcement and management personnel.
(19) Parking lots.
(20) Boat building and repair facilities (subject to site plan review,
regardless of size).
(21) Marinas, piers, docks, boathouses and port facilities (subject to site
plan review, regardless of size)
(22) Home babysitting service.
(23) Day-care home.
(24) Adult day-care center, Type 1 and 2. [Amended 7-1-1991]
(25) Nursery school. [Amended 7-6-1993]
(26) One accessory apartment in a single-family dwelling. [Amended
10-20-2008]
(27) Accessory uses. [Amended 12-1-2008]
B. Conditional uses:
(1) High-voltage transmission lines. [Amended 12-15-2008]
A. Permitted uses:
(1) One single-family dwelling on a lot of record.
(2) Dwelling units above the first floor as part of a mixed-use building.
(3) One caretaker's apartment within a nonresidential use.
(4) Home occupations.
(5) Hotels and motels.
(6) Retail businesses with less than 40,000 square feet of gross floor
area and related outdoor sales.
(7) Accessory retail sales of goods manufactured on the premises.
(8) Lumberyards and material supply yards.
(9) Artist and craftsperson studios.
(10) Eating establishments.
§ 230-410.14 SACO CITY CODE § 230-410.15
173:640
(11) Eating and drinking establishments.
(12) Drive-through eating establishments.
(13) Health and fitness clubs.
(14) Private clubs.
(15) Financial institutions.
(16) Professional offices.
(17) Offices of tradesman and contractors.
(18) Personal services.
(19) Business services.
(20) Repair services.
(21) Small engine repair.
(22) Offices.
(23) Funeral homes.
(24) Health care clinics for humans.
(25) Hospitals.
(26) Animal hospitals and veterinarian offices.
(27)Kennels.
(28) Boarding kennels.
(29) Research and testing laboratories.
(30) Wholesale trade and warehouses.
(31) Contractors.
(32) Any use permitted in the Resource Protection District.
(33) Essential services.
(34) (Reserved)
(35) Accessory uses.
(36) Municipal uses.
(37) Public utility buildings.
(38) Quasi-public uses.
(39) Places of worship. [Amended 7-16-2012]
§ 230-410.15 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-410.15
173:641
(40) Public parks and playgrounds.
(41) Public schools.
(42) Private schools.
(43) Commercial schools.
(44) Nursery school.
(45) Home babysitting service.
(46) Day-care home.
(47) Day-care center.
(48) Adult day-care centers, Types 1 and 2.
(49) Agriculture without animal husbandry.
(50) One accessory apartment in a single-family dwelling. [Amended
10-20-2008]
(51) Automotive/transportation warehouse or distribution facility.
[Added 7-17-2017]
(52) Elder noncongregate, detached housing. [Added 7-17-2017]
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Automobile dealers.
(2) Automobile repair garages.
(3) Gas stations.
(4) Gasoline sales accessory to a retail use.
(5) Car washes.
(6) Indoor recreation/amusement centers.
(7) Enclosed sports areas.
(8) Outdoor commercial recreational facilities.
(9) Commercial recreation.
(10) Campgrounds.
(11) Light industry.
(12)Radio and TV antennas.
(13) High-voltage transmission lines. [Amended 12-15-2008]
(14) Registered dispensary, grow-only. [Amended 7-19-2010]
§ 230-410.15 SACO CITY CODE § 230-410.15
173:642
§ 230-410.16. B-7 Limited Business/Residential District.
(15) Elder/disability housing facility. [Added 7-17-2017]
(16) Elder/disability - limited service. [Added 7-17-2017]
(17) Elder/disability care facility - full-service. [Added 7-17-2017]
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Single-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Multifamily dwellings.
(4) Elder/disability housing facility and elder/disability housing facility
- limited service. [Amended 5-21-2012]
(5) Adult day-care center, Types 1 and 2.
(6) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(7) Home babysitting service, day-care center, day care home.
(8) Home occupations.
(9) Personal services, except laundromats and dry cleaners.
(10) Nursery schools.
(11) Public and private schools.
(12) Accessory uses.
(13) Municipal uses.
(14) Offices.
(15) Quasi-public uses.
(16) Artist and craftsperson studios. [Amended 1-17-1985]
(17) One accessory apartment in a single-family dwelling. [Amended
10-20-2008]
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Funeral homes.
(2) Boardinghouses.
(3) Community living uses.
(4) Elder/disability care facility - full service. [Amended 5-21-2012]
(5) Financial institutions.
§ 230-410.15 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-410.16
173:643
§ 230-410.17. BP Business Park District. [Amended 2-19-2002;
10-21-2002; 4-7-2003]
(6) Retail businesses except alcohol sales (limited to 1,500 square feet)
(7) High-voltage transmission lines. [Amended 12-15-2008]
(8) Eating establishments. [Amended 2-6-2017]
A. Permitted uses:
(1) One single-family dwelling on a lot of record.
(2) One accessory apartment in a single-family home.
(3) Home occupations.
(4) Hotels and motels.
(5) Accessory retail sales of goods manufactured on the premises.
(6) Eating establishments.
(7) Eating and drinking establishments.
(8) Accessory food service facilities.
(9) Health and fitness clubs.
(10) Financial institutions.
(11) Professional offices.
(12) Business offices.
(13) Business services.
(14) Health care clinics for humans.
(15) Research and testing laboratories.
(16) Any use permitted in the Resource Protection District.
(17) Essential services.
(18) Accessory uses.
(19) Municipal uses.
(20) Public utility buildings.
(21) Quasi-public uses.
(22) Public parks and playgrounds.
(23) Commercial schools.
(24) Nursery schools.
§ 230-410.16 SACO CITY CODE § 230-410.17
173:644
§ 230-410.18. B-8 Office Park District. [Amended 9-4-2012]
(25) Day-care centers.
(26) Adult day-care, Types 1 and 2.
(27) Agriculture.
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Fully enclosed light industry with no exterior storage.
(2) Wireless telecommunications facilities.
(3) High-voltage transmission lines. [Amended 12-15-2008]
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Dwelling units only as part of a mixed-use building or mixed-use
development.1
(2) Multifamily housing only as part of a mixed-use building or mixeduse
development.1
(3) Elderly congregate housing.
(4) Nursing homes.
(5) Home occupations.
(6) Eating establishments.
(7) Eating and drinking establishments.
(8) Hotels.
(9) Business offices.
(10) Professional offices.
(11) Financial institutions.
(12) Business services.
(13) Research and testing laboratories fully enclosed within a building.
(14) Personal services.
(15) Health clubs.
(16) Health care clinics for humans.
(17) Hospitals.
(18) Day-care center.
(19) Adult care services.
§ 230-410.17 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-410.18
173:645
§ 230-410.19. I-1 Industrial Park District. [Amended 8-1-1988;
11-17-1988; 3-2-1992; 7-6-1993; 11-7-1994; 2-19-2002; 10-21-2002;
12-15-2008; 7-19-2010; 12-6-2010; 9-19-2016]
(20) Places of worship.
(21) Municipal uses.
(22) Quasi-municipal or public uses.
(23) Private schools.
(24) Public utility buildings.
(25) Essential services.
(26) Accessory uses.
(27) Any use permitted in the Resource Protection District.
NOTE 1: The total floor area devoted to all residential uses shall
not exceed 30% of the total floor area of the mixed-use building or
mixed-use development in which the residential use is located.
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Commercial schools.
(2) Light industry in which all activities occur within a fully enclosed
building.
(3) Places of public assembly or entertainment as part of a mixed-use
building or mixed-use development.
(4) Indoor recreation.
(5) High-voltage transmission lines.
(6) Convenience retail uses only within a mixed-use building and
limited to a maximum of 1,000 square feet of floor area.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Hotels and motels.
(2) Supply yards.
(3) Parking lots as an accessory use to abutting lots in the B-6 Zone.
(4) Off-site parking for uses located within the district.
(5) Health club.
(6) Financial institutions.
(7) Business offices.
§ 230-410.18 SACO CITY CODE § 230-410.19
173:646
(8) Business services.
(9) Hospitals and clinics for humans.
(10) Research and testing labs.
(11) Wholesale trade and warehousing.
(12) Distribution.
(13) Truck terminal.
(14) Light industry.
(15) Any use permitted in the Resource Protection District.
(16) Essential services.
(17) Accessory uses.
(18) Municipal uses.
(19) Public utility buildings.
(20) Public and private schools.
(21) Commercial schools.
(22) Nursery school.
(23) High-voltage transmission lines.
(24) Medical marijuana caregivers, growing.
(25) Medical marijuana caregivers, growing facility.
(26) Food processing facilities. [Added 3-12-2018101]
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Heavy industry.
(2) Recycling center.
(3) Waste composting facility.
(4) Day-care center.
(5) Wireless telecommunications facilities.
(6) Registered dispensary, grow-only.
(7) Addiction treatment facility.
101. Editor's Note: This amendment provided an effective date of 4-12-2018.
§ 230-410.19 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-410.20
173:647
§ 230-410.20. I-2 Industrial Business District [Note: includes I-2b
District at former Maine Turnpike Exit 5]. [Amended 10-2-1986;
8-1-1988; 9-19-1988; 4-1-1991; 6-4-1991; 3-2-1992; 3-16-1992;
7-6-1993; 2-28-1994; 2-19-2002; 12-15-2008; 7-19-2010; 12-6-2010;
5-21-2012]
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Hotels and motels.
(2) Retail uses (I-2b only).
(3) Accessory uses, including eating establishments associated with
hotels and motels.
(4) Teen center.
(5) Financial institutions.
(6) Business offices.
(7) Business services.
(8) Hospitals and clinics for humans.
(9) Research and testing labs.
(10) Light industry.
(11) Any use permitted in the Resource Protection District.
(12) Essential services.
(13) Municipal uses.
(14) Recycling center.
(15) Nursery school.
(16) Adult day-care center, Type 1 and 2.
(17) Municipal animal incinerator.
(18) Enclosed sports arena.
(19) High-voltage transmission lines.
(20) Commercial school.
(21) Elder/disability housing facility - limited service.
(22) Elder/disability care facility - full service.
(23) Elder/disability housing facility (in conjunction with Use 21 or 22).
(24) Places of worship. [Amended 7-16-2012]
§ 230-410.20 SACO CITY CODE § 230-410.20
173:648
§ 230-410.21. I-3 Light Industrial-Business Park District. [Amended
2-19-2002; 10-21-2002; 4-7-2003]
(25) Medical marijuana caregivers, growing. [Amended 9-19-2016]
(26) Medical marijuana caregivers, growing facility. [Amended
9-19-2016]
(27) Food processing facilities. [Added 3-12-2018102]
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Self-service storage units.
(2) Distribution (including not more than 10% of gross floor space for
retail purposes).
(3) Public and private schools.
(4) Day-care centers.
(5) Registered dispensary, grow-only.
(6) Addiction treatment facility.
(7) Car washes in I-2 only (not to include I-2b) [Amended 11-5-2012]
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Hotels and motels.
(2) Accessory retail sales of goods manufactured on the premises.
(3) Eating establishments.
(4) Eating and drinking establishments.
(5) Accessory food service facilities.
(6) Financial institutions.
(7) Business offices.
(8) Offices of tradesmen or contractors.
(9) Business services.
(10) Repair services.
(11) Research and testing laboratories/labs.
(12) Wholesale trade and warehouses.
(13) Contractors.
102. Editor's Note: This amendment provided an effective date of 4-12-2018.
§ 230-410.20 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-410.21
173:649
§ 230-410.22. C-1 Conservation District. [Amended 8-1-1988;
7-1-1991; 12-7-1992; 7-6-1993; 10-20-1993; 11-5-2001]
(14) Light industry.
(15) Any use permitted in the Resource Protection District.
(16) Essential services.
(17) Accessory uses.
(18) Municipal uses.
(19) Public utility buildings.
(20) Quasi-public uses.
(21) Public parks and playgrounds.
(22) Public schools.
(23) Private schools.
(24) Commercial schools.
(25) Nursery schools.
(26) Day-care centers.
(27) Agriculture.
(28) High-voltage transmission lines. [Amended 12-15-2008]
(29) Food processing facilities. [Added 3-12-2018103]
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Automobile dealers.
(2) Indoor recreation/amusement centers.
(3) Health and fitness clubs.
(4) Distribution facilities.
(5) Radio and TV transmission towers.
(6) Wireless telecommunications facilities.
(7) Registered dispensary, grow-only. [Amended 7-19-2010]
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Agriculture.
103. Editor's Note: This amendment provided an effective date of 4-12-2018.
§ 230-410.21 SACO CITY CODE § 230-410.22
173:650
(2) Public parks and playgrounds.
(3) Cemeteries.
(4) Single-family dwellings.
(5) Two-family dwellings.
(6) Clustered residential projects.
(7) Manufactured housing units.
(8) Essential services.
(9) Kennels, except within shoreland areas as defined in Article VIIA of
this chapter.
(10) Commercial greenhouses and nurseries.
(11) Places of worship. [Amended 7-16-2012]
(12) Accessory uses.
(13) Any use permitted in the Resource Protection District.
(14) Home babysitting service.
(15) Day-care home.
(16) Adult day-care center, Type 1.
(17) Agriculturally related business uses.
(18) The processing and/or sale of agricultural products raised on the
premises.
(19) Timber harvesting.
(20) One accessory apartment in a single-family dwelling. [Amended
10-20-2008]
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Home occupations.
(2) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(3) The commercial processing of wood, including cutting, sawing,
splitting and chipping.
(4) Outdoor commercial recreational facilities involving limited
structural development.
(5) Farm stands, subject to the standards of § 230-725.
(6) Golf courses, subject to § 230-722.
§ 230-410.22 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-410.22
173:651
§ 230-410.23. RP Resource Protection District. [Amended 4-5-2002]
(7) Campgrounds.
(8) Water recreation, including piers, docks, and boathouses related
thereto.
(9) Hospitals and clinics for humans, except within shoreland areas as
defined in Article VIIA of this chapter.
(10) Boarding kennels, except within shoreland areas as defined by
Article VIIA of this chapter.
(11) Public riding stables.
(12) Extractive industry, except within shoreland areas as defined by
Article VIIA of this chapter.
(13) Municipal uses.
(14) Nursery school.
(15) Day-care center.
(16) Adult day-care center, Type 2.
(17) The reuse of existing agricultural buildings, subject to the
standards of § 230-726.
(18) High-voltage transmission lines. [Amended 12-15-2008]
A. Permitted uses:
(1) The harvesting of any wild crop, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss,
wild rice, berries, tree fruits and tree seeds, but not including any
extractive industry or activity.
(2) Nonintensive recreational uses not requiring structures, such as
hunting, fishing and hiking.
(3) Wildlife management.
(4) Hiking trails, snowmobile trails, bridle paths and similar facilities.
(5) Parks and picnic areas of primarily undeveloped, natural character.
(6) Motorized vehicular traffic on existing roads.
(7) Forest management activities, except for timber harvesting.
(8) Clearing of vegetation for approved construction and other allowed
uses.1
(9) Fire prevention activities.
(10) Soil and water conservation practices.
§ 230-410.22 SACO CITY CODE § 230-410.23
173:652
(11) Surveying and resource analysis.
(12) Emergency operations.
(13) Selective timber harvesting according to a plan approved by a
forester registered in the State of Maine on a noncommercial
basis.1
(14) Structures accessory to allowed uses.
(15) Temporary piers, docks, wharfs, bridges and other structures and
uses extending over or below the normal high-water line or within a
wetland.1
(16) Private sewage disposal systems for allowed uses.
(17) Service drops for allowed uses.
(18) Filling and earthmoving of less than 10 cubic yards.1
(19) Agriculture.2
NOTE 1: Subject to obtaining a shoreland permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer.
NOTE 2: Subject to obtaining a shoreland permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer, to include submission of a management plan
filed with either the Natural Resources Conservation Service or
the York County Soil and Water Conservation District.
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Small nonresidential facilities for educational, scientific or natural
interpretation purposes.
(2) Recreation uses involving minimal structural development, such as
golf courses, tennis courts, playing fields and similar uses, where
water quality would not be adversely affected and potential for
flood damage could be minimal.
(3) Small nonresidential structures accessory to permitted or
conditional uses.
(4) Essential services.
(5) Water recreation facilities.
(6) Aquaculture.
(7) Permanent piers, docks, wharfs, bridges and other structures and
uses extending over or below the normal high-water line or within a
wetland.
(8) Parking facilities accessory to allowed uses.
§ 230-410.23 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-410.23
173:653
§ 230-410.24. Saco River Overlay District.
§ 230-410.25. Shoreland Overlay District.
§ 230-410.26. MHP Mobile Home Park Overlay District.
(9) Filling and earthmoving of less than 10 cubic yards.
(10) High-voltage transmission lines. [Amended 12-15-2008]
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Any use that is a permitted use in the underlying City zoning
district that is also an allowed use at that specific location under
the Saco River Corridor Commission's regulations is a permitted
use but is subject to the requirements of Article VIIA and the
performance standards of the Saco River Corridor Commission.
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Any use that is a conditional use in the underlying City zoning
district that is also an allowed use at that specific location under
the Saco River Corridor Commission's regulations is a conditional
use but is subject to the requirements of Article VIIA and the
performance standards of the Saco River Corridor Commission.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Any use that is a permitted use in the underlying City zoning
district is a permitted use but is subject to the requirements of
Article VIIA.
B. Conditional uses:
(1) Any use that is a conditional use in the underlying City zoning
district is a conditional use but is subject to the requirements of
Article VIIA.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Mobile home parks. Once a mobile home park is approved by the
Planning Board, the uses in the park are limited to the following
permitted and conditional uses:
(a) Permitted uses:
[1] Accessory uses.
[2] Home babysitting service.
[3] Parks and playgrounds. [Amended 5-9-1990]
(b) Conditional uses:
§ 230-410.23 SACO CITY CODE § 230-410.26
173:654
§ 230-411. Prohibited industrial uses.
§ 230-412. Lot and yard requirements.
[1] Home occupations.
[2] Day-care home.
A. The following uses and similar uses are not included under the
definition of "heavy industry" or any other use in this chapter and are
excluded from all districts because they have strong potential to be
injurious, noxious, or offensive to a neighborhood by reason of the
emission of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, vibration, radioactivity, noise or
other by-products and are deemed to be unacceptable for one or more
of the above causes:
(1) Blast furnace, metal or ore reduction or smelting.
(2) Coke manufacture.
(3) Petroleum refining.
(4) Animal rendering plants.
(5) Nuclear power production facilities.
(6) Industries with high-level radiation hazards.
(7) Nuclear waste disposal.
(8) Petroleum and petroleum product tank farms.
(9) Ammonia, chlorine manufacture, or the refining of hydrochloric,
nitric, picric, sulfuric, sulphurous or similar acid manufacture.
[Amended 3-2-1992].
A. Minimum lot and yard requirements. The minimum lot area, minimum
lot area per dwelling unit, minimum street frontage, minimum depth of
front yard, minimum width of side yard and rear yard, minimum setback
from normal high-water marks, maximum lot coverage, and maximum
height for each district shall be as shown in Table 412-1, Minimum Lot
and Yard Requirements.104
B. Corner and double-frontage lots. Lots which abut public streets or other
ways on more than a single side shall provide a required minimum
depth for a front yard along at least two of the abutting streets.
Minimum side yard and rear yard depth shall be provided along all
other sides.
C. Maintenance of minimum yard requirements. All structures, whether
attached to principal structures or not, and whether open or enclosed,
including porches, carports, balconies or platforms above normal grade
104. Editor's Note: Table 412-1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 230-410.26 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-412
173:655
level, shall not project into or otherwise lessen the required minimum
front, rear or side yards. Driveways and parking spaces may be
considered as part of side or rear yard setback requirements, provided
that no vehicle is parked closer than five feet from the lot line or as
required in Table 412-1, whichever is greater.
D. Waiver of minimum lot and yard requirements. The Building Inspector
shall be authorized to waive minimum yard requirements, and to issue a
building permit without a variance, under the following circumstances
only:
(1) Unenclosed, roofed structures (such as porches and carports)
which are lawfully existing upon the date of adoption of this
chapter shall be permitted to be enclosed, provided that the new
walls will not extend closer to the lot line than the existing roof and
that they shall be not less than five feet from any lot lines.
(2) Along existing residential streets which were developed prior to
enactment of the present front yard requirements, a single-family
detached dwelling, a two-family dwelling, or an addition to either,
other than a garage or carport, may be permitted to be built with a
front setback equal to the average front setbacks of the existing
houses on the immediately adjacent lots. However, in no case shall
new construction be allowed closer than 15 feet from the front lot
line without a variance. [Amended 1-3-1995]
E. Waiver of maximum height requirements. The Building Inspector may
authorize a height in excess of 35 feet if the structure is any of the
following and does not constitute a hazard to an established airport or
neighboring properties: television and radio towers; church spires;
belfries; monuments; tanks; water and fire towers; stage towers and
scenery lofts; amusement park rides; silos; cooling towers; ornamental
towers; spires; chimneys; elevator bulkheads; smokestacks; conveyors;
flagpoles; and windmills. Such projections in height as may apply shall
be properly identified for aircraft. All such structures shall be set back
from the property lines a distance at least equal to their height, except
in the B-6, B-2a, B2-b, I-2 and I-2 Districts. [Amended 6-19-1995]
F. Conversions of dwellings or structures to multifamily use.
Notwithstanding provisions of Article V of this chapter, dwellings or
structures converted to multifamily use shall comply with the minimum
lot area and minimum lot area per dwelling unit requirements in Table
412-1, Lines A and B.105 These two requirements may be waived only by
a variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to the standards
of § 230-902 of this chapter. If a building which is nonconforming with
respect to any other standard of Table 412-1 is proposed for conversion
to multifamily in any district where multifamily is permitted or
conditional, the conversion shall be considered a conditional use,
subject to the conditional use standards of § 230-901D and subject to a
105. Editor's Note: Table 412-1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 230-412 SACO CITY CODE § 230-412
173:656
finding by the Planning Board that this nonconformance does not cause
the use to violate any of the conditional use standards or special
standards of Article VII for certain conditional uses. [Amended
10-4-1993]
G. Back lots. One new back lot may be created from any lot of record
which conforms to the lot requirements of Table 412-1, except for the
lot frontage requirement, and which existed on July 17, 1989, provided
that: [Amended 7-17-1989; 11-1-1993; 3-19-2001]
(1) The back lot and front lot each will be the size of no more than one
principal structure containing one or two dwelling units. Uses are
limited to single-family and two-family dwellings for both the back
lot and front lot.
(2) The back lot and front lot will conform to the minimum lot area and
minimum lot area per dwelling unit required in the district.
(3) The back lot is at least as wide at the site of the proposed dwelling
as the frontage measurement required in the district.
(4) The back lot has a deeded access to a publicly accepted street. This
access may be obtained by way of an at least twenty-foot-wide
right-of-way across the front lot that is deeded to the owner of the
back lot or by the extension of the back lot to the public street so
that the back lot has at least 25 feet of frontage on the street. The
creation of the back lot shall not make the front lot more
nonconforming in street frontage or make the front lot
nonconforming with respect to street frontage if it is conforming.
The back lot and the front lot shall share the same driveway
entrance if access to the back lot is obtained through a right-of-way
or the street frontage of the front lot is located on a road
functionally classified as an arterial or collector or defined as part
of the Rural Road Network as shown on Figure 10.1 of the 1999
Update of the Comprehensive Plan, except in cases where it is not
possible because of the location of the existing structure on the lot
or because of difficult terrain.
(5) Each dwelling unit on the back lot is served by a residential
sprinkler system meeting the requirements of NFPA and approved
by the Saco Fire Department or each dwelling unit is less than 500
feet from a public road or less than a 1,000 feet from a hydrant
approved by the Fire Department. These measurements shall be
made along the driveway and roadway, not cross-country.
(6) The back lot is accessed by a twelve-foot-wide driveway for one
dwelling unit, or a sixteen-foot wide driveway for two dwelling
units. The portion of the driveway which serves only the last
dwelling unit may be reduced to 12 feet. (If the road is curved
additional width may be required by the Fire Department to allow
for the safe passage of emergency vehicles.) The driveway shall be
§ 230-412 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-412
173:657
§ 230-413. Historic preservation.
built with at least 12 inches of subbase gravel and three inches
of base gravel. Drainage shall be provided in accordance with
§ 230-805, and ditches and culverts shall be located at appropriate
points as approved by the Public Works Department or City
Engineer. The grade of the driveway shall not exceed 10%.
(7) A turnaround area approved by the Fire Department shall be
provided for public safety vehicles.
(8) Street numbering shall be approved by the City's emergency
departments and the Assessor. A sign or mailbox clearly stating the
street number shall be posted at the street before occupancy.
(9) If a public sewer line passes in the street in front of the lot from
which the back lot will be created, the back lot shall be required to
connect to the sewer when the house is built.
H. Lot standards. Any new residential lot created after April 18, 2001,
shall conform to the following requirements: [Amended 3-19-2001;
3-07-2005]
(1) Lots in which a narrow strip(s) of land, with a width of less than
25% of the required minimum street frontage for the zoning district
in which the lot is located, is used to join other portions of the lot in
order to meet the minimum lot area, minimum lot area per dwelling
unit, or minimum street frontage requirements are prohibited.
(2) Narrow strips of land along a street with a depth of less that the
minimum front yard requirement for the zoning district in which
the lot is located shall not be counted in meeting the minimum
street frontage requirement.
(3) Prior to issuance of a building permit, the Code Enforcement
Officer may request that a wetlands delineation be submitted in
order to verify that a portion of a proposed building lot adequate
for building construction and septic system installation consists of
upland. If an area of wetlands equal to or greater than Maine DEP
Natural Resource Protection Act thresholds is proposed for
alteration, a copy of the NRPA permit shall be submitted prior to
issuance of a building permit.
A. Purpose and intent. [Amended 3-2-1987; 3-7-1994; 8-22-1994;
1-17-1995; 11-19-2007]
(1) The purpose of this section is to provide a legal framework within
which the residents of the City of Saco can protect the historic,
architectural and cultural heritage of historically significant areas,
landmarks and sites in the community while accepting compatible
new construction. The heritage and economic well-being of the City
will be strengthened by preserving its architectural and historic
§ 230-412 SACO CITY CODE § 230-413
173:658
setting, conserving property values in unique areas, fostering civic
beauty, and promoting the use of historic or architecturally
significant buildings for the education and welfare of the citizens
of the City of Saco. The intent of this chapter is to in every way
possible assist property owners to maintain the architectural
integrity of the district.
(2) Once destroyed, architectural history cannot be replaced. To
prevent such losses, the intent of this section is to:
(a) Protect, preserve and enhance the outward appearance and
architectural features of structures within designated districts
or designated sites or landmarks.
(b) Prevent the demolition or removal of significant historic
buildings or structures within designated districts or
designated sites or landmarks.
(c) Preserve, protect and enhance the essential character of
designated districts by protecting relationships of groups of
buildings and structures.
(d) Accept new buildings and structures in designated districts
which are designed and built in a manner which is compatible
with the character of the district.
(e) Promote the educational, cultural, economic and general
welfare of the people of the City.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the
following meanings, unless the context indicates otherwise:
ALTERED — Includes "rebuilt," "reconstructed," "rehabilitated,"
"restored," "removed," and "demolished."
APPROPRIATE — Shall refer to those changes in historic properties,
landmarks, buildings, structures or sites within historic overlay zones,
or sites or landmarks, which are not incongruous with what is
historically and architecturally significant as determined by the
Commission.
BUILDING — A combination of materials forming a shelter that may be
used for persons, animals, or property.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — The permit indicating
compliance with § 230-413, the historic preservation section of this
chapter.
COMMISSION — The commission acting as the Historic Preservation
Commission established in § 230-413C.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST — Shall be construed to mean direct or
indirect pecuniary benefit to any person, including regular and
associate members of the Commission or members of the person's
immediate family (i.e., related by blood or marriage); or to his employer
§ 230-413 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-413
173:659
or the employer of any member of the person's immediate family; or
interest sufficient to tempt the member to serve his own personal
interest to the prejudice of the interests of those for whom the law
authorized and required him to act.
CONTRIBUTING STRUCTURE — A structure located within a
designated historic district and identified as contributing to the
historical or architectural significance of said district.
DEMOLITION — The razing of a building or a structure or the removal
of any exterior architectural feature or structure or object.
DISTRICT — See "historic district."
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE — The architectural style and
general arrangement of the exterior of a building or structure,
including, but not limited to:
HISTORIC (ADJ.) — Important in or contributing to history.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — A geographically definable area possessing
a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings,
structures or landmarks united by events or aesthetically by plan or
by physical development and designated in accordance with the
requirements of this section as appropriate for historic preservation.
Such historic districts may also comprise an individual historic
landmark or historic site separated geographically but linked by
association or history.
HISTORIC DISTRICT(S) — The district(s) established in § 230-413E or
amended in accordance with the procedures detailed in § 230-413F and
having one or more of the qualifications outlined in § 230-413F.
HISTORIC LANDMARK — Any improvement, building or structures of
particular historic or architectural significance to the City relating to
its heritage, cultural, social, economic or political history, or which
exemplifies historic personages or important events in local, state or
national history, as may be designated in accordance with this section.
HISTORIC SIGNIFICANCE — A building, structure or site possesses
historic significance if it embodies one or more of the six qualities
outlined in § 230-413D. Any building classified as noncontributing is not
considered to possess historical significance.
(1) The kind, type, and texture of the building materials;
The type and style of all windows, doors, lights, dormers, roofs,
gable cornices, porches, decorative trim, etc.;
(2)
(3) The location and treatment of any vehicle access or parking space;
(4) The design of any sign; and
(5) The arrangement of any fencing.
§ 230-413 SACO CITY CODE § 230-413
173:660
HISTORIC SITE — Any parcel of land of special significance in the
history of the City of Saco, and its inhabitants, or upon which an historic
event has occurred, including prehistoric and archeological sites, and
which has been designated as such in accordance with this section.
The term "historic site" shall also include any improved parcel, or part
thereof, used as and constituting part of the premises on which an
historic landmark is situated, as may be designated in accordance with
this section.
MATERIALS AND TEXTURE — The exterior surface material of a
building or structure, including, but not limited to, brick, stone, wood
or slate.
RHYTHM — Characterized by the regular recurrence of strong and
weak elements.
SITE — See "historic site."
C. Historic Preservation Commission.
(1) Appointment. Members of the Historic Preservation Commission
shall be appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City Council.
(2) Qualifications. The Commission shall consist of five regular
members and five associate members. All members shall be
residents of the City of Saco. Appointments shall be made on the
basis of demonstrated interest, knowledge, ability, experience and
desire to promote historic preservation in the City of Saco within
the meaning of § 230-413A of this chapter. To the extent available,
the members shall have architectural design skills or other skills
related to historic preservation, such as history, architectural
history, landscape architecture, planning, engineering, law,
archaeology and building construction, and should include a
member of the Saco Historic Society. Regular and associate
members shall serve without compensation.
(3) Regular members. The regular members who are first appointed
shall be designated to serve terms beginning July 1 and ending June
30 as follows: one for one year, two for two years, and two for three
years from the date of their appointment. Thereafter, said
Commission members shall be appointed for terms of three years,
except in those instances in which the appointment is made to fill a
vacancy, in which case the appointment shall be for the remainder
of the unexpired term. The Mayor shall act within 60 days to fill a
vacancy, including expired terms. Regular members may be
reappointed.
(4) Associate members. Membership should include a resident of the
historic district. Associate members who are first appointed shall
serve terms beginning July 1 and ending June 30 as follows: one for
one year, two for two years, and two for three years from the date
of their appointment. Thereafter, said associate members shall be
appointed for terms of three years, except to fill a vacancy, in which
§ 230-413 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-413
173:661
case it will be for the remainder of the unexpired term. They shall
participate in all hearings and discussions. They shall vote only if
the Chairman appoints an associate to act in place of the regular
member who is absent, has resigned, or has been disqualified
because of a conflict of interest. Associate members may be
reappointed.
(5) Advisory members. In addition to the regular and associate
members of the Commission, the City Council may appoint other
persons, not necessarily residents of the City of Saco, who shall
serve on an advisory or consultant basis to assist the members of
the Commission in the performance of their functions.
(6) Removal. Any regular or associate member may be removed for
cause by the City Council upon written charges after a public
hearing.
(7) Officers and quorum. Such Commission shall elect annually a
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from the regular members. Four
members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business
before said Commission, but if less than a quorum, the meeting
shall be adjourned. The planning office shall maintain a permanent
record of the activities of the Commission, including, but not
limited to, such items as the number and type of cases reviewed
and their disposition, new designations of historic sites, landmarks
and districts made, resumes of Commission members, attendance
records, appointments to the Commission, correspondence and
minutes of all meetings. This duty may be delegated to the City
Planning Department, which shall be the authorized agent of the
Historic Preservation Commission, to whom the Commission may
delegate any duties.
(8) Procedure. The Commission may adopt and may amend rules of
procedure.
(9) Meetings. All meetings of the Commission shall be publicly
announced, open to the public and have a previously available
agenda. Public notice shall be provided prior to any special
meetings of the Commission.
(10) Duties. The duties of the Commission, at a minimum, shall be to:
(a) Advise, and inform City officials and owners of historic
buildings, structures or sites, on physical and financial aspects
of preservation, renovation, and rehabilitation.
(b) Advise and inform owners in complying with the requirements
of this section.
(c) Make recommendations for establishing historic districts,
historic sites, or historic landmarks.
§ 230-413 SACO CITY CODE § 230-413
173:662
(d) Review all proposed additions, reconstruction, alterations,
construction, removal, or demolition of properties designated
under the jurisdiction of § 230-413 of this chapter.
(e) Review all proposed National Register nominations in Saco.
(f) Serve an advisory role to City officials regarding local
historical and cultural resources and act as a liaison between
local government and those persons and organizations
concerned with historic preservation.
(g) Conduct or cause to be conducted a continuing survey of local
historic and cultural resources, in accordance with Maine
Historic Preservation Commission guidelines.
(h) Work to provide continuing education on historic preservation
issues to local citizens.
(i) Undertake other duties as deemed necessary or desirable by
its members to advance the purposes of this section.
(j) Cooperate with federal, state and City officials in the
pursuance of the objectives of historic preservation.
(k) Participate in land use planning efforts of the City, state and
federal government.
(11) Gifts, grants, funding. The Historic Preservation Commission may,
subject to appropriations by the City Council or other income,
employ clerical and technical assistants or consultants, and may
apply for and accept grants, money gifts, or gifts of services, and
may hold or expend the same for all or any of the purposes of
historic preservation in the City of Saco. A nonlapsing fund for gifts
and grants shall be established by the City's Finance Director.
Appropriations from the City Council shall be managed in accord
with City policies and shall lapse each year if unexpended.
[Amended 3-2-1997]
D. Qualifications for historic districts, sites and landmarks. The historic
districts, historic sites or historic landmarks established in accordance
with this section shall have one or more of the following characteristics
and qualifications, without limitations as to cultural or chronological
period:
(1) History of Saco. Structures, buildings or sites at which events
occur or have occurred that contribute to and are identified with or
significantly represent or exemplify the broad cultural, political,
economic, military, social or sociological history of Saco and the
nation, including sites or buildings at which visitors may gain
insight or see examples either of particular items or of larger
patterns in the North American heritage.
§ 230-413 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-413
173:663
(2) Persons. Structures, buildings or sites associated with important
historic personages.
(3) Ideas. Structures, buildings or sites associated with important
historic examples of a great idea or ideal.
(4) Architecture. Structures or structural remains and sites embodying
examples of architectural types or specimens valuable for study of
a period, style or method of building construction, of community
organization and living, or landscaping; or of a single notable
structure or a single site representing the work of a master builder,
master designer, architect or landscape architect.
(5) Visual continuity. Structures or buildings contributing to the visual
continuity of the historic district.
(6) National Register. Those sites or areas on or eligible for listing on
the National Register of Historic Places or as a National Historic
Landmark.
E. Establishment of historic districts, historic sites or historic landmarks.
(1) Preliminary procedures. The initial establishment of historic
districts, historic sites or historic landmarks shall be done by
amendment to § 230-413F and shall overlay the districts created by
§ 230-403. The City Council, the Planning Board, the property
owner(s) or the Commission itself may initiate action to amend
§ 230-413F. Subsequent action to add new districts, or expand
existing historic district(s), shall be done in the same manner. Any
person seeking to add or expand historic districts, sites, or
landmarks shall request the amendment in writing to the
Commission. Any proposal by the Council or Planning Board shall
be referred to the Commission for comment before Council action.
After receiving the Commission's recommendation concerning the
request, the City Administrator shall place it on the agenda of the
City Council to act on the request. Any application or designation of
buildings, structures, sites and districts shall be in writing and
include the following, as appropriate:
(a) Designation of buildings, structures and sites for historic
preservation shall include:
[1] A concise description of the physical elements, qualities,
architectural style, period and historical significance
represented by the building, structure or site, including a
consideration of scale, materials, workmanship and spatial
qualities, as relevant.
[2] A concise statement of how the building, structure or site
meets the review criteria of § 230-413D above.
§ 230-413 SACO CITY CODE § 230-413
173:664
[3] Exterior photographs of the building or structure, or a site
map, illustrating significant details described in
Subsection E(1)(a)[1] above. In addition, the Commission
may request photographs of interior articles of particular
historic significance. These interior photographs may be
provided by the applicant on a voluntary basis and are not
required submissions.
(b) Designation or expansion of districts for historic preservation
shall include:
[1] A concise statement of the physical elements which justify
making this area an historic district and a description of
building types and architectural styles and periods
represented.
[2] A concise statement of how the district meets the review
criteria of § 230-413D above.
[3] An explanation of the boundaries of the district.
[4] A definition of the types of structures that do not
contribute to the significance of the district and an
estimate of the number of noncontributing structures.
[5] A map showing the location of all district structures with
an identification of contributing structures.
(2) Studies; recommendations. Before making its recommendation
concerning the proposed establishment or expansion of an historic
district, historic site or historic landmark, the Commission may
conduct studies and research of the proposal. The Commission will
make a report to the City Administrator on every request received
within six months. Drafts of the report shall also be mailed to the
Maine Historic Preservation Commission in Augusta for review.
(3) Public hearing; final report. Before a final report is made to the
City, the Historic Preservation Commission shall hold a public
hearing on the request, after due notice is provided at least seven
days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general local
circulation. Written notice of the proposal shall be given to the
applicant, owners of all property to be included within the
proposed designation, and abutting property within a two-hundredfoot
radius of the property under consideration. Not later than 30
days after the public hearing, the Commission shall submit a final
report to the City Council.
(4) Action by the City Council. After receipt of the Commission's
recommendations, as provided above, the City Council shall
consider said proposed designation and approve or disapprove the
request. Within 20 days after the designation of any historic
§ 230-413 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-413
173:665
district, historic site or historic landmark, the owner of each
property so designated shall be given written notice.
(5) Applicability of this section. All land, buildings or structures within
an historic district are subject to the requirements of this chapter
after a district has been designated by the City Council. All historic
sites and landmarks are subject to the requirements of this chapter
after they have been so designated by the City Council.
F. Historic districts, historic sites and historic landmarks designated. The
following described lands, buildings, structures, or areas of the City are
designated historic districts, historic sites or historic landmarks as
follows:
(1) Districts.
(a) Beginning at Thornton Academy on the north end of Main
Street, the district takes in the grounds surrounding the
Academy and the football field on the opposite side of the
street. It then takes in all properties on both sides of Main
Street as far south as 146 Main. Beginning at the intersection
of Main and North Streets, it includes all properties on both
sides of North Street as far as the Boston and Maine Railroad
tracks. All properties on both sides of Vernon Street and Cross
Street are included, all properties on the north side of Cutts
Avenue, and properties on both sides of Elm Street from the
intersection of Elm Street and Main Street to the intersection
of Elm Street and Cutts Avenue are included. All buildings in
Pepperell Square are included. The full width and depth of all
lots, except for a portion of the Thornton Academy campus, as
depicted on the Official Zoning Map, are included for all
properties. [Amended 6-17-2002]
(b) Also, all lots on the north side of Beach Street beginning at
Middle Street Extension to Winter Street, except for Memorial
Field, where the boundary is an extension of the rear lot line of
Map 32, Lot 113; on Winter Street, Map 32, Lot 117; on the
south side of Beach Street from Map 32, Lot 98, on Beach
Street east to James Street, including Pepperell Park, defined
for this purpose as Map 32, Lot 65, but not including Fairfield
School and three feet of land around it. The full depth and
width of all the lots, except for the Fairfield School exception
noted above, as depicted on the Official Zoning Map, are
included. In the case of any discrepancies between the
boundaries of the district as described above and the map, the
map shall have precedence. [Amended 1-17-1995;
6-17-2002; 11-19-2007]
(c) Also, the following lots on Middle and School Streets: Map 31,
Lots 6, 7, 7-1, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 55 (limited
§ 230-413 SACO CITY CODE § 230-413
173:666
to the portion which is the location of the original Wardwell
Home), 63, 64, 65, and Map 32, Lots 89, 90, 91, 92, 94, and 96.
(d) Also, Map 38, Lot 183.
(2) Sites.
(3) Landmarks.
(a) Way Way Store, 97 Buxton Road, Tax Map 97, Lot 13, by action
of the City Council on May 23, 2011.
G. Uses permitted.
(1) Uses permitted in historic districts, historic sites or historic
landmarks shall be those set forth in § 230-410 for the zone in
which such district, site or landmark is located.
(2) Determinations of permitted and conditional uses shall continue to
be within the authority of the code enforcement office, the Planning
Board (for conditional uses), and the Zoning Board of Appeals, for
appeals of the Code Enforcement Officer's and Planning Board's
decisions, to the extent that those appeals are authorized under
this chapter.
H. Certificate of appropriateness.
(1) A certificate of appropriateness issued by the Commission shall be
required for any of the following:
(a) New construction of a principal or accessory building visible
from a public street where such building will be located in an
historic district or upon an historic site.
(b) Demolition of an historic landmark or demolition of any
building or portion of any building, including the removal of
architecture features from an historic landmark or a
contributing building in an historic district.
(c) Moving an historic landmark or any building located in an
historic district.
(d) Additions, alterations, or reconstruction, including porches
and steps, to existing buildings within an historic district or an
historic site where such addition would be clearly visible from
a public way.
(e) New signs placed in an historic district or an historic site or
historic landmark.
(f) New construction of walls, fences and parking lots in an
historic district within 75 feet of and clearly visible from a
public way.
§ 230-413 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-413
173:667
(g) Sandblasting of brick or stone buildings.
(2) Majority vote. After a quorum of the voting members has been
established in accordance with § 230-413C(7), an affirmative vote
of at least three of the quorum shall be required to issue a
certificate of appropriateness.
(3) Building permits. In any historic district and with respect to any
historic site or historic landmark, no building permit shall be issued
for any construction, alteration, or demolition until a corresponding
certificate of appropriateness, where required by this section, has
been issued by the Historic Preservation Commission.
I. Application for a certificate of appropriateness.
(1) Application forms, fees. Application for a certificate of
appropriateness shall be obtained from the City Planning
Department. No fee is required for a certificate of appropriateness
application.
(2) Application procedure. A completed application for a certificate of
appropriateness shall be submitted to the City Planning
Department, which shall verify that the requirements of Subsection
I(4) below have been met, then date it and transmit such
application to the Historic Preservation Commission for action. The
Commission shall consider each completed application within 21
days of the date of submittal of a complete application and, within
15 days following, approve, approve the application with
modifications, make recommendations for modifications to the
application, or deny the application. By mutual written consent of
the Commission and the applicant, the review period may be
extended. When the Commission acts on the application, it shall
notify the Code Enforcement Officer.
(3) Alternative procedure for review of installation or alteration of any
exterior sign; minor alterations; and temporary alterations.
(a) In order to process certificates of appropriateness more
efficiently, applications for minor alterations shall be reviewed
by the City Planning Department rather than the Historic
Preservation Commission. The City Planning Department shall
review the application to the standards of § 230-413 and
approve the application, approve it with modifications or deny
it within 10 working days of receiving a complete plan. No
public hearings or abutter notices are required for applications
reviewed under this section. If the Department has not acted
within 10 working days, the applicant may seek approval from
the Commission, rather than the Department. Inaction by the
City Planning Department does not constitute approval or
disapproval of the plan.
§ 230-413 SACO CITY CODE § 230-413
173:668
(b) If the applicant is not satisfied with the determination of the
Department, the applicant shall be permitted to have the entire
application reviewed by the Commission. The City Planning
Department can, for any reason, forward any minor alteration
to the Commission for review. The Department shall provide
the Commission with written notice of any action.
(c) For purposes of this section only, "temporary" is defined as
either a one-time occurrence that does not exceed 30 days or
as an annual occurrence that does not exceed one thirty-day
period each year.
(d) Minor alterations are defined as incidental changes or
additions to a building or site features which will neither result
in substantial changes to any significant historic features nor
obscure such features. In no event shall any change be deemed
minor when, in the determination of the Planning Department,
such change shall alter the historic character of the building or
site.
(4) Application contents. The application shall state the location, use
and nature of the matter for which such application is sought and
shall contain at least the information or documentation outlined in
Subsection I(4)(a) through (h) of this section. The Commission may
waive any application requirement if it determines that it is not
necessary to an application.
(a) The applicant's name, address, and interest in the subject
property. If not representing the owner, the applicant shall
provide evidence of right, title, or interest in the property.
(b) The owner's name and address, if different from the
applicant's, and the owner's signature.
(c) The address and the Tax Map and lot number.
(d) The present use and zoning classification of the subject
property.
(e) A brief description of the new construction, reconstruction,
alteration, maintenance, demolition or removal requiring the
issuance of the certificate of appropriateness.
(f) A scale drawing or drawings of the exterior architectural
features, indicating the design, texture, and location of any
proposed alteration, reconstruction, maintenance or new
construction for which the certificate is being applied. As used
herein, drawings shall mean plans or exterior elevations drawn
to scale, with sufficient detail to show, as far as they relate,
exterior appearances, the architectural design of the
building(s), including materials and textures, including
§ 230-413 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-413
173:669
samples of exterior materials. Drawings shall be clear,
complete and specific.
(g) Photographs of the building involved and of adjacent buildings.
(h) A site plan indicating improvements affecting appearance,
such as walls, walks, terraces, plantings accessory buildings,
signs, lights and other elements.
J. Administrative procedures.
(1) Notice to applicant and abutters. Prior to consideration of a
certificate of appropriateness, the City shall inform the applicant
and mail a notice to all persons owning abutting property of the
application. This section, however, shall not apply to applications
heard under § 230-413I(3). For purposes of the notice required
hereunder, the owners of property shall be considered to be those
against whom municipal taxes for real estate are assessed. Failure
of any person to receive notice shall not necessitate another
hearing or invalidate any action by the Commission.
(2) Hearing. The Commission will hold a public hearing on each
application before it. Applications under § 230-413I(3) do not
require a public hearing. A notice of the hearing will be mailed to
abutters and posted at City Hall at least five days before the public
hearing. In the case of an application for a new building or an
addition of over $1,000 estimated value, or in the case of the
demolition of any building, a hearing notice shall be placed in a
newspaper of general circulation.
(3) Approval. If the Commission determines that the proposed
construction, reconstruction, alteration, moving, or demolition
meets the standards of this chapter and is therefore appropriate, it
shall approve a certificate of appropriateness, and the City
Planning Office shall notify the applicant and Code Enforcement
Officer, in writing, of the determination and any conditions of
approval. [Amended 8-22-1994]
(4) Disapproval. If the Commission determines that a certificate of
appropriateness should not be issued, it shall make findings
describing how the application does not meet the standards of this
chapter. However, in order to prepare more-detailed findings, the
Commission may postpone the decision for up to two weeks or
allow itself up to an additional two weeks to prepare and adopt
more-detailed findings. The City Planner shall notify the applicant
and the Code Enforcement Officer within 10 days of the final
determination. [Amended 8-22-1994]
(5) Appeals. An appeal from the final decision of the Commission as to
any matter over which it has final authority may be taken by any
party or person aggrieved within 30 days from the date of the
decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 230-413 SACO CITY CODE § 230-413
173:670
(6) Time limits on certificates of appropriateness. If substantial
construction is not commenced within six months of the issuance of
a certificate of appropriateness, the approval shall be null and void.
The deadline may be extended for one additional six-month period
by the Planning Department upon the written request of the
applicant. The written request for an extension must be submitted
before the date of expiration of the approval. After the approval has
expired or an extension has been denied, the applicant may reapply
for site plan review at any time without prejudice. The extension
shall be approved by either the Planning Department or the
Commission, as outlined above, unless there is:
(a) Additional information that indicates that the plan does not
meet the standards of this chapter;
(b) Failure to meet a condition of approval;
(c) An amendment in this chapter that prohibits or alters the
proposed project.
K. Standards of evaluation.
(1) The standards and requirements in the United States Secretary of
the Interior's "Standards for Rehabilitation," as revised in 1990 (36
CFR Part 67, Historic Preservation Certifications), as well as the
standards of Subsection K(4) and (5) below, shall be used in review
of applications for certificates of appropriateness. Design
consideration and structural factors related to maintaining historic
structures in good condition shall be the Commission's primary
area of focus. Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a
compatible appearance for new or renovated buildings, structures,
and yards in the Historic Preservation District, or to maintain the
integrity of existing buildings, structures or grounds, giving due
consideration to the economic feasibility of maintaining such
buildings, structures or grounds.
(2) The standards of § 230-413K(7)(d) shall apply to demolitions.
(3) The following standards shall apply:
(a) A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in
a new use that requires minimal change to the defining
characteristics of the building and its site and environment.
(b) The historic character of a property shall be retained and
preserved. The removal of historic materials or alteration of
features and spaces that characterize a property shall be
avoided.
(c) Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its
time, place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of
historical development, such as adding conjectural features or
§ 230-413 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-413
173:671
architectural elements from other buildings, shall not be
undertaken.
(d) Most properties change over time; those changes that have
acquired historic significance in their own right shall be
retained and preserved.
(e) Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or
examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property shall
be preserved.
(f) Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than
replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires
replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall
match the old in design, color, texture, and other visual
qualities and, where possible, materials, subject to § 230-413L.
Replacement of missing features shall be substantiated by
documentary, physical, or pictorial evidence.
(g) Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that
cause damage to historic materials shall not be used. The
surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be
undertaken using the gentlest means possible.
(h) Significant archeological resources affected by a project shall
be protected and preserved. If such resources must be
disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken.
(i) New additions, exterior alterations, or related new
construction shall not destroy historic materials that
characterize the property. The new work shall be differentiated
from the old and shall be compatible with the massing, size,
scale, and architectural features to protect the historic
integrity of the property and its environment.
(j) New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall
be undertaken in such a manner that, if removed in the future,
the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its
environment would be unimpaired.
(4) Visual compatibility factors. Within historic districts and on historic
sites, new construction, additions to existing buildings or
structures and existing buildings and structures and
appurtenances thereof which are moved, reconstructed, materially
altered, repaired or changed through new exterior surfaces shall
be visually related generally in terms of the following factors:
(a) Height. In addition to complying with the height standard of
Table 412-1106 and the height waiver standards of § 230-412E,
the height of a proposed building or addition shall be visually
106. Editor's Note: Table 412-1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 230-413 SACO CITY CODE § 230-413
173:672
compatible with surrounding structures when viewed from a
public street.
(b) Width. The width of the building shall be compatible with
buildings, structures and open spaces to which it is visually
related.
(c) Windows and doors. The relationship of windows and doors in
a building shall be compatible with those windows and doors of
buildings to which the building is visually related, particularly
to adjacent historic buildings of the same period.
(d) Relation of solids to voids in front facades. The relationship of
solids to voids in the front facade of a building shall be
compatible with that of buildings to which it is visibly related.
(e) Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. The relationship of
the building to the open space between it and adjoining
buildings shall be compatible with those of buildings to which
it is visually related.
(f) Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projection. The relationship
of entrance and porch projections to sidewalks of a building
shall be compatible with those buildings to which it is visually
related.
(g) Relationship of materials and texture. The relationship of
materials and texture shall be compatible with that of
predominant materials used in buildings to which it is visually
related.
(h) Roof shapes. The roof shape of a building shall be compatible
with that of buildings to which it is visually related.
(i) Scale of buildings. The size of a building, the building mass in
relationship to open spaces, the windows, door openings,
porches and balconies shall be compatible with those
characteristics of buildings and spaces to which it is visually
related.
(j) Directional expression of front elevation. A building shall be
compatible with the building, squares and places to which it is
visually related in its directional character, whether this be
vertical character, horizontal character, or nondirectional
character.
(5) Construction of new buildings and structures in historic districts.
In addition to the standards above, the construction of a new
building or structure or an addition to an existing building or
structure within an historic district or on an historic site shall be
generally of such design, form, proportion, mass, configuration,
building material, texture, and location on a lot as will be
§ 230-413 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-413
173:673
compatible with other buildings in the historic district and with
streets and open spaces to which it is visually related and in
keeping with area.
(6) Signs.
(a) General. Signs shall be governed by the standards of
§ 230-707, Signs, and this section. If there is any conflict, the
stricter standards shall apply. All signs, either new or upon
alteration, require a certificate of appropriateness.
(b) Contemporary signage needs shall be met with signs designed
to be consistent with the architectural style of a building,
respectful of neighboring buildings, and carefully designed to
fit the facade in the case of attached signs. The design shall
take into account the scale, character and design of the
building, the traditional location of signage on area buildings,
the location of existing sign boards, lower cornices, lintels, and
other architectural elements, and the opportunity to use
signage as an element to enhance the appearance of building
entrances. Materials and workmanship shall convey a sense of
permanence and durability.
[1] Location. Wall signs generally shall be located no higher
than the windowsill line of the second story. The use of a
continuous sign-band extending over adjacent shops
within the same building is encouraged as a unifying
element. Where signage is proposed on street-level
windows, such signage should not substantially obscure
visibility through the window.
[2] Design. The size of signs and letters shall be at an
appropriate scale for pedestrians and slow-moving traffic.
Typefaces which are simple, easy to read, and scaled
appropriately for both the sign and building shall be used.
Pictographs (such as a projecting sign in the shape of a key
for a lock shop) can be an appropriate feature if consistent
with the standards of this chapter.
[3] Illumination. Generally signs, if illuminated, shall be
illuminated from a shielded, exterior source. The light
source should be concealed from direct view. However, the
Historic Preservation Commission (but not the Planning
Department) may approve certain special illuminated
signs. Special situations, such as marquees, or special
uses, such as cultural events or public activities, may be
appropriate exceptions where sensitively designed.
[4] Additional guidelines for special categories of signs:
[a] Awnings, canopies and marquees. The shape and size
of these devices shall correspond to the shape,
§ 230-413 SACO CITY CODE § 230-413
173:674
character and size of the opening over which they will
be installed and fully fill the width of the individual
window or door opening. Besides the signs standards
of this chapter, these sign types and all advertising
signs must comply with all other historic ordinance
design standards.
[b] Painted wall signs. Painted wall signs, such as
business names, may be appropriate if designed in
conformance with this chapter.
[c] Outdoor murals. Painted walls, such as murals and
trompe l'oeil (suggestive of architectural or other
three-dimensional objects) scenes, shall be used only
to enhance the streetscape, not for advertising
purposes.
(7) Demolition or removal.
(a) Scope. The following provisions apply to any proposal involving
the demolition, moving, or removal of any historic landmark, or
any building or structure, or any appurtenance thereto, in an
historic district. The purpose of this subsection is to further the
purposes of the section by preserving historic buildings which
are important to the education, culture, traditions, and the
economic value of the City, and to afford the City, interested
persons, historic societies or organizations the opportunity to
acquire or to arrange for the preservation of such buildings.
Furthermore, the purpose of this section is to afford the City,
and Historic Preservation Commission, other preservation
organizations and others interested in preservation the
opportunity to acquire or arrange for the preservation of
historic buildings and structures, or important portions and
features thereof, or the proper removal of historic artifacts, or
the proper recordation of the building, structure and/or site.
(b) Procedure. Any person proposing any activity falling within the
scope of this subsection shall first file an application for a
certificate. In addition to the regular submissions under
§ 230-413I, the applicant shall also submit evidence which
supports one or more of the approval standards of Subsection
K(7)(d) below. This might include evidence from a structural
engineer, an architectural historian, an appraiser, or other
qualified expert.
(c) Stay. At the hearing on an application to relocate or demolish a
contributing building in an historic preservation district, or an
historic landmark, or an historic site, the Commission may, in
the interest of exploring reasonable alternatives, delay
issuance of a permit for up to 120 days from the date of the
hearing. If, 10 days prior to the expiration of the delay period,
§ 230-413 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-413
173:675
the Commission finds that there are still reasonable
alternatives to explore, the Commission may continue the
delay for an additional period of up to 60 days. The purpose of
the delay is to find alternatives to demolition, such as:
[1] Assisting in securing funding to preserve in place the
building, structure, or important portions and features
thereof; or
[2] Finding other ways to preserve the building or structure,
such as outright purchase of the property, when feasible,
or relocation; or
[3] Proper recordation of buildings, structures and sites,
including photography and narrative report; or
[4] Preservation of historic artifacts.
(d) Standards of approval. In order to approve an application for
the relocation or demolition of a contributing building in an
historic preservation district, or of an historic landmark or an
historic site, the Commission must find that the proposal meets
one of the following standards of approval:
[1] Not a contributing structure in the historic district nor an
historic landmark or site. The determination of what is a
contributing structure is based on the "Saco Historic
Resources Inventory," marked "(late 1999)," and "The
Middle Street-School Street Area - April 7, 1997."
[2] The Commission determines that the building or structure
is not of historical significance.
[3] The building or structure, or predominant portions
thereof, has been determined by the Chief Code
Enforcement Officer to represent an immediate hazard to
the public health or safety because of severe structural
deficiencies, which hazard can not be abated by
reasonable measures.
[4] No prudent and feasible alternative exists.
[5] The property is deteriorated beyond repair.
(e) Conditions of approval. In approving an application for the
demolition of a contributing building in an historic
preservation district, or an historic landmark or historic site,
the Commission may impose the following conditions:
[1] Photographic, video, or drawn recordation of the property
to be demolished; and/or
§ 230-413 SACO CITY CODE § 230-413
173:676
§ 230-414. Multiple dwellings and/or uses on one lot.
[2] Reasonable salvage and curation of significant elements;
and/or
[3] Other reasonable mitigation measures.
(f) Hazard buildings. No provision in this chapter shall be
construed to prevent the alteration, demolition, or relocation of
a building when the Chief Code Enforcement Officer certifies
that such action is required for the public safety.
L. Ordinary maintenance; safety.
(1) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in an
historic district or of any historic landmark which does not involve
a change in the design, material, or outward appearance thereof.
Paint color and the preparation of a wooden building for painting,
and the construction of legally required ramps for access by the
handicapped, shall be specifically excluded from the scope of this
section.
(2) Nothing in this section shall prevent the construction,
reconstruction, restoration, or demolition of any feature which the
Code Enforcement Officer shall determine is a required condition
because of concerns about the safety of the building and its
occupants.
M. Appeals; hardship. An appeal from the final decision of the Commission
may be taken by any party or person aggrieved to the Zoning Board of
Appeals within 30 days from the date of the decision.
N. Conflict with other ordinances. This section shall not repeal, annul, or
in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with any other
ordinance, law, regulation or bylaw. Where this section imposes a
higher and/or stricter standard, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail.
O. Amendments. The City Council, the Planning Board, or the Commission
itself may initiate action to amend this section. The request to amend
shall be referred to the Commission for a report within 90 days thereon.
The Commission shall hold a public hearing before the report is made to
the City Council. Notice of the hearing shall be made public by notice in
a newspaper of general local circulation at least seven days before the
public hearing. The Planning Board shall also make a recommendation
to the City Council.
A. Except as permitted under Subsection B below, no more than one
single-family or two-family dwelling and its accessory buildings as
regulated by this chapter may be located on any one lot, except in the
case of multifamily complexes that meet all other applicable sections of
§ 230-413 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-414
173:677
§ 230-415. Coordination of permitting and reviews within the Saco
River Overlay District.
§ 230-416. Additional requirements for a master planned
development. [Amended 7-1-2013]
the chapter. Commercial buildings may be permitted on the same lot
as single-family and two-family dwellings in business districts only,
provided that the combined uses and buildings are in the same
ownership, remain in the same ownership, and meet the lot size
requirements of Table 412-1, Line A.107
B. A second single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling in the same
ownership as the first may be located on a lot only if the street frontage
requirement, without variance, is met for each principal building or
structure located on the lot, and the placement of the buildings will
allow division of the lot in conformance with the minimum lot and yard
regulations of the district in which it is located as expressed in Table
412-1. [Amended 9-6-1994; 7-16-2012]
A. Activities within the Saco River Overlay District are subject to the
regulations of both the City of Saco and the Saco River Corridor
Commission. Construction, development, and some other activities
require a permit or approval from both the City and the Corridor
Commission.
B. Activities within the Saco River Overlay District must conform to the
applicable City regulations as well as to the Commission's regulations.
Where there is conflict between the two sets of requirements, the more
stringent or restrictive shall govern.
C. To coordinate the review and permitting process, applicants or
potential applicants should first determine if the proposed activity is
allowed under the City's regulations and the City standards that will
apply. The applicant should then obtain a permit for the activity from
the Saco River Corridor Commission. Once the Corridor Commission
permit has been obtained, the applicant should apply for any City
permits or approvals needed for the project. Obtaining a permit from
the Corridor Commission does not absolve the applicant of the
requirement to obtain all necessary City permits and approvals.
[Amended 4-3-2002]
A. General.
(1) Any proposal for a master planned development must conform to
the requirements of this section. The approval of a master planned
development involves a two-phase process as follows:
107. Editor's Note: Table 412-1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 230-414 SACO CITY CODE § 230-416
173:678
(a) The site inventory and analysis and master plan phase. The site
inventory and analysis involves the preparation and review of a
detailed analysis of the existing conditions on the site, the
opportunities and constraints these conditions create for the
use and development of the site, and the factors that must be
addressed in the development of the master plan for the
master planned development. The master plan phase involves
the preparation and review of a conceptual master plan for the
overall master planned development and the development
standards that will apply to individual buildings, subdivisions,
or phases of the development based upon the results of the site
inventory and analysis. Approval of the master plan and
development standards must occur before any application is
submitted for site plan review or subdivision approval.
(b) The site plan or subdivision review phase involves the
preparation and review of the detailed development plans for
individual buildings, subdivisions, or phases of the
development in accordance with the City's site plan review
provisions and/or Subdivision Ordinance requirements. In
addition to conforming to the requirements of those chapters
and the other zoning requirements, a master planned
development must demonstrate that it is consistent with the
approved master plan and its development standards.
(2) In addition, a developer or property owner considering a master
planned development may go through a conceptual review as set
forth in Subsection D. This review is optional. The conceptual
review is intended to be informational, and the results of this
review are not binding on the applicant or on the Planning Board.
B. Where permitted. Master planned developments are permitted only in
those zones where they are expressly allowed by the standards of the
zone.
C. Area included in a master planned development.
(1) The intention of these requirements is that a master planned
development includes a substantial area that will allow for the
master planning of a significant development activity. If a parcel is
less than 10 acres, the entire area of the parcel must be included in
the master planned development, unless the Planning Board
determines otherwise based upon the unique characteristics of the
parcel or existing development on the parcel. For lots with 10 acres
or more, the Planning Board may permit a portion of the parcel to
be treated as a master planned development, or the parcel to be
treated as more than one master planned development, if it finds
that such treatment will be consistent with the provisions of this
section and will result in a coordinated development approach for
the entire holding. If the Planning Board allows a master planned
§ 230-416 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-416
173:679
development that is less than the entire parcel, the master planned
development must include at least five acres.
(2) If the Planning Board allows a master planned development to
include less than the entire parcel or if it permits multiple master
planned developments on a parcel, the site inventory and analysis,
the conceptual site plan, and preliminary infrastructure plan
submitted for the initial master planned development must cover
the entire area of the parcel, unless the Planning Board determines
that the areas of the parcel not included are unlikely to be
developed in the future due to site constraints or legal restrictions
on development such as easements. The materials submitted for
the entire site must allow the Planning Board to evaluate the
overall utilization of the entire parcel and how the master planned
development under consideration fits into the overall development
plan.
D. Conceptual review.
(1) The purpose of the conceptual review is to allow the property
owner or developer to discuss the preliminary concepts for the
master planned development with the planning staff and Planning
Board. As such, the review is intended to be informal and
educational in nature. The Planning Board's feedback on the
preliminary concepts is nonbinding.
(2) If an applicant wants to go through the conceptual review process,
the applicant shall provide 12 copies of the following information to
the planning staff:
(a) A map showing the location of the property under discussion.
(b) Evidence of right, title, or interest in the property, such as a
deed, lease, option, or purchase and sale agreement.
(c) A preliminary site analysis based on available information
identifying the possible opportunities and constraints that the
natural and built environments create for the use and
development of the site. This analysis should tentatively
identify the portions of the site anticipated to be suitable for
development as well as areas that are potentially unbuildable
or suitable as open space or conservation areas.
(d) A narrative and accompanying sketches describing the
potential development concept and how the development
concept is consistent with the appropriate approval criteria.
(e) An indication of any submission requirements for which the
applicant may be interested in requesting waivers.
(3) The Planning Board shall review the materials at a meeting of the
Planning Board. All property owners that are entitled to notice
§ 230-416 SACO CITY CODE § 230-416
173:680
under Subsection F(3) will be notified of the meeting. The result
of the Planning Board review will be to provide the applicant with
guidance as to whether the potential development is consistent
with the general intent of the master planned development
provisions, issues or questions that will need to be addressed in
subsequent submissions, and on the suitability of possible waivers
of the submission requirements of Subsection E.
E. Site inventory and analysis and master plan phase. This phase consists
of the preparation of a site inventory and analysis together with
development of a master plan for the development based on the site
analysis. This section lays out the requirements for the site inventory
and analysis and the master plan.
(1) Site inventory and analysis.
(a) The site inventory and analysis is intended to provide the
applicant, Planning Board, staff, boards and utility districts,
and public with a better understanding of the overall site and
the opportunities and constraints that the natural and built
environments create for the use and development of the site.
The expectation is that the preparation of the inventory and
analysis will result in a master plan for the master planned
development that reflects and is sensitive to the conditions on
the site, that preserves areas that should be protected from
development or intensive use, that utilizes the areas of the site
that are most suitable for development for intensive use and
development, and that recognizes and addresses identified
constraints or limitations of the site.
(b) The site inventory and analysis shall include the following four
elements plus any additional information the applicant wishes
to submit to enable the Planning Board to evaluate the site and
its development potential:
[1] A site context or locus map.
[2] A site inventory plan.
[3] A site analysis plan.
[4] A site analysis narrative.
(c) Each element shall include all of the information set forth
below together with any supplemental information desired by
the applicant. The Planning Board may not waive the
submission of any of the four required elements, but may waive
the submission of individual pieces of data or information
required for any of the four required elements upon written
request of the applicant and a finding, by formal vote of the
Board, that the information is not needed to understand the
§ 230-416 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-416
173:681
conditions of the site and the opportunities and constraints
resulting from these conditions.
[1] The site context or locus map shall show the location of the
development in the City and its relationship to adjacent
property. The map shall be drawn at a size adequate to
show the relationship of the proposed development to the
adjacent properties within 500 feet of the site and to allow
the Board to locate the site within the municipality. The
location map shall show:
[a] Existing subdivisions or other developments.
[b] Approved but undeveloped subdivisions or other
developments.
[c] Locations and names of existing streets.
[d] Boundaries and designations of zoning districts.
[e] An outline of the land included in the master planned
development and of the overall parcel, if different.
[2] The site inventory plan shall show the existing natural
features and resources and the built environment on and
within 500 feet of the site. The plan shall be an accurate
scale plan of the site at a scale of not more than 100 feet to
the inch. If this scale is not adequate to show critical
details of the inventory, the Planning Board may require
larger-scale plans be provided for these portions of the
site. The plan must show the following as a minimum:
[a] The proposed name of the development, North arrow
(True Meridian), date, and scale.
[b] The owner's and applicant's name and address and the
names and addresses of consultants who aided in
preparing the inventory and analysis.
[c] Evidence of right, title, or interest in the property,
such as a deed, lease, option, or purchase and sale
agreement.
[d] The boundaries of the property and all contiguous
property under the control of the owner or applicant
based upon a standard boundary survey prepared by a
registered land surveyor and giving the bearings and
distances of all property lines. The Planning Board
may waive the requirement for a boundary survey
when sufficient information is available to establish,
on the ground, all property boundaries.
§ 230-416 SACO CITY CODE § 230-416
173:682
[e] The zoning classification(s) of the property and the
location of zoning district boundaries if the property is
located in two or more zoning districts or abuts a
different zone.
[f] Existing restrictions or easements on the site (if none,
so state).
[g] The topography of the site at two-foot intervals.
[h] The location, extent, and, where appropriate, value or
condition of the natural features and historic features
of the site, and within 500 feet of the site, including,
but not limited to, floodplains, wetlands, vernal pools,
streams, ponds, open drainagecourses, sand and
gravel aquifers, scenic views or areas, significant
wildlife habitats, habitat areas for rare and
endangered plants and animals, deer wintering areas,
stands of trees, stone walls, graveyards, fences,
unique natural areas, buildings more than 50 years
old, other historically significant structures or
features, archaeologically significant features, or
other important unusual natural site features or areas.
Information on adjacent properties may be from
published sources.
[i] The soils on the site through a medium-intensity soil
survey. The Planning Board may require the
submission of a high-intensity soils survey if it
determines that a high-intensity survey is required to
evaluate the appropriate use of the property.
[j] Vegetative cover conditions on the property according
to general cover type, and the identification of any
exceptional specimens, including any trees with a
diameter at breast height of more than 24 inches.
[k] Watershed and subwatershed boundaries.
[l] The groundwater hydrology beneath the site,
including any information from test pits, borings, or
existing wells.
[m] Existing buildings, structures, or other improvements
on the site, including streets, driveways, stone walls,
fences, trails, and cemeteries (if none, so state).
[n] The location and size of existing utilities or
improvements servicing the site (if none, so state).
[3] The site analysis plan shall be at the same scale as the
inventory plan (see Subsection E(1)(c)[2] above) and
§ 230-416 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-416
173:683
highlight the opportunities and constraints of the site in
a bubble diagram or annotated format. This plan must
enable the Planning Board to determine which portions of
the site:
[a] Are well-suited for the proposed use;
[b] Are unsuitable or have significant limitations for
development or use;
[c] Have potential conservation or open space value that
should be addressed in the master plan; and
[d] May be subject to or create off-site conflicts or
concerns (noise, lighting, visual intrusion, traffic,
etc.).
[4] The site analysis narrative must describe the existing
conditions of the site, the constraints and opportunities
created by the site, the potential for mitigating any
potential conflicts or concerns, the development potential
of the site, and the open space conservation potential of
the site. This submission should include a narrative
description of the existing road system that will provide
access to the project and any issues related to traffic
capacity, safety, sight distances, or other traffic
considerations, together with any preliminary studies done
relative to the site, including traffic studies, market
studies, or other information that will help the Board
understand the site and the proposed project.
(2) Master plan.
(a) The master plan is intended to lay out, in general terms, how
the master planned development will be developed, including
the proposed use of various parts of the site, the primary road
and pedestrian network, primary utility network, overall
approach to stormwater management, proposed development
areas, proposed open space areas, and proposed buffer areas,
and the development standards that will apply to development
proposals. The intention of this plan is to provide the overall
development framework for the district into which specific
projects can then be fitted to produce a coordinated
development.
(b) The master plan shall include the following six elements, plus
any additional information the applicant wishes to submit to
enable the Planning Board to evaluate the proposed
development and the treatment of the site vis-a-vis the site
inventory and analysis. These elements may be combined if
appropriate.
§ 230-416 SACO CITY CODE § 230-416
173:684
[1] A development narrative.
[2] A conceptual site plan.
[3] A preliminary infrastructure plan.
[4] A neighborhood impact mitigation plan if the development
abuts a residential zone.
[5] An environmental assessment.
[6] Development and design standards.
(c) Each element shall include all of the information set forth
below, together with any supplemental information desired by
the applicant. The Planning Board may waive the submission of
any of the required items as well as the submission of
individual pieces of data or information required for any of the
six required elements upon written request of the applicant
and a finding, by formal vote of the Board, that the information
is not needed to understand how the proposed development
relates to the conditions of the site or the proposed nature of
development, or that the information is not appropriate given
the scale of the development.
[1] The development narrative must describe the overall
nature of the proposed development, the general
utilization of the site, the types and scale of anticipated
development, and provisions to address the constraints
and limitations identified in the site inventory and analysis.
The development narrative must specifically address how
the master planned development standards of the zone in
which the development is located will be met. The
narrative must include a projected timeline for the
development of the project and/or a description of the
phasing of the development, if applicable.
[2] The conceptual site plan must be an accurate, scaled plan,
at the same scale as the site analysis plan submitted as
part of the site inventory and analysis, and show the
proposed layout of the site, the proposed use of various
parts of the site, the primary road and pedestrian network,
primary utility network, overall approach to stormwater
management, proposed development areas, proposed
open space areas, and proposed buffer areas. The
conceptual site plan may show proposed uses in a bubble
diagram or similar conceptual format and does not need to
include the location of individual buildings. However, if
buildings are not shown on the conceptual site plan, the
development standards (see Subsection E(2)(c)[5] below)
must address the site and architectural design issues
related to the design of individual buildings and sites.
§ 230-416 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-416
173:685
[3] The preliminary infrastructure plan must show the layout
and preliminary design of the various infrastructure
components that will serve as the core infrastructure for
the site if the site will have any internal infrastructure/
utility networks. This should address off-site infrastructure
improvements where necessary. The plan should include
the proposed primary road network within the
development as well as access into and out of the site, the
public water and sewerage systems, the overall approach
to stormwater management, including any mitigation
activities to comply with state stormwater requirements,
electric, cable, and fiberoptic systems, and any shared or
common facilities, such as parking or service areas.
[4] The neighborhood impact mitigation plan must describe
how the impacts of the proposed development on
neighboring residential areas, including traffic, noise,
exterior lighting, and visual considerations, will be
minimized. The impact mitigation plan must specify the
areas that will be retained as buffers and how those areas
will be treated and protected. The plan must include any
specific standards or requirements that will be imposed on
individual buildings or projects, such as increased
setbacks, buffering or landscaping, and similar measures.
[5] The environmental assessment must identify and evaluate
the importance of the natural resources on the site based
upon the site inventory and analysis, detail how the
conceptual site plan has been designed to minimize
encroachment on high-value resources identified in the
site inventory and analysis, describe actions that will be
taken to reduce adverse impacts on these resources from
the proposed use of the site, and describe what mitigation
activities will be undertaken to compensate for any
undesirable negative impacts.
[6] Development and design standards that will apply to
individual buildings or projects if the conceptual site plan
does not address site and building design issues. The
standards should assure that the development will
conform to the design standards of § 230-729 and result in
a coordinated, visually integrated development. These
standards must address, at a minimum, parking layout and
design, landscaping, exterior lighting, signage, pedestrian
and bicycle facilities, noise, and architectural design and
details.
F. Review and approval of the site inventory and analysis and master plan.
(1) Every applicant applying for approval of a master plan for a master
planned development shall submit to the Planning Department a
§ 230-416 SACO CITY CODE § 230-416
173:686
completed application form and 12 copies of a complete site
inventory and analysis and master plan for the proposed
development, which shall be prepared in accordance with
Subsection E and accompanied by a fee as prescribed by the City's
Cost Recovery Ordinance.108
(2) After an application is submitted, the Planning Department, within
10 working days, shall determine whether all information required
under Subsection E, or requests for waivers of submission for items
that have not been addressed, have been submitted. Any requests
for waivers must be explained in detail and supported by
substantial evidence, where appropriate. If the application appears
to be complete, it shall be scheduled for Planning Board
consideration. Nothing in this subsection shall preclude a
determination by the Planning Board that additional information is
needed before the application is treated as complete. A
determination of completeness by the Planning Board does not
constitute approval of any waiver requests, unless a specific finding
to that effect is made by the Planning Board.
(3) Prior to taking action on a master plan application, the Planning
Board shall hold a public hearing. Property owners shall be notified
by first-class mail at least seven days prior to a public hearing.
Property owners in the Conservation District, any industrial
district, the Resource Protection District, or the R-1, R-2, and R-4
Districts shall be notified of the hearing if their property is within
600 feet of the applicant's property. Property owners in the R-3
District or any business or mixed-use district shall be notified if
their property is within 200 feet of the applicant's property. Failure
of any property owner to receive a notice shall not necessitate
another hearing or invalidate any action by the Planning Board.
The hearing shall also be advertised in a local newspaper at least
seven days prior to a public hearing.
(4) The Planning Board shall act to approve, approve with conditions,
or disapprove the master plan within 30 days of the close of the
public hearing, or by a date mutually agreeable with the applicant.
(5) The Planning Board shall approve the master plan only if it finds
that it complies with the following criteria. The Planning Board may
impose conditions on its approval of the master plan if it finds that
such conditions are necessary for the master plan to comply with
the approval criteria.
(a) The master plan is consistent with the site inventory and
analysis and reflects a reasonable utilization of the site given
both environmental and built-environment considerations.
Areas that are proposed to be intensively developed or used
are located in the areas identified for development in the site
108. Editor's Note: See Ch. 83, Cost Recovery.
§ 230-416 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-416
173:687
inventory and analysis. Areas that were identified as being
unsuitable for development in the site inventory and analysis
are protected, and the adverse impacts of development
mitigated. Areas that were identified as having open space or
conservation and natural resource value in the site inventory
and analysis have been addressed and the resource value
maintained through the utilization of the site, mitigation
activities, and/or on- or off-site compensatory activities. Other
issues and concerns identified in the site inventory and
analysis have been appropriately addressed in the master plan.
(b) The master plan is consistent with the space and bulk
standards, the development standards, and other requirements
for master planned developments in the zoning district in
which it is located.
(c) The master plan demonstrates that the infrastructure needed
to serve the development, including water supply, sewage
disposal, power, telecommunications, and other utilities, is
available or can be reasonably expected to be able to be
provided and will not create an unreasonable burden on the
infrastructure systems.
(d) The master plan demonstrates that street system can
accommodate the traffic that will be generated by the
development or that improvements can be reasonably made to
accommodate the traffic.
(e) The master plan demonstrates that runoff from the
development will be managed to maximize on-site infiltration
and minimize discharge from the site and that any runoff from
the site can be accommodated by the City's stormwater system
or that improvements can be reasonably made to accommodate
the runoff.
(f) The master plan is consistent with any zoning district specific
approval criteria set out in Subsection G or H.
G. Additional standards of approval for a master plan for a master planned
development in the MU-3 District. In addition to the general standards
of approval set out in Subsection F(5), the Planning Board shall approve
a master plan for a master planned development in the MU-3 District
only if it finds that the master plan conforms to all of the following
additional standards. When the master plan involves only a portion of
the parcel, the Planning Board shall consider both the conceptual
development of the entire parcel and the development of the proposed
master planned development in determining if these additional
standards will be met. The Planning Board may condition its approval of
the master plan on phasing of the development and/or the applicant
addressing specific issues or questions in the site plan review process
§ 230-416 SACO CITY CODE § 230-416
173:688
when additional information is available and/or detailed design or
engineering has been completed.
(1) The master plan must demonstrate that the development will result
in the creation of high-quality, mixed-use neighborhood that is
consistent with the vision for the planned mixed use development
area set out in the City's 2011 Update of the Comprehensive Plan.
(2) The overall development concept must provide for a mix of
residential and nonresidential uses and must assure that both
components of the neighborhood will be developed in a timely
manner.
(3) The master plan must result in the creation of a mixed-use
neighborhood in which residential and nonresidential uses are
integrated both with designated development areas and within
individual buildings. A plan that proposes that part of the
development area be exclusively residential while the balance of
the development area is exclusively nonresidential is not consistent
with this standard. While some development areas may be devoted
exclusively to one type of use, the objective is that there be a mix of
uses throughout the neighborhood.
(4) The residential uses proposed as part of the master plan should
include a mix of housing types.
(5) The nonresidential uses proposed as part of the master plan must
be compatible with and integrated into the overall neighborhood
development. Provisions must be included in the master plan to
minimize and mitigate any potential conflicts between residential
and nonresidential uses. Large parking lots should be avoided and
parking provided in smaller, well-landscaped lots.
(6) If retail uses are proposed as part of the master plan, these uses
should be intended to either primarily serve residents and workers
in the neighborhood or adjacent neighborhoods or offer goods and
services that complement goods and services offered by the
downtown business community or in other commercial districts.
The master plan must demonstrate how this standard will be met.
(7) The overall layout of the development, including the street system,
must result in a neighborhood in which all or most buildings and
other centers of activity are internally focused rather than focused
on Route 1. Vehicle access to individual buildings or lots should be
primarily from the internal street network. The creation of curb
cuts on Route 1 to serve individual lots or buildings should be
avoided.
(8) The proposed street system serving the development should create
an interconnected network that allows vehicles to move about the
neighborhood without having to use existing arterials or collectors.
The street network within the development should also be
§ 230-416 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-416
173:689
interconnected, and dead-end streets should be avoided. The
internal street network should be connected to the existing street
network at appropriate locations and should provide access to all
adjacent arterials and collectors if feasible.
(9) The overall character of the development should be urban rather
than suburban. Most buildings should be located close to the
street, and parking lots should be located to the side or rear of most
buildings, although provision for limited parking between a
building and the street may be appropriate for convenience retail
and service uses. Major buildings should be more than one story
and should include a mix of uses. The urban design standards of
§ 230-729 should guide the character of the neighborhood.
(10) The design of streets within the neighborhood should be urban in
character with provisions for sidewalks or other pedestrianways,
street trees, and lighting. The master plan must demonstrate how
this requirement will be met.
(11) The neighborhood must be pedestrian-friendly and provide a high
level of pedestrian and bicycle facilities. The master plan should
provide for the creation of pedestrian and bicycle networks that
allow people to move within the neighborhood. The neighborhood's
pedestrian and bicycle networks should connect to the City's
existing facilities and to the Eastern Trail where feasible.
(12) The neighborhood must include a network of parks, recreation
areas, and conservation land/open space. At a minimum, at least
15% of the total area of the development and at least 5% of the
developable area of the master planned development must be set
aside for these purposes. The location and type of land should be
based on the site inventory and analysis and should create an
interconnected "green" network where feasible and consistent with
the site analysis.
(13) The master plan should address opportunities for alternative
transportation, such as mass transit. Provisions for bus stops or
other facilities should be incorporated into the master plan if
appropriate. A plan that proposes reducing the amount of parking
provided in exchange for support for transit service is appropriate
and may be approved by the Planning Board as part of the master
plan.
H. Additional standards of approval for a master plan for a master planned
development in the MU-4 District. In addition to the general standards
of approval set out in Subsection F(5), the Planning Board shall approve
a master plan for a master planned development in the MU-4 District
only if it finds that the master plan conforms to all of the following
additional standards. The Planning Board may condition its approval of
the master plan on the applicant addressing specific issues or questions
§ 230-416 SACO CITY CODE § 230-416
173:690
in the site plan review process when additional information is available
and/or detailed design or engineering has been completed.
(1) The master plan assures that areas that are identified in the site
inventory and analysis as being unsuitable or having significant
limitations for development or use are preserved as open space to
the extent practical, that areas that are identified as having
potential conservation or open space value have been considered
for inclusion in any open space, and that development in these
areas is minimized to the extent practical.
(2) The master plan assures that the treatment of areas along the
perimeter of the MU-4 District that are adjacent to existing
residential uses are done in a manner that minimizes any negative
impacts on the adjacent residential uses, including visual intrusion,
exterior lighting, noise, traffic, or other external factors.
(3) The master plan assures that the treatment of areas adjacent to
existing public streets creates an attractive urban streetscape that
is compatible with the pattern of the adjacent neighborhood and
results in the transition of the development into the adjacent
neighborhood, taking into consideration the scale and massing of
any buildings or structures in this area, the orientation of buildings
to the street if they are located within 100 feet of the street, the
location of parking, vehicular drives, and service areas, including
limitations on parking between buildings and existing streets, and
any proposed improvements within the street right-of-way.
§ 230-416 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-416
173:691

ARTICLE V
Nonconformance
§ 230-501. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate nonconforming lots, uses, and
structures, as defined in this chapter, such that they can be reasonably
developed, maintained or repaired, or changed to other less nonconforming
or to conforming uses. When nonconforming uses fall into disuse, the intent
of the article is not to allow them to be reestablished after a twelve-month
period of dormancy.
§ 230-502. Nonconforming lots.
A. Vacant lots.
(1) A nonconforming lot of record may be built upon, provided that
such lot shall be in separate ownership and not contiguous with any
other lot in the same ownership, except as provided in Subsection
A(2) and (3) below. [Amended 2-24-2014]
(2) If two or more vacant, contiguous lots or parcels are in single or
joint ownership of record at the time of adoption or amendment of
this chapter, if these lots do not individually meet the dimensional
requirements of this chapter or subsequent amendment, the lots
shall be combined to the extent necessary to meet the dimensional
standards, except where the contiguous lots front onto different
streets or where the lots were legally created and recorded as part
of an approved subdivision after March 22, 1972, the date of
adoption of Saco's subdivision standards.
(3) If two contiguous lots or parcels are in common ownership of
record at the time of the adoption of this chapter, January 3, 1985,
and either lot does not individually meet the dimensional
requirements of this chapter, and provided that one lot is vacant or
contains no principal structure and the other lot has a principal
structure, the lots shall be combined into one lot of record. This
shall apply to lots or parcels within all zoning districts in the City of
Saco. This shall not apply to contiguous lots with frontage on
different streets, or to lots legally created and recorded as part of
an approved subdivision after March 22, 1972, the date of adoption
of Saco's subdivision standards. [Amended 2-24-2014]
(4) In the Shoreland Zone, two or more contiguous lots, at least one of
which is nonconforming, owned by the same person or persons on
or before the effective date of the shoreland provisions in this
chapter shall be considered one lot. [Amended 2-24-2014]
B. Built lots.
(1) A structure built on a lot prior to enactment of this chapter, which
lot does not conform to lot area or lot frontage, may be repaired,
§ 230-501 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-502
173:693
§ 230-503. Nonconforming uses.
maintained or improved, and may be enlarged in conformity with
all dimensional requirements of this chapter, except lot area or lot
frontage. If the proposed enlargement of the structure(s) cannot
meet the dimensional requirements of this chapter, a variance shall
be required from the Board of Appeals.
(2) If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in single or joint
ownership of record at the time of adoption or amendment of this
chapter, if all or part of the lots do not meet the dimensional
requirements of this chapter, and if a principal use exists on each
lot, the nonconforming lots may be conveyed separately or
together, provided all state law and local ordinance requirements
are complied with.
A. Continuance. The use of land, building or structure, lawful at the time
of adoption of this chapter, may continue although such use does not
conform to the provisions of this chapter.
B. Resumption.
(1) Whenever a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use of
a structure, or structure and land in combination, such structure or
combination of land and structure shall thereafter conform to the
provisions of this chapter, and the nonconforming use may not
thereafter be resumed.
(2) This provision shall not apply to the resumption of a use of a
residential structure, provided that the structure has been used or
maintained for residential purposes during the preceding five-year
period. [Amended 4-21-1992]
C. Discontinuance. A nonconforming use which is discontinued for a
period of 12 months may not be resumed. The uses of the land, building
or structure shall thereafter conform to the provisions of this chapter.
D. Change of nonconforming use. With the permission of the Planning
Board, an existing nonconforming use may be changed to another
nonconforming use, provided that the proposed use is equally or more
appropriate within the zoning district. The Planning Board shall make
this determination after making a finding that the proposed use will be
an improvement over the prior use based on the conditional use
standards, § 230-901D and E, in shoreland areas. The Planning Board
review and decision shall be governed by this section and by § 230-901.
[Amended 11-6-1989]
E. Expansion of use.
(1) A nonconforming use, including a nonconforming outdoor use of
land, shall not be extended or expanded in area or function;
provided, however that a nonconforming use may be extended
§ 230-502 SACO CITY CODE § 230-503
173:694
§ 230-504. Nonconforming structures.
throughout any part of a building or structure that was lawfully and
manifestly designed or arranged for such use as of the effective
date of this chapter.
(2) Expansions of nonconforming uses are prohibited, except that
nonconforming residential uses in the Resource Protection District
may be expanded under the provisions of § 230-504A(3)(e).
[Amended 5-12-2014]
F. Earth removal. In the case of earth removal operations, the removal of
earth may not be extended as a nonconforming use beyond the setback
lines required in this chapter of the specific lot or parcel of land upon
which such removal operations are in progress at the time at which
such use has become nonconforming without securing a variance from
the Board of Appeals. Adjacent parcels in the same or different
ownerships shall not be eligible for exemption under the
nonconforming use provisions unless earth removal operations have
been in progress prior to the enactment of these provisions.
A. Maintenance and enlargement. [Amended 5-21-2012]
(1) A structure in existence as of the effective date of this chapter
which does not meet the lot and yard requirements in § 230-412
may be repaired, maintained and improved. It may be enlarged
and/or accessory structures may be added to the site without a
variance, provided that the enlargement or accessory structure
itself meets the setback and height requirements of the district in
which it is located and that the enlargement or accessory structure
in combination with the existing structure does not exceed the
prescribed maximum lot coverage. Vertical enlargements of singlefamily
or two-family dwellings that are nonconforming with regard
to setbacks may be permitted if each of the following is met:
(a) The proposed use of the enlarged space is habitable residential
space. No enlargements are permitted to expand space for a
use that is nonconforming in the district.
(b) The closest point of the new construction shall be no nearer to
the property line than the closest point on the existing building
upon which the vertical enlargement is proposed.
(c) Enlargements constructed under these provisions shall not
increase the height of the vertical face of the building more
than 10 feet vertically within the setback. The height of the
new eaves within the setback shall not exceed 22 feet, when
measured from original grade to the new eaves. Mansard and
gambrel roofs, or similar roofs, and full dormers, or roof
pitches greater than 12/12 are not permitted above the new
§ 230-503 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-504
173:695
eaves. Two single-window dormers above the new eaves are
permitted, but each may not exceed four feet in width.
(d) The nonconforming portion of the existing structure on which
the addition is built is no closer than six feet from the side or
rear property line upon which it encroaches. If the building
code requires the new construction to be fire-rated, the
existing first-floor construction in the setback shall be
reconstructed to the same fire-rated standard.
(e) The closest point of the nonconforming portion of the existing
structure on which the addition is built is no closer than 15 feet
to the front property line.
(f) All other relevant standards of this chapter not related to
setbacks are met.
(g) The standards of the Floodplain Development Ordinance,
Chapter 106, must be met.
(2) The following activities shall not constitute an enlargement or
creation of a nonconforming structure, and may encroach into
front, side or rear yard setbacks, without the need for a variance
from the Board of Appeals, if any of the following conditions are
present:
(a) The addition of an open patio with no structure elevated above
ground level, and the addition is outside of the Mandatory
Shoreland Zone;
(b) The addition of steps from the first floor to the ground level in
any zone;
(c) The placing of a foundation below a nonconforming structure
in any zone.
(3) Further limitations in Shoreland Zones. Except as otherwise
provided in this article, a nonconforming condition shall not be
permitted to become more nonconforming. Further limitations and
exceptions in the Shoreland Zones: [Amended 6-29-2009;
2-24-2014; 5-12-2014]
(a) After January 1, 1989, if any portion of a structure is less than
the required setback from a water body or tributary stream or
the upland edge of a wetland, that portion of the structure shall
not be expanded in floor area or volume, by 30% or more,
during the lifetime of the structure. If a replacement structure
conforms with the requirements of § 230-504B and is less than
the required setback from a water body, tributary stream or
wetland, the replacement structure may not be expanded if the
original structure existing on January 1, 1989, had been
expanded by 30% in floor area and volume since that date.
§ 230-504 SACO CITY CODE § 230-504
173:696
(b) Whenever a new, enlarged, or replacement foundation is
constructed under a nonconforming structure, the structure
and new foundation must be placed such that the setback
requirement is met to the greatest practical extent as
determined by the Planning Board, basing its decision on the
criteria specified in § 230-504E. If the completed foundation
does not extend beyond the exterior dimensions of the
structure, except for expansion in conformity with this section,
and the foundation does not cause the structure to be elevated
by more than three additional feet, as measured from the uphill
side of the structure (from original ground level to the bottom
of the first-floor sill), it shall not be considered to be an
expansion of the structure.
(c) No structure which is less than the required setback from the
normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or
upland edge of a wetland shall be expanded toward the water
body, tributary stream, or wetland.
(d) A nonconforming structure in the RP Zone may be added to or
expanded as measured in floor area or volume by up to 30%
upon issuance of a permit from the Code Enforcement Office, if
such addition or expansion does not increase the
nonconformity of the structure and is in accordance with
Subsection A(3)(a) through (c) above. [Amended 5-12-2014]
B. Reconstruction. [Amended 10-24-2016]
(1) Any nonconforming building or structure which is removed,
damaged or destroyed, regardless of the cause, by more than 50%
of the market value of the structure before such damage,
destruction or removal, may be reconstructed or replaced,
provided that a permit is obtained within 18 months of the date of
said damage, destruction or removal, and provided that such
reconstruction or replacement is in compliance with all
dimensional requirements of this chapter to the greatest extent
practical as determined by the Planning Board in accordance with
the purposes of this chapter. In no case shall a structure be
reconstructed or replaced so as to increase its nonconformity.
(2) If the reconstructed or replacement structure is less than the
required setback, it shall not be any larger than the original
structure, except as allowed pursuant to Subsection A(3) above, as
determined by the nonconforming floor area and volume of the
reconstructed or replaced structure at its new location. If the total
floor area and volume of the original structure can be relocated or
reconstructed beyond the required setback area, no portion of the
relocated or reconstructed structure shall be replaced or
constructed at less than the setback requirement for a new
structure. When it is necessary to remove vegetation in order to
§ 230-504 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-504
173:697
replace or reconstruct a structure, vegetation shall be replanted in
accordance with § 230-504E.
(3) Any nonconforming structure which is located less than the
required setback from a water body, tributary stream, or wetland
and which is removed by 50% or less of the market value, or
damaged or destroyed by 50% or less of the market value of the
structure, excluding normal maintenance and repair, may be
reconstructed in place if a permit is obtained from the Code
Enforcement Officer within one year of such damage, destruction
or removal.
C. Reconstruction in floodplains. Any building in existence prior to January
1, 2012, which is located in an area of special flood hazard and which is
thereafter substantially improved, as defined in Chapter 106 of the
Saco City Code, may be elevated pursuant to the standards of Chapter
106, and may be allowed to exceed the height limits of this chapter
without need for a variance from the Board of Appeals, as long as all of
the following standards are met: [Amended 5-21-2012]
(1) If the building, prior to reconstruction, had a height of 30 feet or
greater, as defined by this chapter, the overall height of the
reconstructed building may exceed the required height in the zone
in which it is located without the need for a variance, but by no
more than the distance that the lowest floor (including basement) is
raised above its original elevation during reconstruction.
(2) If the building, prior to reconstruction, had a height of less than 30
feet, as defined by this chapter, the building shall not be allowed to
be reconstructed higher than the maximum height requirement,
unless a variance is applied for and granted by the Board of
Appeals.
(3) Any reconstructed building shall meet all of the requirements of the
Department of Environmental Protection Sand Dune Act and
Regulations, if it is located in a designated dune area.
D. Off-street parking and loading spaces.
(1) A building or structure which is nonconforming as to the
requirements for off-street parking space shall not be enlarged or
altered to create additional dwelling units, seats, or
accommodations unless off-street parking is provided for such
enlargement or alteration itself sufficient to satisfy the requirement
of this chapter.
(2) A building which is nonconforming as to the requirements for offstreet
loading space shall not be enlarged or added to unless offstreet
space is provided sufficient to satisfy the requirements of
this chapter for the addition or enlargement.
E. Relocation.
§ 230-504 SACO CITY CODE § 230-504
173:698
§ 230-505. Transfer of ownership.
Ownership of lots and structures which remain lawful but became
nonconforming by the adoption or amendment of this chapter may be
(1) A nonconforming structure may be relocated within the boundaries
of the parcel on which the structure is located, provided that the
site of relocation conforms to all setback requirements to the
greatest practical extent as determined by the Planning Board, and
provided that the applicant demonstrates that the present
subsurface sewage disposal system meets the requirements of
state law and the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal
Rules (Rules), or that a new system can be installed in compliance
with the law and said rules. In no case shall a structure be
relocated in a manner that causes the structure to be more
nonconforming.
(2) In determining whether the building relocation meets the setback
to the greatest practical extent, the Planning Board shall consider
the size of the lot, the slope of the land, the potential for soil
erosion, the location of other structures on the property and on
adjacent properties, the location of the septic system and other onsite
soils suitable for septic systems, and the type and amount of
vegetation to be removed to accomplish the relocation. When it is
necessary to remove vegetation within the water or wetland
setback area in order to relocate a structure, the Planning Board
shall require replanting of native vegetation to compensate for the
destroyed vegetation. In addition, the area from which the
relocated structure was removed must be replanted with
vegetation. Replanting shall be required as follows:
(a) Trees removed in order to relocate a structure must be
replanted with at least one native tree, three feet in height, for
every tree removed. If more than five trees are planted, no one
species of tree shall make up more than 50% of the number of
trees planted. Replaced trees must be planted no further from
the water or wetland than the trees that were removed.
(b) Other woody and herbaceous vegetation, and ground cover,
that are removed or destroyed in order to relocate a structure
must be reestablished. An area at least the same size as the
area where vegetation and/or ground cover was disturbed,
damaged, or removed must be reestablished within the setback
area. The vegetation and/or ground cover must consist of
similar native vegetation and/or ground cover that was
disturbed, destroyed or removed.
(c) Where feasible, when a structure is relocated on a parcel, the
original location of the structure shall be replanted with
vegetation which may consist of grasses, shrubs, trees, or a
combination thereof. [Amended 4-21-1992]
§ 230-504 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-505
173:699
transferred, and the new owner may continue the nonconforming use or
continue to use the nonconforming structure or lot, subject to the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 230-505 SACO CITY CODE § 230-505
173:700
ARTICLE VI
Clustered Residential Development
[Amended 6-19-1989; 1-4-1999; 6-6-2002]
§ 230-601. Purpose.
§ 230-602. Performance standards.
A. Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, the Planning Board, in
reviewing and approving proposed residential subdivisions, may modify
provisions relating to space and bulk to permit innovative approaches
to housing and environmental design in accordance with the standards
of this article. Such modifications of space and bulk provisions shall not
be construed as granting variances to relieve hardship. The purpose of
this article shall be to encourage housing development that will result
in:
(1) Preservation of open space to serve recreational and scenic
purposes and to provide adequate recreation opportunities to
residents.
(2) Improved living environments which offer variety and choice in
housing and permit more economical housing to be constructed.
(3) A pattern of development in harmony with the natural features of
land.
(4) Economical subdivision layout, and efficient use of the land, with
smaller networks of utilities and streets.
A. The provisions of this article apply to subdivisions for single-family and
two-family dwellings in the C-1, R-1a and R-1d Zoning Districts. The
minimum area of land in a cluster residential development shall be 15
acres in the R-1a and R-1d Districts and 30 acres in the C-1 Zoning
District. Cluster residential development is not permitted in other
districts. The minimum acreage limitation shall not be applicable to
developments on land contiguous with an existing or approved cluster
development, provided that the Planning Board finds that the proposed
cluster development is designed as an extension of the existing or
previously approved cluster development. The Planning Board shall
base the determination on the compatibility of the lot layouts, the
compatibility of the housing types and densities, and the degree to
which the road network is integrated. In the case of a previously
approved contiguous cluster development which is not built, evidence
that it will be built shall be submitted.
B. Applicants for developments of 10 or more dwelling units shall present
a plan of development assuring that buyers at each phase are offered
adequate levels of service, sufficient open space, and adequate levels of
amenities.
§ 230-601 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-602
173:701
C. All dwelling units in a cluster development shall be connected to the
Biddeford Saco Water Company supply.
D. All dwelling units in a cluster development shall be connected to the
municipal sanitary sewer system.
E. The approximate location of each building shall be indicated on the
plan.
F. Overall net residential density of the development shall not exceed the
density allowed under the "net residential acreage" definition of this
chapter nor exceed that which would be obtained under normal
subdivision provisions. A drawing and calculations clearly showing the
net residential acreage and density, and a drawing showing the
maximum number of lots feasible under regular subdivision provisions,
shall be submitted.
G. Lots, frontage, buffers, setbacks. If the development includes individual
lots for single-family detached or two-family dwellings:
(1) Lot size shall not be reduced to less than:
(a) 20,000 square feet in the C-1 District.
(b) 10,000 square feet in the R-1a District.
(c) 7,500 square feet in the R-1d District.
(2) Frontage.
(a) Each lot shall have frontage on a public way or on a street
proposed by the applicant, as follows:
[1] C-1 District: 100 feet.
[2] R-1a District: 75 feet.
[3] R-1d District: 75 feet.
(b) Up to 10% of lots in a cluster subdivision may have frontages
reduced below the frontage requirements stated in this
subsection, but not below 25 feet. Lots with frontage reduced
under this provision shall not be adjacent to more than one
other such reduced-frontage lot, as determined at the front lot
line.
(3) Front yard setbacks shall not be reduced by more than 50% of
those specified in the district requirements.
(4) The Planning Board may reduce side and rear yards at its
discretion, using the provision of adequate light, ventilation,
firesafety, emergency access, and privacy as review criteria.
§ 230-602 SACO CITY CODE § 230-602
173:702
§ 230-603. (Reserved)
§ 230-604. Common open space.
(5) Perimeter setbacks and adequate screening shall ensure the
protection of existing and proposed development adjacent to the
cluster where adjacent developments are not fully compatible.
H. (Reserved)
I. Cluster developments shall have no more than one driveway per 500
feet of road frontage on arterial streets. The Planning Board may
require a second access for public safety purposes.
J. The use of land shall not differ from the uses permitted and conditional
in the zoning district in which the development is located.
A. The total area of reserved common land within the development shall
not be less than 35% of the entire parcel. The open space shall be
shown on the recorded subdivision plan with appropriate notation that
it shall not be used for future building lots and shall not be further
subdivided.
B. Common open space shall not include areas devoted to public or private
vehicular streets, driveways or parking spaces.
C. The common open space shall be usable for low-intensity recreation,
such as hiking, skiing and picnicking, agriculture or other outdoor
living purposes, including structures accessory thereto, and for
preserving the natural features of the site, and for active recreation
use. The use of any open space may be further limited or controlled at
the time of final subdivision approval where necessary to protect
adjacent properties.
D. Where a cluster development abuts a water body, a portion of the
shoreline, as well as reasonable access to it, shall be part of the
common open space.
E. The common open space shall be accessible to the residents of the
development.
F. With the agreement of the Planning Board, the developer may dedicate
the open space to the City for the use of all its citizens, or to another
government agency or recognized land stewardship organization
willing and able to manage the land permanently.
G. If common open space is not dedicated to public use, it shall be
protected by legal arrangements, satisfactory to the Planning Board,
sufficient to assure its maintenance and preservation for whatever
purpose it is intended. Covenants or other legal arrangements
submitted with the final plan shall specify ownership of the cluster open
space; method of maintenance taxes and insurance; compulsory
§ 230-602 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-604
173:703
membership and compulsory assessment provisions; guarantees that
any association formed to own and maintain cluster open space will not
be dissolved without the consent of the Planning Board; and any other
specifications deemed necessary by the Planning Board.
H. The developer shall maintain control of common green spaces and
facilities and be responsible for their maintenance until development
sufficient to support the association has taken place. The association
bylaws shall specify at what point maintenance is taken over by the
association. All maintenance is the responsibility of the developer until
that time.
I. If the common open space is in the form of farmland, appropriate
covenants restricting its use shall be approved by the Planning Board as
part of the final subdivision approval. The covenants shall provide for
the ownership and maintenance of the open space in the event that it is
no longer farmed.
J. Cluster open space shall include irreplaceable natural features located
on the tract, such as, but not limited to, stream buffers, significant
stands of trees, individual trees of significant size, rock outcroppings,
excessive slopes, open fields and meadows, prime agricultural soils,
scenic vistas, historic and archaeological sites, wetlands and wet areas.
K. The suitability of cluster open space intended for scenic value and
purposes shall be determined by its visibility from a significant number
of units or buildings, or the length of public or private streets from
which it can be seen. When a cluster development is proposed for land
with frontage on an existing arterial, a portion of common open space
shall include the area between the building sites and the existing road
right-of-way.
L. Space suitable for active recreation shall be included in the cluster
subdivision open space. Active recreation shall include activities which
require substantial construction and maintenance for recreation use,
including playgrounds, tennis courts, ballfields, basketball courts, and
similar facilities.
(1) The following table provides the minimum active open space
reservations required in cluster subdivisions:
Average Density Per Dwelling
Unit
(square feet)
Active Open Space Required
(percent of subdivision)
80,000 or more 1.5%
40,000 to 79,999 2.5%
20,000 to 39,999 4%
10,000 to 19,999 5%
§ 230-604 SACO CITY CODE § 230-604
173:704
§ 230-605. Landscaping and buffer yards.
§ 230-606. Site considerations; approval criteria.
(2) Land reserved for active open space shall be of a character,
configuration, and location suitable for the particular use intended.
A site intended to be used as a playfield should be level and dry,
have a total frontage on one or more streets of at least 50 feet, and
have no major dimensions of less than 200 feet. The Planning Board
shall determine if other active recreation areas are suitable for the
intended uses.
M. In determining the suitability of open space and active open space, the
Board shall consider the proximity of the subdivision to neighboring
dedicated open space or recreation facilities; the needs identified in the
comprehensive land use plan or recreation plan for open space or
recreation facilities in the neighborhood surrounding the subdivision;
the type of development and the demographic characteristics of
potential residents in the subdivision; and the density of the
development.
N. Where the land in the subdivision is not suitable for active recreation,
or is insufficient in amount, or where the subdivider and the Planning
Board agree that residents of the subdivision would be better served by
a nearby public recreation facility, a fee in lieu of dedication of the
active recreation land may be deposited to a City recreation facility
improvement and acquisition reserve fund. The amount of such
contribution shall be $500 per lot, and it shall be made before any
construction begins. Any funds deposited to such a fund shall be
returned to the developer if not used for the intended purpose within
five years of the date of the deposit of funds with the City.
A. Where the proximity of proposed buildings in a cluster residential
development, or the arrangement of lots, or the compatibility with
neighboring uses is not adequate because of the nature of the cluster
design and the nature of the neighboring uses, a detailed plan and
specifications for landscaping and screening which will afford adequate
buffering and screening is required. Existing vegetation shall be
retained and maintained to the extent possible so as to permit such
vegetation to fulfill or contribute to buffer and screening requirements.
B. Maintenance of landscaping. All required landscaping and screening
shall be maintained or replanted as necessary so as to continue its
effectiveness. Financial security shall be provided as required by the
Saco Subdivision Regulations.
A. A subdivision plan for a cluster development shall provide for a total
environment better than that which could be achieved under standard
regulations. If, in the opinion of the Planning Board, the proposed plan
could be significantly improved with respect to the criteria listed below
by the reasonable modification of the location of cluster open space or
§ 230-604 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-606
173:705
§ 230-607. Submission requirements and additional standards.
buildings or configurations of lots, streets, buffers and landscaping, and
parking areas, the proposed plan shall be so modified or denied. In
acting on the proposed plan, the Planning Board shall make specific
findings of fact as to whether the proposal has addressed the following
criteria:
(1) Diversity in lot and building layout achieves a superior relationship
between development and the land than would be possible under
regular subdivision regulations.
(2) Individual lots, buildings, streets, and parking areas are designed
and situated to minimize alteration of the natural site features to be
preserved and with respect for scenic vistas, natural features and
potential solar access.
(3) Individual lots, buildings, and units are arranged and situated to
relate to surrounding properties, and to lessen area devoted to
motor vehicle access, and to minimize the adverse effects of
shadows, noise, and traffic on the residents of the site.
(4) Planting, landscaping, disposition and form of buildings, fencing
and screening used to integrate the proposed development with the
landscape and the character of any surrounding developments are
adequate for that purpose.
(5) The cluster development conforms to the purposes and standards
of the Saco Subdivision Regulations, except where this article
prescribes additional or different requirements.
(6) The provision for active recreation, whether on site or off, is
adequate to meet the needs of the residents.
A. The submission requirements for a development proposed under this
article shall be the same as those required in the Saco Subdivision
Regulations, except when additional information is required in this
article.
B. Additional information required.
(1) Applicants for developments which require construction of the
whole subdivision at once shall present a plan of development
assuring that buyers at each phase are offered adequate levels of
service, sufficient open space, and adequate levels of amenities.
(2) A drawing and calculations clearly showing the net residential
acreage and density, and a drawing showing the maximum number
of lots feasible under regular subdivision provisions, shall be
submitted.
(3) Covenants or other legal arrangements submitted with the final
plan shall specify ownership of the cluster open space; method of
§ 230-606 SACO CITY CODE § 230-607
173:706
§ 230-608. Procedures.
Consideration and approval of cluster residential development follows a
four-step procedure, including subdivision review with which it is
coordinated. The first review is preliminary clustered residential
development review. This is followed by preliminary subdivision review
and final subdivision review. Final clustered residential development review
is conducted contemporaneously with final subdivision review, with the
determination for final clustered residential development review necessary
before a determination on final subdivision review. Procedures are as
outlined in the Saco Subdivision Regulations, except where alternative
procedures and requirements are set out in this article.
§ 230-609. Preliminary cluster residential development review.
maintenance taxes and insurance; compulsory membership and
compulsory assessment provisions; guarantees that any association
formed to own and maintain cluster open space will not be
dissolved without the consent of the Planning Board; and any other
specifications deemed necessary by the Planning Board.
(4) A site plan prepared by a registered landscape architect shall be
submitted for any cluster development of 10 dwelling units or
more.
C. The Planning Board may require additional information to be submitted
in order to ascertain whether the purposes and approval criteria of this
article, this chapter, and the subdivision regulations are met.
A. This initial review is conducted in order to help the applicant and
Planning Board ascertain before engineering a plan whether a cluster
subdivision design appears to be in keeping with the purposes and
criteria of this article. A public hearing shall be held for this review. The
Planning Board may schedule an on-site inspection, if necessary.
B. Submissions for a preliminary cluster residential development review
plan shall include those items listed in Sections 4.2.1 and 4.2.2 of the
Subdivision Regulations and the following:
(1) Topography plan;
(2) Wetlands plan;
(3) A plan and calculations clearly showing the net residential acreage
and density;
(4) A plan showing the maximum number of lots feasible under regular
subdivision provisions;
(5) A plan showing the proposed cluster subdivision design;
§ 230-607 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-609
173:707
§ 230-610. Subdivision review and final clustered residential
development review.
Only plans that have been approved may continue to be considered under
this article. Following approval of the preliminary clustered residential
development, the applicant shall follow the procedures for subdivision
review. Where subdivision requirements are less extensive or superseded
by this article, the provisions of this article shall apply. Final clustered
residential development review is conducted contemporaneously with final
subdivision review, with the determination for final clustered residential
review preceding the determination on final subdivision review. The basis
of the final clustered residential development determination is the approval
criteria of this article. These two final determinations may occur on the
same agenda. The public hearing held for final subdivision review shall also
include final clustered residential development review.
§ 230-611. Appeals.
Appeals from determinations made under Article VI may be appealed to the
York County Superior Court within 30 days.
(6) A written narrative explaining how the cluster subdivision design
would attempt to meet the purpose and approval criteria of this
article, except § 230-606A(5).
C. The preliminary clustered residential development review plan shall not
be considered the commencement of the regular subdivision review
process. The submittal and preliminary cluster residential development
review shall not be considered the initiation of the review process for
the purposes of bringing the plan under the protection of 1 M.R.S.A.
§ 302.
D. Within 45 days of the close of the public hearing on the preliminary
clustered residential development, the Planning Board shall make
findings on the plan, then approve the plan, approve the plan with
modifications or deny the plan. The basis of this determination is the
approval criteria of this article, except § 230-606A(5).
§ 230-609 SACO CITY CODE § 230-611
173:708
ARTICLE VII
Standards of Performance
§ 230-701. Agriculture.
A. Animal breeding or care, including stables. The keeping or raising of
animals, including fowl, for any commercial purposes shall be subject to
the following: [Amended 11-1-1993]
(1) All pens, stables, barns, coops or other building shelters for
animals shall be set back no less than 150 feet from any lot line.
(2) Animal breeding or care, as defined in this section, shall be
permitted only on lots with five acres or more of land area (the area
of water bodies or wetlands may be included).
(3) No manure shall be stored within 300 feet of the normal high-water
line of any water body, watercourse, or wetland, or wells used to
supply water for human consumption.
(4) The landowner shall fence in any area in which his animals are
allowed to roam with a fence of a type and height adequate to
contain his livestock.
(5) Any kennels or "runs" shall be constructed of masonry or a similar
material to provide for cleanliness, ease of maintenance, and noise
control.
B. Roadside agricultural stands. Temporary roadside stands for the sale of
agricultural products shall be considered as accessory uses and
permitted in districts where retail sales otherwise are not allowed if:
(1) They are erected at least 50 feet back from the nearest edge of
roadway surface.
(2) They are used principally for the sale of agricultural products
grown on the premises.
(3) Parking spaces are provided off the road right-of-way.
(4) Signs shall conform to provisions set forth in § 230-707.
C. Mechanical repair services. Mechanical repair services, allowed as
conditional uses elsewhere in this chapter, are subject to the following
standards: [Amended 8-1-1985]
(1) No building or structure used in connection with such services may
be located within 100 feet from any lot line.
(2) No repairs may be conducted within 100 feet from any lot line.
(3) No equipment or vehicles left for repair may be located or stored
outside within 150 feet from any lot line; no outside storage shall be
§ 230-701 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-701
173:709
permitted except for temporary storage of equipment or vehicles
which are to be repaired.
(4) All roads providing access to the service shall be treated in a
proper manner to eliminate dust or mud.
(5) Hours of operation shall be restricted to between 7:00 a.m. and
8:00 p.m., unless otherwise permitted by the Planning Board.
(6) Any sign shall comply with § 230-707.
(7) The standards in Article VIII and § 230-901D shall be met.
D. Domestic chickens. [Amended 7-20-2009]
(1) The keeping or raising of a small number of domestic chickens shall
be allowed on a noncommercial basis. The City recognizes that
adverse neighborhood impacts may result from the keeping of
domesticated chickens as a result of noise, odor, unsanitary animal
living conditions, unsanitary waste storage and removal, the
attraction of predators, rodents, insects, or parasites, and loose
animals leaving the owner's property. This section is intended to
create standards and requirements that ensure that domestic
chickens do not adversely impact the neighborhood surrounding
the property on which the chickens are kept.
(a) A permit is required from the Code Enforcement Office for the
keeping of domesticated chickens. Additionally, a building
permit is required for the construction of a henhouse and
chicken pen, or the conversion of any existing structure or
portion of structure. The permit is specific to the permittee and
may not be assigned. In the event that the keeping of chickens
is discontinued for longer than six months, the permit shall
become void. Any fees related to domestic chickens shall be set
by City Council after a public hearing.
(b) The maximum number of chickens allowed is six per lot,
regardless of the number of dwelling units on the lot.
(c) Only female chickens are allowed. There is no restriction on
chicken species.
(d) Chickens must be kept in a clean, dry and odor-free enclosure
or fenced area at all times. During daylight hours, chickens
may be allowed outside of the chicken pen in a securely fenced
yard in a manner that will not disturb the use or enjoyment of
neighboring lots due to noise, odor or other adverse impact.
Chickens shall be secured within the henhouse during nondaylight
hours.
(e) Henhouses and chicken pens shall only be located in rear yards
and are subject to a twenty-five-foot setback from all property
lines. For a corner lot or other property where no rear yard
§ 230-701 SACO CITY CODE § 230-701
173:710
§ 230-702. Earth removal.
exists, a side yard may be used as long as the twenty-five-foot
setback is met. A henhouse shall not be placed in a front yard.
(f) Provision must be made for the storage and removal of chicken
manure to the satisfaction of the Animal Control Officer. All
stored manure shall be covered by a fully enclosed structure
with a roof or lid over the entire structure. No more than three
cubic feet of manure shall be stored at one time. In addition,
the henhouse, chicken pen and surrounding area must be kept
free from trash and accumulated droppings.
(g) Odors from chickens or chicken manure shall not be
perceptible at the property boundaries.
(2) Prohibited activities:
(a) No person shall sell eggs or engage in chicken breeding or
fertilizer production for commercial purposes.
(b) The slaughtering of chickens is prohibited.
A. Exemptions. The following earthmoving activities shall be exempt from
these standards:
(1) The removal or transfer of less than 20 cubic yards of material from
or onto any lot in any twelve-month period.
(2) The removal or transfer of material incidental to construction,
alteration or repair of a building or in the grading and landscaping
incidental thereto.
(3) The removal or transfer of material incidental to construction,
alteration, or repair of a public or private way or essential services.
(4) Any gravel pit with a valid, local approval prior to January 2, 1985.
B. Standards. Topsoil, rock, sand, gravel, and similar earth materials,
unless listed as an exempt activity in Subsection A above, may be
removed from locations where permitted under the terms of this
chapter only after a special permit for such operations has been issued
by the Building Inspector upon approval of the Planning Board of a final
site plan in accordance with Article XI, and granting of a conditional use
permit in accordance with Article IX of this chapter, and provided
further that the following standards are met:
(1) Specific plans are established to avoid hazards from excessive
slopes or standing water. Where an embankment must be left upon
the completion of operations, it shall be at a slope not steeper than
one foot vertical to four feet horizontal. Embankments around any
pond or water body also shall be a slope not steeper than one foot
vertical to four feet horizontal, and this gradient shall extend at
§ 230-701 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-702
173:711
least six feet from the edge of said water body toward its center.
These dimensional standards shall also apply to the creation of the
new farm ponds, and the recontouring of existing ponds when such
recontouring is proposed by the applicant.
(2) The operation shall be shielded from surrounding property with
adequate screening, consisting of a vegetated buffer at least 15
feet wide, planted with shade trees (minimum 2.5 inches' to three
inches' caliper, planted at least every 35 feet along the road
frontage, and along common property lines) and dense mediumheight
shrubs (greater than three feet in height on maturity). The
Planning Board may allow the use of earth berms, stone walls and
other permanent landscape features to substitute for some of the
shrub requirement. No earth removal operation shall create any
disturbances of water sources. Fill shall not restrict a floodway,
channel, or natural drainageway.
(3) The operation, when terminated, shall not detract from the
appearance or value of nearby property.
(4) The operation shall not abuse or destroy the ecological balance of
any area.
(5) The edge of all working shall be set back from the property lines a
minimum of 150 feet.
(6) No excavation shall be extended below the grade of adjacent
streets unless 150 feet from the street line.
(7) Soil shall not be left in a disturbed, unreclaimed state any longer
than necessary, and shall be treated in accordance with an
approved soil erosion and sediment control plan.
(8) Any topsoil and subsoil suitable for purposes of revegetation shall,
to the extent required for restoration, be stripped from the location
of extraction and stockpiled for use in restoring the location after
extraction operations have ceased. Such stockpiles shall be
protected from erosion according to the erosion prevention
performance standards of this chapter and the erosion and
sediment control standards approved as part of any approval from
the Planning Board.
(9) All access/egress roads leading to/from the excavation site to
public ways shall be treated with approved materials, such as
bituminous pavement, crushed stone, or concrete, to reduce dust
and mud for a distance of at least 100 feet from such public ways.
Public ways giving access to the site shall be kept free of any clay,
gravel, mud or other materials from the earth removal operation.
(10) The hours of operation of any extraction site shall be limited to 7:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m., unless otherwise specified by the Planning Board.
§ 230-702 SACO CITY CODE § 230-702
173:712
(11) Excavation of peat deposits shall, where permitted, be conducted
in accordance with all recommendations from the Department of
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, and the United States Soil
Conservation Service. Where ponds or standing water will be
created or enlarged by the excavations, the resulting depth shall be
controlled in order to avoid creating pools of stagnant water or
other conditions unsuitable for fish and/or waterfowl after
reclamation. After consulting with technical experts, the Planning
Board may require the creation of islands or an irregular-shaped
shoreline in order to create favorable waterfowl nesting habitat
conditions. Discharges into adjacent water bodies or watercourses
shall minimize increases in turbidity, sedimentation, pH levels, or
fiber pollution which would be likely to affect fisheries.
(12)No permit shall be issued without a surety bond or other equivalent
security to ensure compliance with such conditions as the Planning
Board may impose. The bond or surety shall be in an amount
recommended by the Building Inspector, and approved by the
Planning Board, as sufficient to guarantee conformity with the
conditions of approval, taking inflation into account. No permit
shall be issued for a period to exceed three years, although such
permit may be renewed for additional periods in the same manner.
At the point of renewal, the Planning Board may require
conformance with any new provisions of the rules and regulations
governing the permitted operations and may recalculate the surety
guarantee accordingly.
(13)No operation shall result in the discharge of contaminants to any
surface water or groundwater resource.
(14)No earth removal activity shall utilize a substandard public road for
primary access, as defined in the Subdivision Regulations of the
City of Saco.
(15) All vehicles removing material from an earth removal operation
shall be covered to prevent any materials from falling from the
back of the vehicle. It shall be the responsibility of the owner/
operator of the earth removal operation to ensure compliance.
C. Submission requirements. In addition to the items required to be
submitted as part of site plan and conditional use review, the following
items shall be submitted:
(1) Time period of operation.
(2) Method of operation.
(3) Weight and loading limit of trucks.
(4) Estimate of, and provisions to clean up, sand and gravel spillage
upon public streets.
§ 230-702 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-702
173:713
(5) A reclamation plan, in conformance with the standards in the
"Maine Erosion Sediment Control Handbook for Construction: Best
Management Practices" by the Cumberland County Soil and Water
Conservation District and the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection, latest revision.
(6) The specific measures, such as diversions, silting basins, terraces,
temporary ground cover and runoff filters, to be used to control soil
erosion and prevent sedimentation of streams.
(7) Where a stream bank is proposed to be excavated, the approval by
the Department of Environmental Protection.
(8) A hydrogeologic study to determine impacts to the local
groundwater system and any neighboring wells.
(9) A plan, signed and stamped by a Maine licensed engineer, to bring
any access roads up to the required standards.
(10) A stormwater management plan, prepared by a Maine licensed
engineer, designed to maintain predevelopment flows off the site.
The plan shall also address sediment and nutrient transportation
off site and shall maintain predevelopment rates.
(11) Where the Planning Board finds that, due to special circumstances
of a particular plan, the submission of required exhibits is not
necessary or is inappropriate because of the nature of the proposed
development, it may waive such requirements subject to
appropriate conditions. The Planning Board may require
submission of such additional information as it deems necessary for
proper review. A written request for such a waiver shall accompany
the application. Waivers will be considered for applications of less
than 10,000 square feet of soil disturbance within a five-year
period.
D. Conditions. The Planning Board may impose other reasonable
conditions to safeguard the health, safety, and welfare of the
community, including those that relate to:
(1) Type and location of temporary structures.
(2) Routes for transporting material.
(3) Provision of temporary or permanent drainage.
(4) Disposition of stumps, brush and boulders.
(5) Cleaning, repair, and/or resurfacing of streets used in removal
activity.
(6) Proof of approval from the Department of Environmental
Protection for all extraction activities.
§ 230-702 SACO CITY CODE § 230-702
173:714
§ 230-703. Campgrounds.
(7) Restrictions on times of hauling material to avoid conflicts with
periods of heavy pedestrian or school traffic.
E. Insurance. Every property owner, before commencing removal of earth
material, shall file with the City Clerk a certificate of insurance, in an
amount not less than $1,000,000, against liability arising from
production or activities or operations incident thereto conducted or
carried out under or by virtue of any law or ordinance imposed by the
Planning Board, and such insurance shall be kept in full force and effect
during the period of operation and for 12 months thereafter. No existing
rock, gravel or sandpit will be extended or expanded until the owner
has complied with the provisions of this chapter and obtained a permit
therefor. [Amended 4-16-1996]
A. General. [Amended 11-7-2005]
(1) All campgrounds shall comply with state and local law relative to
water and sewer systems, sanitary stations, and convenience
facilities.
(2) A campground must be constructed on at least 10 acres of land,
and all camping units or structures shall be located at least 200
feet from any residence not owned or used by the campground
owners.
(3) Each area proposed for a tent site or parking space for a travel
trailer, pickup camper, motorized camper, or tent trailer must
contain at least 2,500 square feet. The sites shall be roughly
rectangular with no dimension less than 30 feet.
(4) The maintenance of all open space areas, roads, and utilities in a
campground shall be the responsibility of the campground
management.
(5) In applying for a conditional use permit, an applicant proposing to
construct a campground shall furnish specific information
concerning the campground, including a site plan illustrating the
location and design of the proposed sewage disposal and water
supply systems, the means of firefighting, and the type and location
of roads within the campground, and all other submissions
required for a conditional use permit.
(6) Except for the storage of unoccupied recreational vehicles, parks
shall be open only between April 15 and October 31. From
November 1 of one year to April 14 of the following year, no person
shall occupy any site, the water services to all sites shall be turned
off or disconnected, and the electrical service to all sites shall be
turned off or disconnected.
§ 230-702 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-703
173:715
(7) Two parking spaces for passenger vehicles shall be provided for
each recreational vehicle site. One parking space for a passenger
vehicle shall be provided for each tenting site. The parking spaces
shall be on or within 500 feet of the site. No parking space may
block walkways or interfere with traffic flow within the park.
(8) No rigid enclosed addition shall be affixed to a recreational vehicle
other than a recreational vehicle accessory enclosure, as herein
defined.
(9) Retained plantings or a planted buffer strip is required in areas
visible or likely to be visible from neighboring properties.
(10)No electrical service line shall be installed without first obtaining
all required electrical permits from the Municipal Building
Department.
(11) All new wastewater sewer connections shall be the subject of
permits from the Public Works Department.
(12)No new campsites shall be created within 100 feet of the exterior
lot lines of a campground.
(13) The addition of sites or the enlargement of a campground shall be
reviewed in the same manner as the creation of a campground.
B. Shoreland areas. Campgrounds in shoreland areas shall be further
subject to the standards in § 230-7A06 of this chapter.
C. Permitted, accessory and prohibited uses.
(1) Permitted uses in a campground are:
(a) Campsites.
(b) One single-family house.
(2) Accessory uses in a campground are permitted only when
incidental and subordinate to the permitted uses and provided that
they are reserved primarily for the use of registered occupants of
the campground, as follows:
(a) Registration offices, administration and maintenance facilities.
(b) Active and passive outdoor recreational facilities, including,
but not limited to, ballfields, shuffleboard courts, swimming
pools, playgrounds, and trails.
(c) Indoor assembly and recreational facilities.
(d) Restrooms, washrooms, and shower facilities.
(e) Self-service and coin-operated laundry facilities.
§ 230-703 SACO CITY CODE § 230-703
173:716
§ 230-704. Mobile home parks.
(f) Convenience stores and retail located at least 100 feet from a
public street and not open to members of the public who are
not registered occupants or guests of registered occupants of
the campground.
(g) Freestanding decks, sheds, and recreational vehicle accessory
enclosures by permit only, issued before work is in progress by
the Code Enforcement Officer.
(h) Dumping stations for the discharge of liquid septic and gray
water wastes from a recreational vehicle or trailer holding
tank. All dumping stations shall be connected to a public sewer,
or consist of sealed holding tanks and be approved in design
and operation by the Code Enforcement Officer. Dumping
stations are for the use of registered occupants of the
campground only.
(3) No trailer, recreational vehicle or mobile home which contains
more than 400 feet shall be located anywhere within the
campground.
(4) Normal maintenance of facilities is permitted without permit,
including the following activities: installation of bark mulch, wood
chips, compost and loam for landscaping and play surfaces
purposes; repair and maintenance of existing internal roadways
and parking areas, provided facility dimensions are not expanded
beyond existing conditions and existing stormwater volumes and
drainage patterns are not altered; and addition of no more than
four inches of crushed stone and/or gravel to existing driveways,
parking areas, drainage facilities, and play areas.
A. Subdivision review. Proposed new mobile home parks and proposed
expansions of existing mobile home parks shall be subject to review as,
and shall meet all the requirements of, a residential subdivision and
shall conform to all applicable state laws and local ordinances and
regulations. No development or subdivision approved as a mobile home
park may be converted to another use without the approval of the
Planning Board. The new use shall meet the appropriate space and bulk
standards and other requirements of this chapter, the Subdivision
Regulations and other City ordinances. [Amended 5-9-1990]
B. Mobile Home Park Overlay District. Mobile home parks shall be located
only in the Mobile Home Park Overlay District. The map(s) for the
district shall be adopted by the City Council and available for inspection
in the Building Inspector's office. [Amended 5-9-1990]
C. Lot and yard requirements. Notwithstanding the dimensional
requirements in Table 412-1 of this chapter109 and the limitation on
community septic systems in the Subdivision Regulations, lots in a
§ 230-703 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-704
173:717
mobile home park shall meet the requirements in Table 412-2, Mobile
Home Park Overlay District, Minimum Lot and Yard Requirements.
The overall density of any park served by any subsurface wastewater
disposal system shall not exceed one dwelling unit per 20,000 square
feet. Lots within any Shoreland Zoning District shall meet the space and
bulk standards for that district. [Amended 5-9-1990]
D. Construction standards. All mobile homes shall be placed on a
permanent foundation which complies with the CABO One and Two
Family Dwelling Code, Chapter 3, Foundations, 1986 or subsequent
revisions. If a slab is used, tie-downs shall be installed to
manufacturer's specifications and skirting shall be installed around the
bottom of the structure. [Amended 5-9-1990]
E. Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct,
maintain, operate or alter any mobile home park within the limits of the
City of Saco unless the owner holds a valid permit issued annually by
the Building Inspector in the name of such person or persons or firm for
the specific mobile home park. The annual costs of this permit shall be
$5 per mobile home lot. [Amended 8-20-1990]
F. Issuance of permits. The Building Inspector shall annually renew such
permit contingent upon compliance with all regulations in this chapter.
An inspection shall be performed by the Building Inspector to assure
such compliance. [Amended 8-20-1990]
G. Inspection of mobile home parks. The Building Inspector is hereby
authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the condition
of mobile home parks located within the municipality of Saco in order
that he may perform his duty of safeguarding the health and safety of
occupants of mobile home parks and of the general public. The Building
Inspector or his duly authorized representative shall have the power to
enter at reasonable times upon any property as permitted by 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4452, Subdivision 1A. [Amended 8-20-1990]
H. Registration of owner. Each mobile home park operator shall maintain a
register for the registration of all owners of mobile homes in the park,
which register shall contain information as follows:
(1) Name and address of each owner.
(2) Mobile home license number and manufacturer's make.
(3) Number of site to which assigned.
(4) Date of arrival.
(5) Date of departure. [Amended 8-20-1990]
I. Availability for inspection. Said register shall be available for inspection
by the Assessor, the Building Inspector, law enforcement officers, public
109. Editor's Note: Table 412-1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 230-704 SACO CITY CODE § 230-704
173:718
§ 230-705. Siting of manufactured housing units. [Amended
7-17-2017]
health officials and other officials whose duties necessitate acquisition
of the information contained in the register. The register and records
shall not be destroyed for a period of five years following date of
registration. [Amended 8-20-1990]
J. Mobile home lot availability required. It shall be illegal to allow any
mobile home to remain in a mobile home park unless a mobile home lot
is available.
K. Alterations and additions. Alterations and additions must comply with
the effective City and state codes and ordinances. [Amended
8-20-1990]
L. Park administration. The owner or operator of a mobile home park shall
be responsible for ensuring the maintenance of all park-owned
structures and their sites. Park management shall conform to state
laws. Compliance with this chapter shall not exempt the park owner,
developer, or manager from complying with other applicable local,
state, and federal codes and regulations. [Amended 8-20-1990]
A. General requirements. Manufactured housing units which are placed
on lots outside of mobile home parks must:
(1) Be constructed in accordance with applicable state and federal
standards; as defined in § 230-302 of this chapter.
(2) Have a pitched roof with a minimum pitch of three inches vertical
for each 12 inches of horizontal run and be covered by approved
wood or asphalt composition shingles.
(3) Have their exterior wall surfaces covered with materials similar to
conventional construction, such as, but not limited to, cedar
shakes, wood, vinyl or metal clapboards, boards and batten siding,
etc., but not including flat, ridged or corrugated metal or plastic
panels.
(4) Be placed on permanent foundation, including a concrete pad over
gravel base, with skirting around the bottom of the structure, or a
concrete frost wall, or a full basement.
(5) Be sited such that a minimum horizontal dimension of 14 feet faces
the street in the C-1 Zoning District and a minimum horizontal
dimension of 20 feet faces the street in other residential zoning
districts where manufactured housing units are permitted.
B. Requirements specific to elder noncongregate detached housing.
Notwithstanding § 230-705A, and the City's Subdivision Regulations,
manufactured housing and on-site built homes, and the lots on which
they are sited in an elder noncongregate detached housing project are
§ 230-704 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-705
173:719
not subject to § 230-704 or the Subdivision Regulations, but all such
projects must instead meet the independent and equally stringent
standards set forth hereinbelow:
(1) Meet the same building standards set out in § 230-705A(1) through
(4) and not include pre-HUD code homes as permitted
manufactured housing.
(2) Be sited on lots not less than 5,000 square feet in size, which lot
shall not have less than 50 feet of frontage on any public or private
way.
(3) There may only be one dwelling on any lot. The minimum footprint
for any one dwelling shall comply with HUD code minimum size
requirements.
(4) No structure built or placed on such lots shall have less than 15 feet
of front yard setback, 10 feet of side yard setback, and a fifteen-foot
rear setback.
(5) Structures built on such lots shall not exceed 45% coverage of the
lot area and shall not exceed a height of 35 feet, as measured from
the existing grade at the highest point around the footprint of the
existing or proposed structure to the highest point of the structure
itself, excluding chimneys, steeples and antennas and similar
appurtenances which have no floor area.
(6) Such lots must be serviced by community sewer and community
water, although the infrastructure within the development shall be
privately owned and maintained. No individual wells or septic
systems shall be permitted.
(7) Electrical service shall be provided underground throughout the
project and to each structure.
(8) Telephone and cable service shall also be underground throughout
the project.
(9) All water, sewer, electrical and other utilities shall be installed in
conformance with applicable state and local rules and regulations.
(10) Each lot shall have adequate off-street parking for at least two
vehicles/autos.
(11) Exterior streetlighting for the project shall be provided to
sufficiently illuminate internal roads.
(12) Landscaping, including trees, shall be provided throughout the
project and on each lot.
(13) Adequate provisions for vehicular and pedestrian circulation on
interior roads servicing all lots and onto adjacent public streets
shall be provided.
§ 230-705 SACO CITY CODE § 230-705
173:720
§ 230-706. Planned developments. [Amended 11-16-2011]
(14) Elder noncongregate detached housing projects shall be subject to
site plan review.
(15) To the extent any standard set out herein directly conflicts with a
standard in the City's site plan standards, the standards set out
herein shall control and supersede the other. The minimum lot and
yard standards set out in Table 412-1 for the B-6 Zone are also
replaced by these standards for such projects only.
A. Procedures.
(1) No planned development shall be permitted without approval by
the Planning Board pursuant to the requirements of site plan
review set forth in Article XI of this chapter, and pursuant to the
requirements of the City Subdivision Ordinance.
(2) During the course of review, the Planning Board may allow those
uses which are consistent with the City's Comprehensive Plan and
with the intent of this chapter, including a mix of residential, office,
retail, recreational, and light industrial uses. The following shall
serve as guidance to the developer and the Planning Board in
determining the appropriate uses:
(a) Multifamily dwellings.
(b) Professional offices.
(c) Business offices and services.
(d) Eating places, eating-and-drinking places.
(e) Personal services.
(f) Pedestrian-oriented retail businesses.
(g) Financial institutions.
(h) Research and development facilities.
(i) Light manufacturing and light assembly uses which do not
create heavy truck traffic or large volumes of truck traffic and
which are not offensive due to noise, vibration, smoke, dust,
odors, heat or glare.
(j) Hotels and motels.
(k) Marinas and similar waterfront uses.
(l) Accessory recreational uses.
(3) An application for a planned development may be filed only by the
person who owns or has controlling legal interest in the land
proposed for development.
§ 230-705 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-706
173:721
§ 230-707. Signs. [Amended 6-19-1995; 9-5-2006]
(4) The Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed
planned development as part of its review of the preliminary
subdivision plan under the City Subdivision Ordinance.
B. Performance standards.
(1) Each building, parking area, and other facility in the proposed
development shall be an element of an overall master plan.
(2) Facilities shall be oriented with respect to scenic vistas, natural
landscape features, topography, and natural drainage conditions.
(3) Where open space is proposed as part of the planned development,
it shall be clearly noted on the final subdivision plan.
(4) To the extent that they may apply, the planned development shall
comply with the requirements of the Saco River Corridor
Commission, the Maine Department of Environmental Protection,
and the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife.
A. General requirements. No sign, billboard, or exterior graphic display
shall be permitted unless in compliance with the following
requirements:
(1) Permits and approvals.
(a) Permit required. No new, additional or enlarged business
advertising sign, including mobile signs and reader boards,
shall be erected, altered, or placed within the City of Saco
except as provided below. No person, firm, corporation or
organization shall erect, enlarge or replace any sign or
signboard without first obtaining a permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer. All permit applications shall include a
drawing showing all dimensions, types of materials, and
illumination.
(b) Historic districts. In Historic Preservation Overlay Districts a
certificate of appropriateness shall be obtained before a permit
is issued. Guidelines for signs in historic districts are in
§ 230-413K(4).
(c) Appeals. If the Code Enforcement Officer denies a permit for a
sign, the decision may be appealed as a variance to the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
(d) Approval by the Planning Board is needed for an integrated
sign plan approved under § 230-707E(3). The Planning Board
approval shall be obtained before the Code Enforcement
Officer issues a sign permit under this section. Appeals of
Planning Board decisions under § 230-707E(3) are to the
§ 230-706 SACO CITY CODE § 230-707
173:722
Superior Court under Rule 80K of the Maine Rules of Civil
Procedure.
(2) Measurement of sign area. The area of a sign shall be computed by
means of the smallest rectangle, circle, triangle or combination
thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing or
other graphic display, together with any material or color forming
an integral part of the background of the sign, or used to
differentiate the sign from the structure against which it is placed,
but does not include supporting posts or any structural elements
outside the limits of such perimeter and which do not form an
integral part of the display. Colored bands, lines, bars or other
graphics that appear on the side of a building that include no logos,
lettering or other commonly recognized corporate symbols shall
not be measured as part of the area of a sign in the B-2b and B-6
Districts.
(a) Freestanding signs and projecting signs with more than one
side shall be measured on all sides, except in the B-2b and B-6
Districts, where such signs shall be measured on one side only.
A "projecting sign" is defined as a sign attached to a building,
other than a wall sign.
(b) A wall sign is any sign painted on the surface of the wall, or
attached parallel to and within 15 inches of the wall.
(c) Awning signs, if opaque, shall be measured in the same manner
as described in the first sentence of this subsection,
§ 230-707A(2). Opaque awnings with one small opaque
monogram or opaque logo of less than six inches in height shall
not be considered signs. For awnings that are translucent and
internally illuminated and incorporate any commercial
message or symbol, the entire translucent and illuminated
portion of the awning shall be counted.
(3) Generally acceptable signs. In any district, a sign not exceeding
four square feet (two square feet per side if detached from
building) in surface size is permitted which announces the name
and/or activity of the occupant of the premises on which said sign is
located. In any district on a building more than 50 years old, a sign
or placard noting the history of the building may be placed on a
building. Such signs shall not exceed two square feet and shall not
be lit if in a residential or conservation district.
(4) Roof signs. No sign affixed to the exterior of a building shall be
higher than the cornice (or the top of the parapet wall, if any).
(5) Sight-line obstruction. For traffic safety, the entire signboard or
display area of a freestanding sign located on a double-frontage
corner lot or near a business exit lane shall be either below three
feet or above 10 feet in height from the average ground level when
the sign is within 15 feet of a public right-of-way.
§ 230-707 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-707
173:723
(6) Nonconforming signs. Any existing nonconforming sign may
continue to stand but may not be changed, altered, enlarged or
replaced unless to a conforming sign, except as permitted upon a
variance appeal to the Board of Appeals. Any nonconforming sign
damaged by fire, wind, or other casualty may be reconstructed as
before if such construction is performed within six months of such
casualty. In the B-2b and B-6 Zones only, any existing
nonconforming sign may continue to stand, and may be changed,
altered, or replaced so as to be a conforming sign, and may be
changed, altered or replaced such that the sign area is a 20% or
greater reduction of the sign area of the existing nonconforming
sign.
(7) Prohibited signs and displays.
(a) Billboards, banners, streamers, pennants, ribbons, spinners or
other similar devices shall not be displayed, except if provided
for elsewhere in this section.
(b) Flashing, moving or animated signs, roof signs, signs on gas
station pump island canopies, inflatable signs, and movable
electric signs, except those described in § 230-707E(6)(b)
below, are not permitted. Signs indicating time and/or
temperature are permitted, provided they meet the other
provisions of this section. [Amended 11-1-2004]
(c) A string of lights shall not be used for the purpose of
advertising or attracting attention.
(d) Off-premises directional signs or official business directional
signs, as defined in 23 M.R.S.A. §§ 1902-1925, as the same may
from time to time be amended, are prohibited within the City of
Saco, except as allowed under Subsection A(9). [Amended
10-16-1985]
(e) Signs on motor vehicles or trailers parked or stored in a
location visible from a public way, if one or more of the
following circumstances exist:
[1] The vehicle or trailer is unregistered.
[2] The vehicle or trailer is parked or stored continuously in a
residential, conservation or resource protection zoning
district. "Continuously" is defined, for the purpose of
§ 230-707, as without interruption for a period of time
exceeding 72 hours.
[3] The vehicle or trailer is parked or stored in an area not
designed or of a type commonly used for parking or
storage.
§ 230-707 SACO CITY CODE § 230-707
173:724
[4] The vehicle or trailer is regularly parked or stored in a
front yard or side yard, as defined in this chapter, or in the
public right-of-way adjacent to the front yard when there is
parking available elsewhere on the property.
[5] The trailer or unregistered motor vehicle is regularly
parked or stored where a sign would not be permitted
under this section. [Amended 11-21-1994]
(f) Mobile signs, such as those on trailers or chassis, with or
without wheels.
(g) Any sign of which more than 25% of the area of the sign is
comprised of the corporate advertising of a product or service
which is not directly related to the primary corporate purpose
of the business located on the property. [Amended
11-1-2004]
(8) Exemptions. For the purposes of this section, the term "sign" shall
not include:
(a) Signs erected for public safety and welfare or pursuant to any
governmental function, including directory signs erected by
the City of Saco for its industrial parks.
(b) Directional signs solely indicating entrance and exit placed at
driveway locations, containing no advertising material,
including logos, and where the display area does not exceed
three square feet per side if freestanding or extend higher than
seven feet above ground level.
(c) Signs relating to trespassing and hunting, not exceeding two
square feet in area.
(d) Directional signs not exceeding three square feet in area as
measured on one side and not exceeding six feet above ground
level may be installed within a site with permission of the Code
Enforcement Officer. The purpose of such signs shall be
directional only, with no logo, advertising or corporate symbols
allowed.
(e) Signs not visible from a public way.
(9) Official business directional signs. Official business directional
signs, as otherwise regulated by 23 M.R.S.A. §§ 1901-1925, as
amended, are permitted for any businesses located in Saco and for
businesses within abutting communities that have or are eligible to
have guide signs on the Maine Turnpike that display business
identification and directional information for services and eligible
attractions. Official business directional signs for businesses within
abutting communities shall only be permitted when a guide sign for
the applicant's business on the Maine Turnpike either exists, or has
§ 230-707 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-707
173:725
been approved and then installed. When permitted by this section,
official business directional signs may be erected only within the
following zones: B-1, B-2, B-5, B-6, BP, I-1 and I-2, subject to
all restrictions and conditions of 23 M.R.S.A. §§ 1901-1925, as
amended. [Amended 10-15-2012]
(10) Discontinuance and removal. Any sign which no longer advertises a
bonafide business or product sold shall be removed together with
its supporting structure by the owner of the property within 180
days of the closing of business. After that period the Code
Enforcement Officer may provide written notice to the property
owner that the sign and supporting structure must be removed.
Where written notice has been given by the Code Enforcement
Officer and the sign has not been removed within the thirty-day
period, the City may cause the removal of the sign and charge the
cost of the removal to the owner of the property. Nothing in this
subsection shall preclude the use of other enforcement measures
authorized by this chapter.
(11) One sign marking the entrance to a subdivision, residential
condominium or multifamily complex of at least five lots or units
may be permitted if approved by the Planning Board. The sign shall
not exceed 20 square feet in total surface area, and may be lit only
by a shielded external source. The sign shall be located where
approved by the Planning Board in its review of the subdivision or
site plan, and provision shall be made for its maintenance by the
owner or by an owner's association.
B. Church and school signs. [Amended 11-3-2003; 11-19-2007]
(1) In any residential or conservation district, a sign not exceeding 24
square feet in total surface size, whether one-sided or two-sided, is
permitted in connection with any church, public or private school,
or similar public or quasi-public structure.
(2) When a church is located on an arterial or collector road in a
residential or conservation district, one sign not exceeding 48
square feet in total surface size, whether one sided or two-sided, is
permitted. Such signs shall not be internally illuminated if they
exceed 24 square feet.
(3) In any residential or conservation district, one additional wall sign
is permitted for a church, not to exceed 12 square feet in size.
(4) In business and industrial districts, the allowable signage for any
church, public or private school, or similar public or quasi-public
structure is the same as specified in § 230-707E, Signs in business
or industrial districts, and Table 707.
(5) In any district, a sign not exceeding 12 square feet in total sign
area if one-sided, and not exceeding 12 square feet on either side if
§ 230-707 SACO CITY CODE § 230-707
173:726
double-sided, is permitted in connection with any fraternal
organization.
C. Temporary signs. No temporary signs are permitted except as provided
in this section:
(1) Construction signs. One temporary construction sign, not
exceeding 32 square feet in surface area, including the area of both
sides of such sign, is permitted in any zoning district on the
property on which the construction is taking place. Construction
signs shall not be installed earlier than seven days before the
commencement of construction. Construction signs shall be
removed within 14 days after the completion of construction. The
words "completion of construction" mean the time construction is
actually complete and not when the building permit expires.
Construction signs are not permitted for construction at the
contractor's own residence.
(2) Real estate "for sale" signs. One real estate "for sale" sign, not
exceeding 32 square feet in surface area, including both sides of
such sign, is permitted in any zoning district on the property being
advertised for sale. Real estate for sale signs shall be removed
within 14 days after the date of the real estate closing transferring
ownership of the property.
(3) Real estate "for rent" signs. One real estate "for rent" sign, not
exceeding 32 square feet in surface area, including both sides of
such sign, is permitted in business and industrial zoning districts
on the property being advertised for rent. One real estate "for rent"
sign, not exceeding 12 square feet in surface area, including both
sides of such sign, is permitted in other zoning districts on the
property that is being advertised for rent. "For rent" signs shall be
removed within 14 days after an agreement is made to rent the
property. Notwithstanding the above, no temporary signs for lease
or rent are permitted for seasonal dwelling units.
(4) A temporary political campaign sign, not exceeding 32 square feet
in surface area, including the surface area of both sides, shall be
permitted in any district. Such signs, if on public property, shall be
erected no earlier than 30 days before the election and shall be
removed within five days after the election. Political signs are
prohibited in City parks, on traffic islands, or on trees in the rightof-
way. Political signs shall be placed only in locations which do not
create visual obstructions for traffic and pedestrians. A temporary
sign on public property not meeting the standards of this section
shall be removed by the owner if requested by the Code
Enforcement Officer, the Parks and Recreation Director or the
Public Works Director, or may be removed by the City.
(5) Banners of public, cultural or charitable interest. The Code
Enforcement Officer may permit a person or organization to install
§ 230-707 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-707
173:727
a banner across a public way to announce a bona fide public, quasipublic,
cultural, or charitable function of City-wide importance.
Such events include the Sidewalk Art Festival, Red Ribbon Week,
and similar events. The applicant shall obtain in advance the
permission of the owner of the pole, building, or other structure
where the sign is to be mounted and shall provide sufficient
information for the Code Enforcement Officer to determine that
the installation will be done safely. Proof of insurance shall also be
provided. Such banners may be installed for not more than four
weeks. [Amended 5-15-2000]
(6) Nonprofit events.
(a) Churches, schools, charitable organizations and other
nonprofit entities that hold occasional events may place
temporary signs up to two weeks prior to the event, with
removal no later than the day after the event. Temporary signs
that may be placed include:
[1] Up to two A-frame sandwich board signs which shall not
exceed 30 inches in width and 42 inches in height, or, a
single one- or two-sided sign with an area not exceeding
32 square feet;
[2] Up to two flags, each not exceeding six square feet in area
on one side, mounted to a fixed or permanent location such
as a utility or light pole, sign, or building may be placed in
addition.
(b) Temporary signs may be placed only on the premises of the
entity or organization sponsoring the event and shall be placed
in locations that do not create visual obstructions for traffic
and pedestrians. No more than 25% of the area of a temporary
sign may be comprised of a corporate logo or advertising.
Banners are expressly prohibited. [Amended 1-2-2007]
D. Business signs in residential, conservation and resource protection
districts.
(1) Exterior signs shall not exceed four square feet if attached parallel
to the wall or a building, two square feet (each side) if projecting
from the wall of a building, or two square feet (each side) if the sign
is freestanding. Signs shall not be illuminated. Only one category of
sign (wall sign, projecting, or freestanding) shall be allowed per
building. No illuminated or mobile (chassis-mounted) signs shall be
permitted in a residential or conservation district. No signs are
permitted on trucks or trailers parked continuously in a residential,
conservation, or resource protection district.
(2) Exterior signs for properties approved for nonresidential uses in
residential districts with frontage on roads or streets listed below
shall not exceed 12 square feet if attached parallel to the wall of a
§ 230-707 SACO CITY CODE § 230-707
173:728
building, 12 square feet (each side) if projecting from the wall of a
building, or 12 square feet (each side) if the sign is freestanding.
Signs may be externally illuminated during hours of operation only,
and only with a top of sign mounted, fully shielded fixture which
illuminates the sign only. The roads and streets affected include
Route 1 (Elm Street, Main Street, Portland Road), Industrial Park
Road, and North Street/Route 112 (Park Street to Rotary Drive).
[Amended 11-21-1994; 12-1-2014]
E. Signs in business or industrial districts. Any establishment in a business
or industrial district shall have no more than two signs, one of which
may be freestanding.
(1) No sign shall announce, advertise, or name any service or product
not available, sold or manufactured on the premises.
(2) The size and number of signs permitted in business and industrial
districts, except for the B-4 District, is regulated by Table 707
below. In the B-4 Planned Development District only, for
developments which require a planned development under
§ 230-410.13, because of the unique nature of this zone, the size,
number, nature and location of signs shall be determined by an
integrated sign plan, as outlined in § 230-707E(3).
(3) Integrated sign plan. Because multiple-occupancy properties such
as office parks and shopping centers, as well as planned
developments in the B-4 District, have special sign needs, this
section sets out an alternative procedure for approval of signs on
these properties. It permits additional flexibility as to the size and
number of signs on a property in the B-1, B-2, B-4, B-6 and I-2b
Districts. As part of an integrated sign plan the Planning Board may
permit up to 50% more signs or up to 50% more aggregate footage
in the B-1, B-2, B-6 and I-2b Districts.
(a) An integrated sign plan is required in the following cases:
[1] For any planned development in the B-4 District;
[2] For any commercial development over five acres subject to
site plan review in any business district.
(b) In addition, in the following cases, the owner may voluntarily
seek approval of an integrated sign plan:
[1] Any property in the B-1, B-2, B-4, B-6 and I-2b Districts;
[2] Any new car dealer in the B-2a, B2b and B-6 Districts.
(c) An application for an integrated sign plan approval shall
include:
[1] A site plan and, if necessary, elevations showing the
location of all signs;
§ 230-707 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-707
173:729
[2] Scale drawings showing the detailed design of all
proposed signs, as well as the area of each sign, and
details related to lighting and color.
(d) The following criteria are to be used by the Planning Board in
determining whether an integrated sign plan shall be
approved. A positive finding on all of the standards is required
for approval.
[1] The placement and design of signs meets the specific
standards of this chapter.
[2] The signage will not create glare or excessive brightness.
[3] The signage is designed and located in a manner that does
not create distractions or visual confusion on the property
or in combination with neighboring properties.
[4] The signage will not create traffic hazards.
(e) After an integrated sign plan is approved, minor changes
consistent with the plan approved by the Planning Board may
be approved by the Code Enforcement Officer, with the
concurrence of the City Planner. Major changes shall be
submitted to the Planning Board for approval as an
amendment.
(4) In addition to other signs permitted in business districts only, a
single banner not larger than three feet by five feet may be
displayed during business hours. However, such banners shall be
subject to an annual permit to assure compliance. The annual
permit shall expire on March 1 each year. Such banners shall be
displayed on the building or on a permitted freestanding sign only.
Banners shall be installed in a safe manner that does not interfere
with pedestrian or other traffic and shall be maintained in an
attractive, untattered condition. One banner for the purpose of
advertising a new business or owner may be erected for a period
not to exceed 30 days. Said banner is limited to 20 square feet in
area as measured on one side. A permit for said banner is required.
(5) Business advertising signs shall not be placed closer than five feet
from any lot line. The maximum height for freestanding signs shall
be 25 feet above the adjacent ground grade.
(6) In business and industrial districts where illuminated signs are
permitted, they shall conform to the following requirements:
(a) Signs shall be illuminated only by steady, stationary, shielded
light sources directed solely on the sign without causing glare
or by constant internal illumination. Any light source shall be
shielded with a fixture so that bulbs are not directly visible
from neighboring properties or public ways. No sign shall be
§ 230-707 SACO CITY CODE § 230-707
173:730
animated by means of flashing, blinking or traveling lights or
by any other means not providing constant illumination. Signs
shall not be illuminated from within unless they utilize lightcolored
letters and symbols on a dark-colored background in
order to avoid undue glare radiating from the sign, except in
the B-2 and B-6 Districts, where the letters and backgrounds
shall be designed to avoid excessive brightness. Sign
illumination shall be of reasonable intensity and shall avoid
excessive brightness or glare on nearby properties and to
avoid creating unnecessary distractions on the street.
(b) Gas-filled light tubes shall be allowed for indirect illumination
when placed in such a manner that light tubes are not exposed
to view. In the B-2b and B-6 Districts, gas-filled or LED light
tubes within view of the public way are allowed.
(c) Illuminated signs shall be constructed and erected in such a
manner as to deflect light away from residential properties and
public roads.
(d) Notwithstanding the above, electronic message center signs
are permitted if they change messages no more than every five
minutes. Electronic message center signs shall not have
continuously scrolling, blinking or intermittent lighting.
Electronic message center signs are permitted as any sign type
(freestanding, wall, or projecting) within the overall sign
allowance.
(7) Freestanding signs shall be required to be attached to permanent
posts and to be hung vertically above the ground. So-called "Aframe"
signs shall be prohibited, except as permitted in Subsection
E(9). Any business which is permitted to have more than one
freestanding sign and chooses to do so shall maintain 100 feet of
separation between freestanding signs, whether on his own or on
neighboring property.
(8) Projecting signs. No sign shall project into or over a public street or
way except in the B-3 District on Main Street and in Pepperell
Square, as permitted below:
(a) The sign has a combined surface area no greater than 1.5
square feet for each foot of width of the principal structure,
such surface area including both sides of the sign. In no case
shall the combined surface area be greater than 50 square
feet.
(b) The sign does not project more than 10 feet out from the
building line.
(c) The sign is at least three feet back from a line perpendicular to
the curbline.
§ 230-707 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-707
173:731
(d) The bottom edge of the sign is at least 10 feet above the
sidewalk.
(9) One small A-frame sandwich board sign may be placed on the
sidewalks in front of any business in the B-3 and B-7 Districts. Such
signs shall be taken in each day before the close of business. Such
signs shall not exceed 30 inches in width and 42 inches in height
and shall be placed only in locations where the sidewalk is wide
enough to allow four feet for passage. Such signs shall be
constructed of exterior-grade plywood, such as MDO, or of other
durable materials intended for exterior use, be of sturdy
construction, and shall be weighted to prevent them from blowing
over. All such signs shall be neatly painted, not illuminated, and
subject to review under the historic preservation section of this
chapter. The City may remove from public property any A-frame
sign which is not in compliance with this chapter. Signs,
merchandise and other objects used for marketing must be
removed prior to and 24 hours after any snow event to allow for
municipal snow removal efforts. The City is not responsible for any
signs, merchandise or other objects damaged nor is the City of
Saco responsible for any harm to people or property occurring as a
consequence of a sign being placed on public property. [Amended
12-6-2010]
(10) A system of decorative banners may be placed on buildings, utility
poles or light poles in the B-1, B-3 and B-7 Districts by a business
association or civic group if approved by the City Council.
(11) Pennants may be displayed in the B-2b and B-6 Districts. An
individual pennant on a pennant string shall not exceed 12 inches
by 12 inches. Pennants shall be installed in a safe manner that does
not interfere with pedestrians or other traffic and shall be
maintained in an attractive, untattered condition.
§ 230-707 SACO CITY CODE § 230-707
173:732
Table 707
Signs in Mixed-Use, Business and Industrial Zones
[Amended 9/3/2013; 10/19/2015]
Regulation
B-3/B-4/
B-5/MU-1
MU-4 if no
planned
development
under
§ 230-410.13
B-1/B-2c/
I-1/I-2 I-3
and B-2D
B-2b/B-6/
MU-3 B-2a B-7
I-1, I-2,
B-8
Abutting
Turnpike1
Overall size
allowance
per
premises
per foot of
width of
principal
structure
(square
feet)
2 to
maximum
of 100
2 to
maximum
of 150
2 to
maximum of
200
2 to
maximum
of 200
2 to a
maximum
of 48
2 to
maximum of
350
Number of
signs per
singleoccupancy
premises
2 signs,
only 1 of
which may
be
freestanding,
plus 1
additional
wall sign
not
exceeding
12 square
feet
2 signs,
only 1 of
which may
be
freestanding,
plus 1
additional
wall sign
not
exceeding
12 square
feet
2 signs, plus
1 additional
wall sign
not
exceeding
12 square
feet
2 signs,
plus 1
additional
wall sign
not
exceeding
12 square
feet
2 signs,
only 1 of
which may
be
freestanding
3 signs, only
1 of which
may be
freestanding
Multiple-occupancy premises, number and type of signs:
For entire
complex
1
freestanding
or wall sign
serving as
a directory
or anchor
tenant sign
not to
exceed
50% of
overall size
allowance
1
freestanding
or wall sign
serving as
a directory
or anchor
tenant sign
not to
exceed
50% of
overall size
allowance
1
freestanding
or wall sign
serving as a
directory or
anchor
tenant sign
not to
exceed 50%
of overall
size
allowance
1
freestanding
or wall sign
serving as
a directory
or anchor
tenant sign
not to
exceed
50% of
overall size
allowance
2 signs,
only 1 of
which may
be
freestanding
1
freestanding
or wall sign
serving as a
directory or
anchor
tenant sign
not to
exceed 50%
of overall
size
allowance
§ 230-707 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-707
173:733
Table 707
Signs in Mixed-Use, Business and Industrial Zones
[Amended 9/3/2013; 10/19/2015]
Regulation
B-3/B-4/
B-5/MU-1
MU-4 if no
planned
development
under
§ 230-410.13
B-1/B-2c/
I-1/I-2 I-3
and B-2D
B-2b/B-6/
MU-3 B-2a B-7
I-1, I-2,
B-8
Abutting
Turnpike1
For each
first-floor
occupancy
2 wall,
projecting
or awning
signs per
occupancy
2 wall,
projecting
or awning
signs per
occupancy
2 wall,
projecting
or awning
signs per
occupancy
2 wall,
projecting
or awning
signs per
occupancy
N/A 2 wall,
projecting
or awning
signs per
occupancy
Upper-floor
and
basement
occupancies
1 wall or
projecting
sign not
exceeding
12 square
feet
1 wall or
projecting
sign not
exceeding
12 square
feet
1 wall or
projecting
sign not
exceeding
12 square
feet
1 wall or
projecting
sign not
exceeding
12 square
feet
N/A
Size limits, individual sign types for all zones:
Wall and
awning
signs,
maximum
size
(square
feet)
100 100 150 150 16 If facing
Turnpike,
within 50
feet of
Turnpike
ROW, 150;
greater than
50 feet from
Turnpike
ROW, 200
Freestanding
and
projecting
signs,
maximum
size per
side
(square
feet)
50 75 100 100 16 100
§ 230-707 SACO CITY CODE § 230-707
173:734
§ 230-708. Off-street parking.
Table 707
Signs in Mixed-Use, Business and Industrial Zones
[Amended 9/3/2013; 10/19/2015]
Regulation
B-3/B-4/
B-5/MU-1
MU-4 if no
planned
development
under
§ 230-410.13
B-1/B-2c/
I-1/I-2 I-3
and B-2D
B-2b/B-6/
MU-3 B-2a B-7
I-1, I-2,
B-8
Abutting
Turnpike1
Minimum
size
allowance
per
premises
(square
feet)
48
NOTES:
1 Commercial and industrial structures with total floor area
of 40,000 square feet and greater, on parcels with 200 feet
or greater frontage along Turnpike ROW. Also subject to 23
M.R.S.A. §§ 1913-A and 1914.
A. Off-street parking required.
(1) A minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be provided in
accordance with the specifications in this section in any district
whenever any new use is established or existing use is enlarged.
However, existing uses are considered grandfathered for the
number of parking spaces required on June 19, 1995, and need
provide additionally only the difference between that required for
the grandfathered use and the new or expanded use. [Amended
6-19-1995]
(2) Off-street public parking lots may be utilized to fulfill parking
requirements in lieu of on-premises parking when such public
parking lots have been provided for that purpose.
(3) Notwithstanding other provisions of this section requiring on-site
parking, existing buildings in the B-3 District, north and west of the
Boston and Maine Railroad only, and in the MU-1 District may
receive a parking waiver in whole or in part from the Planning
Board, when a structure is expanded, when a change of use
requires additional parking spaces be provided, or when an
existing building or use undergoes internal expansion. Such
expansion includes the reuse or rehabilitation of unused or
§ 230-707 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-708
173:735
underutilized space. The Planning Board shall hear the application
for the parking waiver as a conditional use and before approving it
shall make a finding that it meets the following standards, as well
as the conditional use standards of § 230-901D:
(a) On-site parking is not available;
(b) Off-site parking as described in § 230-708C(2) is not available;
(c) The lack of on-site parking will not create excessive congestion
in the neighborhood. [Amended 6-19-1995; 5-21-2012]
B. Specified uses and off-street parking spaces required. The minimum
number of off-street parking spaces required for different uses shall be
as shown in Table 708-2. When the required number of spaces arrived
at is not a whole number, fractions of parking spaces shall be rounded
up to the next whole number. In the B-3 District, north and west of the
Boston and Maine Railroad, and the MU-1 District, the parking
requirements of Table 708-2 are reduced by 50%. [Amended
4-3-1989; 6-19-1995; 5-21-2012]
Table 708-2
Minimum Off-Street Parking Spaces Required By Use
[Amended 7-1-1991; 3-7-1994; 9-6-1994; 12-7-1998; 8-4-2003;
6-2-2008; 5-21-2012; 6-5-2017]
Use
Minimum Off-Street Parking
Spaces Required
Single-family residential 2 spaces per dwelling unit
2-family residential 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Multifamily residential 1.5 spaces per unit for 1-bedroom
units
2 spaces per unit for units with 2
bedrooms
In residential zoning districts, 2.5
spaces for units with 3 or more
bedrooms
In residential zoning districts, 1
additional visitor's space for every
6 units or fraction thereof
Multifamily residential restricted
to elderly
1 space for every 2 units
Elderly congregate housing 1 space per 3 units
Churches 1 space per 4 seats in principal
assembly room
§ 230-708 SACO CITY CODE § 230-708
173:736
Table 708-2
Minimum Off-Street Parking Spaces Required By Use
[Amended 7-1-1991; 3-7-1994; 9-6-1994; 12-7-1998; 8-4-2003;
6-2-2008; 5-21-2012; 6-5-2017]
Use
Minimum Off-Street Parking
Spaces Required
Schools (not including high
schools or colleges)
1 space per each 2 employees,
including teachers and
administrators, plus sufficient offstreet
space for safe loading and
unloading of students
High schools and colleges 1 space for each 5 students based
upon the maximum number of
students attending the school at
any 1 period in the day
Commercial schools 1 space for each 3 students based
upon the maximum number of
students attending the school at
any 1 period in the day
Private clubs or lodges 1 space per 75 square feet of total
floor space
Recreational assembly places,
e.g., dance halls, nightclubs,
video game parlors
1 space per 75 square feet of total
floor area
Theaters 1 space per 4 seats
Bowling alleys 5 spaces for each alley
Funeral homes 1 space per 100 square feet of
total floor area
Adult day-care center 1 space per employee and 1 per 6
clients
Hospitals and rest homes 1 space per 3 beds plus 1 space
per 2 employees on the maximum
working shift
Professional offices, business
services, office of wholesale
businesses
1 space for every 250 square feet
of total floor area
Banks 1 space per 150 square feet of
floor area, exclusive of storage
space
Medical offices 1 space per 100 square feet of
floor area, exclusive of storage
space
§ 230-708 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-708
173:737
Table 708-2
Minimum Off-Street Parking Spaces Required By Use
[Amended 7-1-1991; 3-7-1994; 9-6-1994; 12-7-1998; 8-4-2003;
6-2-2008; 5-21-2012; 6-5-2017]
Use
Minimum Off-Street Parking
Spaces Required
Veterinarian clinic, kennel,
animal hospital
5 spaces per veterinarian
Retail business, personal services
businesses
1 space per 200 square feet of
total floor area
Eating and drinking, eating, and
drinking establishments
1 space per 75 square feet of total
floor area
Barber, beauty shop 4 spaces per chair
Industrial businesses 1 space per employee on the
maximum working shift
Warehouses 1 space per 500 square feet of
total floor area
Child-care facilities 1 space per 4 children
Flea markets 3 spaces per table
Hotels and motels, tourist homes,
bed-and-breakfast
establishments, boarding homes
1 space per guest room, plus 1
space per employee working on the
largest shift
Home occupations See mixed uses
Mixed uses Total of individual use
requirements
Golf courses 50 spaces per 9 holes
Marinas 1 space per 2 slips or moorings
Where a proposed use cannot be reasonably fit into one of the above
categories, the Planning Board shall prescribe the required number
of off-street parking spaces. When an applicant demonstrates to the
Board's satisfaction that the number of off-street parking spaces is
adequate for a proposed use, the Board may find that a lesser number
of spaces than is prescribed in Table 708-2 is acceptable, but only upon
making a finding that the following standards have been met:
A. On-street parking is available within a reasonable distance;
B. Off-site parking as described in § 230-708C(2) is not available;
C. The lack of on-site parking will not create hazardous and unsafe
conditions in the neighborhood.
C. Parking design criteria. The following standards apply to off-street
parking areas with five or more parking spaces. These standards apply
§ 230-708 SACO CITY CODE § 230-708
173:738
both to parking areas and automobile, truck and other merchandise
display lots. [Amended 3-2-1992]
(1) Size of space and aisles. Each parking space shall be clearly
delineated and contain a minimum area of 162 square feet (nine
feet by 18 feet), exclusive of drives, aisles, entrances, or truck
loading and unloading spaces, and fully accessible for the storage
or parking of motor vehicles. Aisles between rows of parking
spaces shall be at least 24 feet wide, except that one-way aisles
may be reduced to not less than 16 feet wide. [Amended
8-4-2003]
(a) Handicap spaces shall meet the requirements set forth in ANSI
117.1.A.
(b) A parking space in front of a garage door shall contain a
minimum area of 198 square feet (nine feet by 22 feet). No
parking space shall obstruct or intrude into a sidewalk or
driveway.
(c) Parking spaces at the edges of parking lots may be reduced to
16 feet in length if the front of the cars can overhang the front
of the space by two feet. This is not acceptable in areas
adjacent to sidewalks, buildings, or other facilities which might
be interfered with by the fronts of cars.
(2) Off-site parking. Required off-street parking for all land uses shall
be located on the same lot as the principal building or facility or
within 500 feet measured along lines of access. However, in the B-3
District, north and west of the Boston and Maine Railroad, and in
the MU-1 District, this is increased to 1,200 feet. The Planning
Board may approve off-site parking or the joint use of a parking
facility by two or more principal buildings or uses where it is clearly
demonstrated that said parking facility would substantially meet
the intent of the requirements because there is sufficient space, or
because of a difference in the probable time of maximum use by
patrons or employees of such establishments. A long-term lease or
other arrangement satisfactory to the Planning Board is required
for any off-site parking. The Planning Board, as part of a site plan
review, may permit contiguous properties to construct shared
parking areas that extend over property lines without regards to
the five-foot setback requirement for parking areas. The Board may
require adequate plantings and other landscape treatments if
necessary to buffer such shared parking. [Amended 6-19-1995;
10-15-2001; 2-19-2002]
(3) Access. All multifamily and nonresidential parking areas shall be
located off the street. Adequate maneuvering areas shall be
provided according to standard and acceptable engineering
practices so that vehicles can be turned around within such areas
without backing into the street. A maneuvering area designed
§ 230-708 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-708
173:739
appropriately for an SU-30, box van-sized vehicle shall be provided
for all multistructure multifamily, and nonresidential parking areas.
Access to parking stalls shall not be immediately accessible from
any public way. The access point from a public road to commercial
and industrial operations shall be so located as to minimize traffic
congestion and also to avoid generating traffic on local access
streets of a primarily residential character. [Amended 8-4-2003]
(4) Visual obstructions and internal walkways.
(a) All driveway entrances and exits shall be kept free from visual
obstructions higher than three feet above street level for a
distance of 15 feet measured along the intersecting driveway
in order to provide the required visibility for entering and
leaving vehicles. However, a sign may be located within 15 feet
of a public right-of-way but shall be either below three feet or
above 10 feet in height from the average ground level [see
§ 230-707A(5)]. [Amended 4-30-2007]
(b) Continuous internal walkways shall be provided from the
public sidewalk to the principal customer entrance of all
principal buildings on the site if the street has or will have a
sidewalk. Walkways shall connect focal points of pedestrian
activity, such as, but not limited to, street crossings, and
building and store entry points. All internal pedestrian
walkways shall be distinguished from driving surfaces through
the use of durable surface materials such as pavers, bricks, or
scored concrete or painted treatments to enhance pedestrian
safety and comfort, as well as the attractiveness of the
walkways. [Amended 2-19-2002]
(5) Loading facilities. Loading facilities shall be located entirely on the
same lot as the building or use to be served so that trucks, trailers,
and containers shall not be located for loading or storage upon any
public way. Loading facilities shall be designed not to interfere with
aisles, drive-in lanes and stacking areas, and in a manner that will
not block access to parking or go against traffic. [Amended
8-4-2003]
(6) Lighting. All artificial lighting used to illuminate any parking space
shall be so arranged that no direct rays from such lighting shall fall
upon any neighboring property or streets, and it shall conform with
§ 230-804 of this chapter. [Amended 8-4-2003]
(7) Bumper guards. Bumpers or wheel stops shall be provided where
overhang of parked cars might restrict flow on adjacent streets,
interfere with pedestrian movement on adjacent walkways, or
damage landscape materials.
(8) Buffers. All parking spaces and access drives shall be at least five
feet from any side or rear lot line. Off-street parking and access
§ 230-708 SACO CITY CODE § 230-708
173:740
drives for nonresidential uses that abut lots in any residential or
conservation district shall meet the minimum yard requirements
in Table 412-1, the landscaping requirements of this section and
§ 230-807.
(9) Landscaping.
(a) General. The existing landscape shall be preserved in its
natural state, insofar as practicable, by minimizing tree
removal, and any grade changes shall be in keeping with the
general appearance of neighboring developed areas.
[1] Parking lots in residential districts. Parking lots shall be
landscaped with a continuous border of shrubbery along
all lot lines abutting properties in residential and
conservation districts, or, in other districts, if they abut
lots developed with residential uses on which an
equivalent buffer has not been provided. This border shall
have a mature height of three to six feet and shall provide
a year-round screen.
[2] Large parking areas. Large parking areas of 35 or more
spaces shall be provided with at least one tree (of 2 1/2
inches' to three inches' caliper) for every 35 car spaces
(four trees per acre), to be located at representative points
throughout such lots. Planting islands for such trees shall
not be less than five feet wide nor 75 square feet. Parking
lots of 5,000 to 10,000 square feet shall provide 5% of that
space in internal landscaping. Parking lots over 10,000
square feet shall provide 10% internal landscaping.
[3] Front buffers. All parking areas, merchandise display
areas, or outdoor storage areas shall be separated from
any public road by a landscaped buffer strip at least 15
feet wide, planted with shade trees (minimum 2.5 inches'
to three inches' caliper, planted at least every 35 feet along
the road frontage), ornamental trees (one per 35 feet of
road frontage), and dense, medium-height shrubs (three
feet in height on maturity to screen parked vehicles). The
Planning Board may permit the installation of earth berms,
boulders, stone walls and other permanent landscape
features to achieve the desired screening and may permit
that some of these elements substitute for low plantings
but not for shade trees.
[4] Special Route 1 standards. In lots fronting on Route 1,
north of Interstate 195, a vegetated buffer of 40 feet is
required. A driveway of reasonable width may cross the
buffer strip. No parking or display of merchandise is
permitted in the buffer strip.
§ 230-708 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-708
173:741
[5] Alternate buffers and screening. In lieu of strict
compliance with the specific buffer and screening
requirements of this section and § 230-807, the Planning
Board may approve a detailed plan and specifications for
landscaping and screening which will afford a degree of
buffering and screening equivalent to or exceeding that
provided by the above requirements. The Planning Board
may also make a determination that buffer screens
required under this chapter are incompatible with
neighboring properties and relieve the requirement that
the landscaping be installed, in whole or in part. However,
the forty-foot vegetated buffer provided for in Subsection
C(9)(a)[4], Special Route 1 standards, shall not be reduced
in width. [Amended 2-19-2002]
[6] Special Main Street standards. In the Main Street corridor
from Saco Island to the I-195 connector, no more than one
row of parking spaces or 25% of the total required number
of parking spaces, whichever is greater, shall be located
between the front of the building and the street; the
remainder shall be located to the side and rear of the
building. In lieu of strict compliance with this standard,
the Planning Board may approve an alternate plan that
allows a greater number of parking spaces between the
front of the building and the street if the alternate plan
specifies enhanced landscaping and screening that
minimizes the visual impact of the parking lot. [Amended
4-11-2005]
[7] Installation, maintenance, and financial guarantees. All
required landscaping shall be installed before occupancy,
or within six months if occupancy occurs during the winter.
Financial security suitable to the City, in the form of an
escrow account, a bond, or an irrevocable letter of credit,
equivalent to 30% of the value of the plantings shall be
maintained for a period of 18 months after planting. All
plantings shall be watered regularly during their first year
and maintained permanently in good growing condition as
an effective visual screen. Shrubs or trees which die shall
be replaced within one growing season with new shrubs or
trees to ensure continued compliance with applicable
landscaping requirements.
(10) Parking held in reserve. If the applicant can clearly demonstrate to
the Planning Board that, because of the nature of the operation or
use, the parking or loading requirements of this chapter are
unnecessary or excessive, the Planning Board shall have the power
to approve a site plan showing less parking or loading area than
required; provided, however, that a landscaped area of sufficient
size to meet the deficiency shall be set aside and reserved for the
§ 230-708 SACO CITY CODE § 230-708
173:742
§ 230-709. Traffic and highway access. [Amended 3-2-1992]
purpose of meeting future off-street parking and loading
requirements in the event that a change of use of the premises
shall make the use of such additional off-street facilities necessary.
The applicant, at the time of the initial application, shall submit for
Planning Board approval a design of this possible future parking
area. The reserved area shall be converted to parking in whole or
in part whenever the owner desires, or when deemed necessary
by the Planning Board. In addition, a reevaluation of the parking
requirement shall be required upon a change of use, expansion,
or renovation. Notations describing these arrangements shall be
included on the face of the plan.
(11) Drive-through facilities. Each drive-through or queuing lane shall
be separated from the circulation lanes by means of pavement
markings, signs, and/or islands and shall not block access to any
parking spaces. Stacking spaces shall not be permitted in the
required building setbacks. Five stacking spaces shall be provided
for each bank teller station or automated teller machine. At least 10
stacking spaces will be provided for a restaurant's drive-in window.
[Amended 3-2-1992]
(12) Minor conditional uses. Upon an affirmative finding by the
Planning Office, home occupations that are reviewed as minor
conditional uses may be exempted from the parking standards of
§ 230-708C(3), specifically the requirement for turnaround
capacity and off-street parking. Instead, minor conditional uses
may be permitted to count street parking immediately in front of
the home, and on the same side of the street, as parking spaces,
where on-street parking is permitted.
(13) Parking lot interconnections. Where practical, the design of
parking lots shall provide for lot-to-lot vehicle movement via
interior connecting roads. [Amended 2-19-2002].
A. Curb cuts.
(1) On collectors and arterials (as identified in the 1990 "Infrastructure
Inventory and Management Program"), no use or development on a
single lot or on separate but contiguous lots shall have more than
one curb cut serving the use or development. However, in the
course of site plan review under Article XI of this chapter, the
Planning Board may allow a second curb cut, provided no more
than one curb cut shall be on the same public right-of-way, unless
the curb cuts are designed to operate as a one-way pair.
(2) Curb cuts serving lots on Routes 1, 5 and 112 and providing access
to one or more of said routes shall, for each lot, be separated by at
least 500 feet as measured along the street line, except if operated
as a one-way pair or serving a gasoline station approved by the
§ 230-708 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-709
173:743
Planning Board, or two-family dwelling. To the extent possible,
new development along these routes shall share common points
of access. The Planning Board may impose reasonable conditions
to require joint access on both developed and undeveloped lots
adjoining the site. Entrances to developed commercial lots shall be
kept clear of parked cars to enable good access and to prevent cars
from stacking onto public roads.
(3) Minimum and maximum throat widths for curb cuts on public
streets shall be as follows:
One-Way
Operation Two-Way Operation
Driveway Width
(feet)
Driveway Width
(feet)
Single- and 2-family
dwellings
10-15 10-20
3 to 20 dwelling
units
10-20 15-25
More than 20
dwelling units
10-25 20-36
Commercial and
industrial
10-30 16-40
For two-way operation driveways, the Planning Board may
require the placement of separation islands, which shall not be
included within the above widths.
B. Sight distance. Any exit driveway serving five or more parking spaces
shall be so designed as to provide the following recommended exiting
sight distance measured in each direction. Sight distances shall be
measured from the driver's seat of a vehicle, a distance of 10 feet
behind the edge of the traveled way from a height of eye 3 1/2 feet to an
object 3 1/2 feet above the pavement. The Planning Board shall give
preference to the recommended sight distance rather than the
minimum. However, where the driveway is moved to the optimum
position on the lot, and the Planning Board determines that an adequate
level of traffic safety has been attained, the Planning Board may permit
less than the recommended distance in the following table. [Amended
3-2-1992, 4-30-2007]
Allowable Speed
(miles per hour)
Recommended
Distance
(feet)
Minimum Required
Distance
(feet)
20 225 200
25 280 250
§ 230-709 SACO CITY CODE § 230-709
173:744
Allowable Speed
(miles per hour)
Recommended
Distance
(feet)
Minimum Required
Distance
(feet)
30 335 300
35 390 350
40 445 400
45 500 450
50 555 500
55 610 550
C. Review by Public Works Department. Any proposed new curb cut on a
public way shall be reviewed and approved by the Saco Public Works
Department in accordance with the above standards and such other
standards relating to drainage and traffic safety as the Department
shall require.
D. Pedestrian access. New or substantially enlarged commercial and
multifamily developments subject to site plan review shall provide for
safe, convenient pedestrian access with sidewalks built to City
specifications, except where the Planning Board determines that little
pedestrian access is likely or pedestrian safety is already adequate.
E. Corner clearance for driveways. Corner clearance is the minimum
distance, measured parallel to a roadway, between the nearest curb,
pavement or shoulder line of an intersecting public way and the nearest
edge of a driveway entrance or exit, excluding its radii. The
recommended corner clearance for entrances for unsignalized
intersections is 100 feet with a minimum of 50 feet. The recommended
corner clearance for signalized intersections is 125 feet with a
minimum of 75 feet. [Amended 4-30-2007]
F. Implementation of off-site traffic improvements. When improvements to
roads or intersections within the study area are required as part of a
condition of approval of a site plan, conditional use, or other permit,
these improvements must be implemented prior to occupancy of the
development, except where the following occurs:
(1) Maine Department of Transportation impact fee is applied.
(a) Impact fee payment. The applicant has paid or will pay an
impact fee to MaineDOT for future improvements; and
(b) Impact fee use. The impact fee will be used to make the
required improvements by MaineDOT; and
(c) Improvement plan approval. The improvement plan has been
reviewed and approved for implementation by the City and
MaineDOT; and
§ 230-709 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-709
173:745
§ 230-710. Water recreation and storage facilities.
Any facility for water recreation, such as swimming pools, and commercial
fishing ponds, or any other water storage facility, such as reservoirs, fish
hatcheries, sewage lagoons, and farm ponds, shall comply with the
following requirements.
(d) Schedule. The improvements are scheduled for
implementation within three years of the initial occupancy of
the development; OR
(2) City of Saco traffic mitigation fee is applied.
(a) The City may impose traffic mitigation fees on projects in
addition to and/or in lieu of actual improvements;
(b) The City may impose traffic mitigation fees on the project for
their impact on substandard intersections or roadways; OR
(3) Where improvements are to be implemented by MaineDOT or the
City of Saco. The applicant demonstrates that the necessary traffic
improvements have been identified by the MaineDOT or the City of
Saco as improvements which will be implemented; OR
(4) Where monitoring will be performed by the applicant. The
applicant will be responsible for monitoring safety and/or traffic
conditions. The approval conditions may also make the applicant
responsible for implementation of improvements if the specified
monitoring conditions are met. [Amended 4-30-2007]
A. Plan required. Before a building permit shall be issued to the operator
or owner of the facility, a plan shall be submitted to the Building
Inspector showing size of facility, proposed use, parking arrangement
and use of buildings on the site, surrounding properties and their
usage, and any other pertinent information.
B. Standards.
(1) Setbacks.
(a) No swimming pool shall be constructed closer than 10 feet
from the side or rear lot line, nor closer to the front line of any
lot than would be permitted for buildings or other structures
by other provisions of this chapter. Mechanical equipment
related to the maintenance of a swimming pool shall not be
located closer to a property line than the minimum yard
dimension of the zoning district in which the pool is located.
(b) All other water recreation and water storage facilities shall
comply with the setback requirements of the zoning districts in
which they are located.
(2) Fencing.
§ 230-709 SACO CITY CODE § 230-710
173:746
§ 230-711. Home occupations.
(a) The facility shall be entirely enclosed by a fence no less than
four feet high to prevent uncontrolled access by small children.
The fence shall have no openings larger than four inches in the
least dimension. Any building or related structure may be
included as part of the required enclosure. Every gate or other
opening in the fence enclosing such pool, except an opening
through the dwelling or other main building of the premises,
shall be kept securely locked at all times when the owner or
occupant of the premises is not present at such pool.
(b) Pools that are four feet or more above ground may be exempt
from the fence requirement if all access ramps, stairways or
ladders are removed or equipped with locking gates for use
when unattended.
(3) Off-street parking. The facility, if operated to attract visitors, shall
comply with the off-street parking requirements of this chapter.
C. Swimming pools as accessory uses. Swimming pools may be permitted
in any district as accessory uses to a dwelling for the private use of the
owners or occupants of such dwelling and their families and guests,
subject to all other standards in this section plus the following
conditions:
(1) Such pool shall not occupy more than 40% of the lot area, excluding
all garages or other accessory structures located in such area.
(2) If the water for such pool is supplied from the private well, there
shall be no cross-connection with the public water supply system.
(3) If the water for such pool is supplied from the public water supply
system, the inlet shall be above the overflow level of the pool.
(4) Such pool shall be chemically treated in a manner sufficient to
maintain the bacteria standards established by the provisions of
the State Sanitary Code relating to public swimming pools.
(5) No loudspeaker device which can be heard beyond the property
lines of the premises on which any swimming pool has been
installed may be operated in connection with such pool, nor may
any lighting be installed in connection therewith which shall throw
any rays beyond such property lines.
A. Conditions. Home occupations shall conform with the following
conditions:
(1) The occupation or profession shall be carried on wholly within the
principal building or within a building or other structure accessory
thereto.
§ 230-710 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-711
173:747
§ 230-712. Used merchandise sales.
(2) Not more than one employee outside the family shall be employed
in the home occupation.
(3) There shall be no exterior display, no exterior sign except as
permitted by § 230-707 of this chapter, no exterior storage of
materials, and no other exterior indication of the home occupation
or variation from the residential character of the building.
(4) No nuisance, offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat,
glare, or electrical disturbance shall be generated.
(5) No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in such
volumes that it will create hazardous conditions in the
neighborhood.
(6) In addition to the off-street parking provided to meet the normal
requirement of the dwelling, off-street parking shall be provided in
conformance with the standards of this chapter.
(7) The home occupation shall not utilize more than the equivalent of
25% of the total floor area of the dwelling unit.
(8) A home occupation shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
(a) Art studio or other crafts studio.
(b) Dressmaking or similar shop.
(c) Hairdressing shop.
(d) Teaching or tutoring facility.
(e) Office of a physician; dentist, optometrist, lawyer, engineer,
architect, accountant, or similar professional.
(f) Office of a real estate broker or agent.
(g) Office of an insurance agent or broker.
B. Prohibited home occupations. A home occupation shall not be
interpreted to include the following:
(1) Facility for the repair of motor vehicles.
(2) The retailing of any item not produced on the premises. [Amended
8-1-1988]
(3) Medical marijuana caregivers, growing. [Amended 9-19-2016]
A. Where permitted by this chapter, outdoor sales of used merchandise
shall comply with the following standards:
§ 230-711 SACO CITY CODE § 230-712
173:748
§ 230-713. Offices in residential districts.
(1) Adequate off-street parking shall be provided in such a manner that
the visibility of drivers along the public roads is not reduced.
(2) A maximum of two signs, each not exceeding three square feet per
side in area, may be erected on the operator's property.
(3) All display tables shall be cleared and removed to a location not
visible from the road at the end of each business day.
(4) All relevant provisions of this chapter must be complied with.
A. In those residential districts where they are permitted as conditional
uses, offices shall comply with the following standards in addition to
those listed under other relevant provisions of this chapter:
(1) Offices shall be located only within converted residential structures
in order to retain the essential residential character of these
neighborhoods, except as allowed in Subsection A(5) below.
(2) Parking for offices shall be located to the side or rear of the
building.
(3) All outdoor lighting shall be shielded to avoid "overspill" onto
abutting residential properties or glare into the street.
(4) Exterior alterations shall be minimized and shall be subject to
design review by the Planning Board, which will use § 230-413K as
the basis of its review of additions and alterations. After acting on
the conditional use and site plan, the Planning Board may delegate
this design review to the Historic Preservation Commission, which
shall make the final determination on compliance with § 230-413K
when the Planning Board has so delegated. In historic districts and
on historic sites, this design review shall be the responsibility of the
Saco Historic Preservation Commission rather than the Planning
Board.
(5) In special situations where a building is extremely dilapidated and
structurally unsound and where reuse is therefore not practicable
or economically feasible or where a building is not judged to be a
significant component of the neighborhood's overall architectural
and historic character, the Planning Board may approve plans to
replace an existing residential building with a proposed new office
building whose scale and design would be appropriate to the site
and to the neighborhood. The Board shall obtain the
recommendation of the Saco Historic Preservation Commission
before granting permission to demolish. The Commission and the
Planning Board shall utilize the standards of this subsection and
those in § 230-413 relative to demolition in determining whether to
permit the demolition. In the historic district and on historic sites,
§ 230-712 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-713
173:749
§ 230-714. Airports.
Airports or airplane landing strips used by persons or firms other than the
owner, or for which a landing or take-off fee is charged, shall meet the
following requirements:
§ 230-715. Soil suitability for land uses and roads.
the decision on demolition shall rest entirely with the Historic
Preservation Commission.
(6) Proposals to locate offices in residential districts shall be subject to
site plan review.
(7) Outdoor storage is prohibited. [Amended 5-7-1993]
A. Information required. Where permitted under the terms of this chapter,
proposals for new or expanded airports shall, as part of conditional use
appeal and/or site plan review as required, provide the following
information in addition to that required by such review:
(1) The boundaries of the "clear zone" (where structures are
prohibited under state or federal aviation regulations);
(2) The boundaries of the "sound footprint" showing the noise contours
expected to be produced on the ground by approaching or
departing aircraft;
(3) A property value impact study evaluating the effect of the proposed
use or expansion upon all residential, commercial or industrial
premises existing within the "sound footprint."
A. All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which the proposed
uses or structures can be established or maintained without causing
adverse environmental impacts, including severe erosion, mass soil
movement, improper drainage, and water pollution, whether during or
after construction. Proposed uses requiring subsurface waste disposal,
and commercial or industrial development and other similar intensive
land uses, shall require a soils report based on an on-site investigation
and be prepared by state-certified professionals, sufficient to
demonstrate that the proposed use will meet the criteria noted above in
this subsection. Certified persons may include Maine certified soil
scientists, Maine registered professional engineers, Maine state
certified geologists and other persons who have training and
experience in the recognition and evaluation of soil properties. The
report shall be based upon the analysis of the characteristics of the soil
and surrounding land and water areas, maximum groundwater
elevation, presence of ledge, drainage conditions, and other pertinent
data which the evaluator deems appropriate. The soils report shall
include recommendations for a proposed use to counteract soil
limitations where they exist.
§ 230-713 SACO CITY CODE § 230-715
173:750
§ 230-716. Bed-and-breakfasts in historic districts. [Amended
12-7-1992]
§ 230-717. Adult businesses. [Amended 1-19-1993]
B. Any new roads shall prepare soil borings every 150 feet of the road
length for review by the Public Works Director. A new road will only be
allowed when soil borings indicate that the subsoils are of an adequate
type to sustain the new road. [Amended 4-21-1992]
A. In order to encourage the preservation and reuse of historic buildings,
this chapter permits bed-and-breakfast establishments in the R-1a and
C-1 Districts as a conditional use in houses in the Historic Overlay
District(s) or in houses designated as historic sited under § 230-413D, E
and F, subject to the conditional use standards of this chapter and
subject to the following special standards:
(1) Existing buildings are not required to conform to setbacks.
(2) New parking areas to be enlarged by five or more spaces and new
access drives shall be 10 feet from the side and rear lot lines.
Existing parking areas and access drives do not need to meet a
setback.
(3) For both new and existing parking areas, the Planning Board may
impose conditions of approval, including plantings, fences, earth
berms, and other screens and buffers, to assure that adequate
protection of nearby uses is provided.
A. Location of adult businesses. No adult business shall be located:
(1) In any zoning district other than B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, B-5, or B-6,
Business Districts.
(2) In any location where the customer entrance to the "adult"
business would be closer than 500 feet, measured in a straight line,
to the nearest point on the boundary of any property which is:
(a) Occupied by a church, playground, amusement park, public
facility, excluding roads, dwelling, school, or park; or
(b) Located in a residential zone.
(3) In any location where the customer entrance would be closer than
1,000 feet to the nearest point on the boundary of any property
which is occupied by another "adult" business.
B. Displays. There shall be no outside displays, window displays, or
interior displays visible from the outside of the building, of any
materials, text or devices displaying, exhibiting or describing specified
sexual activities, sexual materials or paraphernalia.
§ 230-715 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-717
173:751
§ 230-718. Service station pump island canopies for existing
stations.
§ 230-719. Special standards for B-7 Limited Business/Residential
District. [Amended 1-17-1995]
C. Time of operation. No adult business shall be open for business
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following
morning.
D. Review authority. All proposals for an adult business shall be subject to
minor site plan review.
E. Operating standards. No adult business shall be permitted to operate
any viewing booths or viewing facilities.
A. This section applies only to service stations without pump island
canopies which exist on May 18, 1993. Canopies are exempt from the
front setback requirements of Table 412-1 and instead are governed by
the standards of this section. This exemption applies only to pump
island canopies and not for other construction on the service station lot.
(1) If all requirements of this section are met, a pump island canopy
may be erected, but it shall extend no farther than 12 feet in front
of the fuel pumps nearest the front property line. In no case shall
the front of the canopy extend closer than five feet to a front
property line.
(2) All pump island canopies are subject to site plan review.
(3) The pump island canopy and its supports shall not obscure any
sight lines for traffic on nearby streets.
(4) Signs on the canopy shall be limited to the name of the business or
brand name of the gasoline and shall also conform to all standards
of § 230-707 and other sections of this chapter. Signs on canopies
shall be counted toward the amount of signage permitted in
§ 230-707.
(5) The pump island canopy shall not be enclosed in any manner. No
buildings which do not conform to the normal setback
requirements shall be erected under canopies. Pump island
canopies shall be used only to provide shelter to persons using fuel
pumps. If the property is to be converted to any other use, the
canopies shall be removed before the new use is permitted.
[Amended 5-7-1993]
A. Parking shall be located chiefly to the side and rear of buildings. At least
50% of the area between the building and the street right-of-way will be
maintained as vegetated.
§ 230-717 SACO CITY CODE § 230-719
173:752
§ 230-720. Special standards for self-storage facilities. [Amended
3-16-1998]
§ 230-721. Home-based retail use in residential districts. [Amended
11-16-1998]
B. All outdoor lighting shall be shielded to avoid "overspill" onto abutting
residential properties or glare into the street.
C. Outdoor storage is prohibited.
D. On-street parking spaces on the same side of the street as the proposed
business, in front of the front lot line of the proposed business, may be
counted toward the parking requirement for the business as required in
§ 230-708B.
A. A landscape plan shall be submitted as part of the conditional use
application for all self-service storage facilities. Landscaping, including
earth work, trees, shrubbery, other plantings, fences and other
landscape elements sufficient to buffer the often harsh appearance of
self-storage facilities from neighboring land uses and the public way, is
required unless the Planning Board makes a determination that the
building design and/or the remote or unusual nature of the site of a selfservice
storage facility is adequate without additional landscaping.
B. Outdoor storage is prohibited within 100 feet of any public way and is
limited to registered boats and registered recreational vehicles,
including registered camp trailers. Outdoor storage is also prohibited
within the side, rear and front setbacks. The registrations must be
readily available for inspection. No human habitation is permitted in
the recreational vehicles, trailers and boats.
C. Repairs of vehicles or other equipment, or outdoor auctions or outdoor
sales are not permitted.
D. All lighting shall be shielded to direct light away from adjacent
properties and the public way.
A. In those districts where they are permitted as conditional uses, homebased
retail uses shall comply with the following standards in addition
to those listed under other relevant provisions of this chapter:
(1) Home-based retail uses shall be located only within existing
residential structures or accessory structures in order to retain the
essential residential character of these neighborhoods.
(2) Existing buildings are not required to conform to setbacks.
(3) Parking for home-based retail uses shall be located to the side or
rear of on-site buildings.
§ 230-719 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-721
173:753
§ 230-722. Golf courses.
(4) New parking spaces and new access drives shall be 10 feet from
side and rear lot lines. Existing parking areas and access drives do
not need to meet a setback.
(5) For both new and existing parking areas, the Planning Board may
impose conditions of approval, including plantings, fences, earth
berms, and other screens as buffers, to assure adequate protection
of nearby uses is provided.
(6) All outside lighting shall be shielded to avoid "overspill" onto
abutting residential properties or glare into the street.
(7) Exterior alterations shall be minimized. In historic districts,
exterior alterations shall be reviewed by the Saco Historic
Preservation Commission.
(8) Outdoor storage is prohibited.
A. Development and operation of a commercial golf course facility shall be
subject to the following standards:
(1) A golf course, including supporting facilities, shall have a minimum
land area of 75 acres.
(2) Vehicular access to a golf course facility in a residential or
conservation zoning district shall be directly from a collector or
arterial street.
(3) Structures in residential and conservation districts:
(a) Only buildings and accessory structures necessary for the
operation of and use by golf course patrons shall be permitted.
These are limited to a pro shop, one staff dwelling unit, snack
bar or restaurant for golf course patrons, function hall, locker
and restrooms, maintenance facility, and parking area.
(b) No single building shall be larger than 5,000 square feet, and
the total square footage of all buildings shall not exceed 12,000
square feet, and no more than three buildings shall be
permitted.
(c) The use of golf course buildings in residential and conservation
districts is limited to golf-related functions for golf patrons,
members and guests of members, and the buildings shall not
be used for general non-golf functions, such as weddings,
parties, and other private functions.
(d) All buildings shall be residential in appearance and visually
compatible with neighborhood buildings if visible from nearby
residences or the public streets. This determination shall be
made by the Planning Board, based on building elevations
§ 230-721 SACO CITY CODE § 230-722
173:754
§ 230-723. Seasonal rental of dwelling units. [Amended 2-7-2000]
submitted by the applicant. All buildings shall be 100 feet from
any property line.
(4) All golf courses shall provide a construction schedule and plan
which limit the amount of area to be excavated at one time before
stabilization, and a winter stabilization plan. A conditional use
permit shall not be issued without such a plan.
(5) Inspections. The applicant shall retain a registered engineer or
other professional acceptable to the City to provide third-party
inspection of all important drainage elements, including, but not
limited to, outlets, spillways, embankments, ditches, erosion
control and soil stabilization measures, detention basins, wet ponds
and other drainage and erosion control elements. Inspections shall
occur weekly and after any significant rainfall. Alternative
schedules can be approved in advance by the City. Inspection
reports will be submitted to the City within a week for review.
(6) A plan for the application of pesticides, fertilizers, herbicides and
other chemicals shall be submitted and evaluated for impacts on
water quality. The plan shall not be approved if a degradation of
surface water quality or groundwater quality will result from these
activities.
(7) Parking areas will be buffered according to the standards of
§ 230-708C. In residential and conservation districts, the Planning
Board may require additional buffering or setbacks to protect
nearby residences and the residential appearance of these areas.
(8) Signage. Notwithstanding § 230-707D, a golf course in a
residential, conservation or Resource Protection District may erect
a single freestanding sign and a single wall sign. A freestanding
sign printed on one side only shall not exceed 32 square feet in area
nor exceed eight feet in height. A freestanding sign printed on both
sides shall not exceed 16 square feet per side nor exceed eight feet
in height. A wall sign shall be limited to eight square feet in area.
Signs at a golf course shall conform in every other way with
§ 230-707 of this chapter. [Amended 10-21-2002]
A. Seasonal rentals of single-family, two-family, and multifamily dwelling
units, to the extent to which they are permitted elsewhere in this
chapter, may be rented for periods of six days to four months. Rental of
dwelling units longer than four months is not considered a seasonal
rental and is not regulated by this section. Both the rental of dwelling
units as part of a house swap, and the renting of a dwelling unit for
caretaking purposes at a rent which is substantially below the market
rent, are not considered a seasonal rental and are not regulated by this
section.
§ 230-722 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-723
173:755
§ 230-724. Private roads. [Amended 10-5-2001; 4-7-2003]
B. In addition to the standards of this chapter, seasonal rentals shall
comply with the City's Seasonal Property Rental Ordinance.110
C. Only single-family, two-family, and multifamily dwelling units within the
area east of Seaside Avenue and Camp Ellis Avenue and areas within
400 feet to the west of the center line of these streets may be rented or
leased as a seasonal dwelling.
D. Any dwelling unit rented as a seasonal dwelling shall be occupied by
only one family and shall not be sublet or subrented in whole or in part
to another party.
E. Properties approved by the City as seasonal dwellings shall not include
facilities and accommodations that would serve to circumvent this
chapter by creating independent or semi-independent suites of rooms
that might be rented separately. Such facilities and accommodations
might include, but are not limited to, kitchen facilities or partial kitchen
facilities, microwave ovens, hot plates or other cooking devices,
multiple laundry facilities, additional cable television connections or
independently metered utilities, additional sinks and other plumbing,
additional entrances beyond those customary in a dwelling unit, and
entrances which are separate from common areas of the dwelling unit
and allow a room or suite of rooms to be occupied separately from the
unit as a whole.
A. General requirements. No building permit shall be issued to erect any
structure containing a dwelling unit on a lot without frontage on a
public road, nor shall a new lot be created without frontage on a public
road, unless a road meeting the criteria for a "private road" has been
approved under site plan review and constructed. If approved under
site plan review, a private road may be established in accordance with
the following provisions:
(1) Each lot shall have the minimum frontage required in the district
regulations.
(2) No more than four new lots shall be established on any new or
existing private road or private road network. A private road
network shall have no more than two private roads designed to
connect as nearly as possible at right angles. A variation of up to
15° may be permitted. A new private road is one created after
October 15, 2001, and conforming with the requirements of
§ 230-724.
(3) When a private road is created or extended or a new lot is created
on a private road, and if the private road is to provide access to two
or more lots, a maintenance agreement specifying each lot owner's
110. Editor's Note: See Ch. 173, Seasonal Property Rental.
§ 230-723 SACO CITY CODE § 230-724
173:756
rights and responsibilities with respect to ownership, maintenance,
repair, and plowing shall be submitted for the City's approval. After
approval by the City, this agreement shall be recorded in the York
County Registry of Deeds before a building permit is issued.
(4) The plan of the new, extended, or improved road as approved and
signed by the City Planner or Planning Board shall be recorded in
the York County Registry of Deeds within 30 days of City approval.
If the plan is not recorded within 30 days, the approval shall
become null and void.
(5) Nothing in this section shall override any requirement in the
Subdivision Regulations that subdivisions and all lots within
subdivisions be built on public streets. See Section 10.8 of the
Subdivision Regulations. [Amended 10-19-2015]
(6) The person proposing the private road shall submit a name for City
review. The name of the street shall not be so similar to the name of
other streets or locations in the City as to cause confusion. The City
reserves the right to designate any name for the road and name
and number it in accordance with E-911 standards.
(7) The land within the right-of-way of an approved private road shall
not be used to meet the frontage or lot area requirements of any lot
obtaining its frontage from the private road. The creation of a
private road shall not reduce the frontage, lot area, or other
dimensional requirements of an existing conforming lot below that
required by the zone in which it is located nor reduce the frontage,
lot area, or other dimensional requirements of an existing
nonconforming lot.
(8) The maintenance agreement shall be adequate for its purpose. Any
private road plan required under Subsection A(4) above shall bear
a note that "The City of Saco will not be responsible for the
maintenance, repair, plowing or similar services for the private
way. Future lot divisions may be prohibited."
(9) Construction standards. The design standards for new private
roads and existing private roads are as follows:
(a) ROW width: 50 feet if new; 40 feet for existing portions.
(b) Minimum travel width: 18 feet.
(c) Minimum aggregate subbase (Type D): 15 inches.
(d) Crushed gravel (Type A) or reclaimed surface course: three
inches.
(e) Minimum center-line grade: 1%.
(f) Minimum center-line radius: 150 feet (new roads only).
§ 230-724 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-724
173:757
(g) Roadway crown: 3/8 inch per foot.
(h) Maximum grade at intersection: 2%.
(i) Maximum length dead end: 1,500 feet (including a dead-end
public road, an existing private road or a private road
network).
(j) Maximum slope: 10%.
(k) A turnaround suitable for public safety vehicles is required and
can be designed as a hammerhead or T or cul-de-sac.
(l) Swales and culverts are generally acceptable. However, at the
intersection with a City street, the drainage practice used on
the intersecting street may be required for the portion within
the City right-of-way.
(m) A private road shall have a paved apron 40 feet long
commencing at the existing edge of pavement of the
intersecting public street. The portion in the City right-of-way
will be constructed to normal City street standards.
(n) The applicant will provide a stop sign and street name sign
meeting City specifications at the intersection with the public
street prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit.
(10) Trees and brush shall be cleared from within three feet of the
travelway, and this clear zone shall be maintained permanently. The
Saco Fire Department may inspect the road periodically. If the road
is not in good repair in the judgment of the Fire Department, the
parties to the maintenance agreement may be notified that the road
needs repair and that the City may discontinue emergency
services.
(11) Before an occupancy permit is issued, the road will be inspected by
the City, and the applicant's engineer shall certify that it has been
constructed as designed.
(12) Existing private roads. Any private road existing on October 15,
2001, which provides frontage for one or more lots shall be allowed
to provide frontage to those existing lots and up to four additional
lots if it meets the standards or is improved to the standards of this
section. The design standards for existing private roads are
included in Subsection A(9) above.
(13) Additional submissions. In addition to the submissions
requirements of § 230-1104A, applicants for the review of a private
road shall provide:
(a) A plan showing the new private road, or extensions, or
improved private road shall be prepared by a registered
professional engineer. The plan shall be labeled "Plan of a
§ 230-724 SACO CITY CODE § 230-724
173:758
§ 230-725. Standards for farm stands.
Private Road" and shall provide a signature block. The plan
shall delineate the private road and each of the lots it will
serve, including complete descriptive data by bearings and
distances of existing (if any) and proposed rights-of-way.
(b) The plan for the road shall include grades, the road profile, a
typical section, a grading plan, a drainage plan, a plan for
erosion and sedimentation control, and a utilities plan for each
private road serving two or more lots.
(c) A copy of the signed standard boundary survey on which the
street plan is based.
(d) If the private road is to provide access to two or more lots, a
maintenance agreement specifying the maintenance, repair
and plowing responsibilities of each lot owner shall be
submitted. Any private road plan required under Subsection
A(4) above shall bear a note that "The City of Saco will not be
responsible for the maintenance, repair, plowing or similar
services for the private way. Future lot divisions may be
prohibited."
(e) The location and size of existing and proposed utility
connections, including sewer, or subsurface wastewater
disposal systems, water, power, telephone, stormwater
drainage systems, power poles, light poles and nearest
hydrant(s).
(f) If an extension to an existing private road is proposed, the plan
shall include all submissions required in § 230-724A(13). If
only minor improvements to the existing portion of the road
are required, the City Planner may waive the submission and
recording of some or all of a detailed plan of the existing
portion of the road.
A. A farm stand shall conform to the following standards: [Amended
11-5-2001]
(1) The use as a farm stand shall be accessory to a principal use as a
commercial agricultural business.
(2) The structure used as the farm stand shall conform to the yard and
setback requirements of the district in which it is located.
(3) Products sold at the farm stand shall be limited to the following:
(a) Agricultural products raised or produced as part of the
commercial agricultural use;
(b) Foodstuffs produced from products raised or produced as part
of the commercial agricultural use;
§ 230-724 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-725
173:759
§ 230-726. Standards for the reuse of existing agricultural
buildings. [Amended 11-15-2001]
§ 230-727. Standards for an accessory apartment in a single-family
dwelling. [Amended 6-18-2001; 10-20-2008]
(c) Other locally or regionally produced foodstuffs, including
processed food products such as jams, jellies, pickles, sauces
or baked goods; and
(d) Locally or regionally produced handicrafts, whether produced
on or off the premises.
(4) The sales area devoted to the sale of foodstuffs and/or handicrafts
not produced by the commercial agricultural use shall not exceed
50% of the total sales area.
A. Agricultural buildings existing as of April 1, 2000, may be reused for
nonresidential purposes, subject to the following limitations:
(1) There is no retail sales of goods not otherwise allowed in the
district;
(2) The nonresidential activity occurs completely within the
agricultural building and there is no outside storage of materials,
equipment, or products;
(3) The architectural character of the building is maintained;
(4) Exterior changes in the structure are limited to minor changes and/
or additions needed to provide access or comply with code
requirements; and
(5) Any reuse shall conform to the performance standards of Articles
VII and VIII.
A. An "accessory apartment" is a small apartment that is accessory and
subordinate to the principal use of a property as a single-family
dwelling. These standards are intended to allow the addition of an
accessory apartment to a single-family dwelling only if such addition
will preserve the single-family residential character of the property. The
following standards shall be met to create and maintain an accessory
apartment in a single-family dwelling:
(1) An accessory apartment in a single-family dwelling must be an
allowed use in the district in which the property is located.
(2) The single-family home and the accessory apartment must be
located entirely outside of the Shoreland Zone.
(3) The single-family dwelling must be located on a lot that conforms to
the minimum lot area requirement for the district in which it is
located, but in no case shall the lot be less than 7,500 square feet in
§ 230-725 SACO CITY CODE § 230-727
173:760
§ 230-728. Wireless telecommunications facilities/towers and
antennas. [Amended 10-21-2002]
area if served by public sewerage or 40,000 square feet in area if
served by on-site sewage disposal. For the purposes of this section,
the accessory apartment shall not be considered to be a second
dwelling unit for determining the required minimum lot area.
(4) If the lot is served by public sewerage, both the single-family
dwelling and the accessory apartment must be connected to the
sewer system. If the lot is served by on-site sewage disposal, the
owner must demonstrate that lot complies with the State of Maine
Minimum Lot Size Law111 and the sewage disposal system(s) for
both the single-family dwelling and the accessory apartment
complies with the Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
(5) Following the creation of the accessory apartment, the singlefamily
dwelling must have a gross floor area of at least 900 square
feet.
(6) The accessory apartment shall be located within a single-family
dwelling with or without addition to the building.
(7) Either the single-family dwelling or the accessory apartment must
be occupied by the owner of the property as his/her primary
residence. Both units shall be occupied as primary residences, and
neither unit may be rented for less than a monthly basis.
(8) Any exterior alteration of the single-family dwelling or accessory
buildings shall preserve the single-family appearance, architectural
style, and character of the original structure and shall be in
harmony with the general appearance of the neighborhood. Any
alteration shall preserve the front entrance of the original structure
to preserve the single-family character. A separate entrance for the
accessory apartment may be created but shall not be located on
any facade that faces a public street or private road or on the
facade of the building where the main entrance is located, except
for houses with double or triple frontage.
(9) At least three off-street parking spaces shall be provided in
accordance with § 230-708. At least one space shall be available for
the occupant(s) of the accessory apartment. The parking shall be
located and designed to minimize the impact on adjacent
properties and shall be buffered by landscaping and/or fencing
from abutting residential uses if located in the side or rear yard.
A. The intent of the City is to minimize the visual, environmental, and
operational impacts on the City and its residents of new wireless
telecommunications facilities, including the towers, antennas and
111. Editor's Note: See 12 M.R.S.A. § 4807 et seq.
§ 230-727 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-728
173:761
accessory structures associated with such facilities. This standard is
also intended:
(1) To minimize the adverse impacts of such facilities, including, but
not limited to, visual, environmental, health and safety, and
property value impacts, and impacts to historically significant
areas.
(2) To encourage co-location of carriers, thereby minimizing the
number of facilities located within the City.
(3) To encourage the utilization of alternative tower structures,
thereby minimizing the number of facilities located within the City.
(4) To permit the construction of new facilities only where all other
reasonable opportunities have been exhausted.
(5) To provide for the removal of facilities no longer in operation.
(6) To ensure that provision is made for the reservation of space on a
proposed facility that will enable City of Saco public safety needs to
be met.
B. Submission requirements. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall
be considered a conditional use, subject to Planning Board review as
outlined in Article IX. Such facilities shall also be subject to Article XI,
Site Plan Review. In addition to the submission requirements of Articles
IX and XI, the following information shall be submitted as part of the
application for a wireless telecommunications facility:
(1) An inventory of all existing wireless telecommunications facilities
within the City of Saco and all directly abutting communities, to
include specific locations, heights, and types of tower. Said
inventory shall include both a text-based list and a map showing
Saco, all directly abutting communities, and all wireless
telecommunications facility locations in those communities.
(2) A description of the proposed facility's area of service and how it
relates to the applicant's existing or proposed area of service in
northern York and southern Cumberland Counties.
(3) A written statement of the carrying capacity of the proposed facility
in terms of the number and types of antennas it is designed to
accommodate.
(4) A written statement prepared by a qualified professional
addressing why a new facility is necessary. This statement shall
provide details such as, but not limited to: existing and proposed
service area maps, future expansion needs in the area, the lack of
existing facilities to service the area intended for the proposed
facility, the lack of space on existing facilities, and/or why existing
facilities may not be adequately engineered for co-location
purposes.
§ 230-728 SACO CITY CODE § 230-728
173:762
(5) Certification by a structural engineer that the proposed facility will
meet all federal, state and City of Saco building code requirements.
(6) A visual impact analysis that quantifies the level of visual impact on
properties located within 500 feet, within 2,000 feet and within two
miles of the proposed structure. Said analysis shall include:
(a) Photo simulations of the proposed structure taken from
perspectives determined by the City Planner and/or the
Planning Board. The photo simulations shall include the
proposed visual impact on historic structures, public areas and
residential neighborhoods. Each photo shall be labeled with
the line of sight and elevation and shall show the color of the
proposed structure.
(b) Elevation drawings of the proposed structure and accessory
structures, clearly showing height above ground level.
(c) A landscaping plan indicating the placement of the structure
on the proposed site; location of existing structures, trees and
all other significant features of the site; type and location of
vegetation proposed to screen the base of the structure and
accessory buildings; placement and type of fencing, which
shall enclose the entire telecommunications facility; color of
structure; and proposed lighting.
(7) Any additional information deemed necessary by the Planning
Office or Planning Board.
C. Standards. In addition to criteria in Articles IX and XI, the Planning
Board shall consider the following factors in reaching a decision. The
Board may establish reasonable conditions to ensure conformity with
the purposes of this chapter and the City of Saco Comprehensive Plan.
(1) The height of the proposed tower does not exceed that which is
essential for its intended use, nor pose a threat to public safety.
(2) Proximity of the tower to residential development or zoning
districts.
(3) Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties.
(4) Surrounding topography.
(5) Design of the tower, antenna or facility, with particular reference to
design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or
eliminating visual obtrusiveness.
(6) Proposed access to the site.
(7) Availability of suitable existing towers and other alternative tower
structures.
§ 230-728 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-728
173:763
(8) Visual impacts on the community due to line of sight of the tower or
facility from historic structures, public or natural areas, or
residential neighborhoods.
(9) When possible, existing structures shall be used as an alternative
to the development of new towers, antennas or other facilities.
Shared use and co-location shall be a priority for both the applicant
and the Planning Board to consider.
D. Height. Telecommunications structures shall be limited to 190 feet in
height. Lesser heights shall be encouraged.
E. Landscaping, buffers, setbacks, aesthetics.
(1) Illumination, signals and signs are prohibited on
telecommunications towers and antennas, except as required by
the Federal Communications Commission or the Federal Aviation
Administration.
(2) A new or expanded telecommunications structure shall comply
with setback requirements for the zoning district in which it is
proposed, or be set back 105% of its height from all property lines,
whichever is greater. The latter requirement may be satisfied by
including areas outside the property boundaries if secured by an
easement. Said easement shall not exceed 30% of the overall
height of the structure.
(3) Towers, guys and accessory facilities shall meet the minimum
zoning district setback requirements.
(4) Wireless telecommunications facilities shall maintain the required
setbacks as undisturbed vegetated buffers, except for the access
road.
(5) The design of buildings and related structures shall use materials,
colors, textures, screenings and landscaping that will allow the
telecommunications facility to blend with the natural setting and
built environment to the extent possible.
(6) A security fence or wall not less than eight feet in height from the
finished grade shall be installed around the telecommunications
facility and all accessory buildings. Access to the tower shall be via
a lockable gate.
F. Upon approval and prior to issuance of a building permit, a financial
guarantee acceptable to the City Finance Director to ensure the timely
removal of towers and antennas which are abandoned shall be
submitted. A wireless telecommunications facility that is not operated
for a continuous twelve-month period shall be considered abandoned.
The financial guarantee shall be for a period of not less than five years.
The financial guarantee shall include a mechanism satisfactory to the
Finance Director for review of the cost of removal of the facility every
§ 230-728 SACO CITY CODE § 230-728
173:764
§ 230-729. Design standards. [Amended 4-11-2005]
five years and a mechanism for increasing the amount of the guarantee
should the revised cost estimate increase.
G. Exemptions. The following are exempt from the provisions of this
section:
(1) Emergency wireless telecommunications facilities for emergency
communications by public officials.
(2) Facilities on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the
City of Saco for the sole purpose of municipal use.
(3) Amateur ham radio stations licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission.
(4) An antenna that is an accessory use to a residential dwelling unit.
A. Purpose. The following design standards are intended to enhance and
improve the exterior appearance of commercial and multifamily
buildings and sites in order to:
(1) Protect and encourage Saco's cultural, architectural and visual
resources in order to preserve and cultivate a desirable
environment for its citizens and the region;
(2) Prevent the decline of business districts and neighborhoods and
maintain or upgrade building quality;
(3) Preserve and reinforce the natural, historic and architectural
qualities of business districts and neighborhoods;
(4) Attract development and redevelopment by establishing conditions
that result in an attractive living and working environment;
(5) Prevent the loss of community identity by prohibiting the repetition
of generic architectural forms found throughout the country, and
encourage instead site-specific architectural building design or
New England regional prototype building design.
B. Applicability.
(1) These design standards shall apply to all building construction or
remodeling projects requiring a conditional use permit or site plan
review according to requirements found in this chapter that are not
subject to covenants found in City industrial or business parks.
These standards shall not apply to § 230-901L, Minor conditional
uses, or to properties within the Historic Preservation District
subject to design review by the Historic Preservation Commission.
In addition, the additional requirements for the MU-1, B-2c and B-8
Districts shall apply to all projects that substantially alter the scale
or massing of the building or that change the street facade even if
§ 230-728 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-729
173:765
site plan review is not otherwise required. Where a project subject
to site plan or conditional use review is associated with an existing
building, such as an addition or partial remodeling, these design
standards shall apply only to the new construction or the part of
the building being remodeled.
(2) In the MU-3 and MU-4 Districts, any project that is part of a master
planned development for which a master plan has been approved
by the Planning Board must conform to the design and
development standards included in the master plan rather than the
standards of this section. However, any aspect of the design of a
project that is not addressed in the master plan shall be subject to
the standards of this section. [Amended 1-2-2007; 10-3-2011;
9-4-2012; 7-1-2013]
C. Intent. The City of Saco features a broad array of architectural styles,
many of which are based on traditional New England design. These
standards are intended to encourage a sense of continuity and
community identity, not to dictate specific building styles. These
standards are not intended to limit creativity but to serve as a useful
tool for design professionals to engage in contextual, site-specific
design. Acceptable building styles shall continue the City's humanscaled
environment through visually compatible architectural forms,
massing, details, relationship to nearby buildings and neighborhoods,
and the use of materials consistent with these standards.
The gables, bay windows and shingle siding contribute to the
traditional New England appearance of this building..
§ 230-729 SACO CITY CODE § 230-729
173:766
D. Submissions. In addition to requirements for site plan review or for a
conditional use permit, the following information shall be submitted:
(1) The plans shall include line drawings of all sides of the building or
buildings.
(2) The proposed exterior construction materials shall be indicated,
including, but not limited to, siding materials and roofing materials.
(3) Line drawings that demonstrate the style and design of windows
and doors proposed for the building or buildings shall be
submitted.
(4) The plans shall include line drawings of all proposed accessory
structures, including, but not limited to, canopies, storage
buildings, fenced enclosures, and maintenance buildings.
(5) If the applicant is or represents a corporate entity that operates
businesses of a similar nature in locations beyond Saco,
representative color photographs of existing structures identical or
similar to that proposed in Saco shall be submitted.
E. Design standards. All buildings and structures subject to these
standards shall comply with the following requirements to the greatest
extent practicable. The Planning Board shall recognize that, while
compatibility and the continuation of characteristics found in existing
buildings and site features is generally desirable, should an application
be found to deviate from one or more of these standards but still meet
the purpose and intent of these standards, the Board may find that the
purpose and intent of these standards have been met:
(1) Scale. The scale of a building is based on overall size, its mass in
relation to the space around it, and its entrances, windows, walls,
and roofline. The successful application of these features will result
in a building that provides continuity with the existing community.
When the scale of a building is visually incompatible with its site
and the scale of surrounding buildings, it shall be mitigated by
design strategies that lessen its visual impact so as to be visually
compatible with its site and with characteristics of neighboring
buildings and sites.
§ 230-729 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-729
173:767
Buildings with multiple uses or tenants shall be designed with a
complex massing that includes varying rooflines, projections/
recesses, or smaller additions to a main building.
(2) Height. The height of a building shall be visually compatible with
the heights of buildings on neighboring sites where practicable. A
sudden dramatic change in building height can have a jarring effect
on the streetscape, for example, by shading its neighbors or the
street. In the B-3, B-6, BP and industrial zones, and contract zone
projects where proposed building height exceeds 35 feet, if a
building's proposed height is 50% or higher than neighboring
buildings, the applicant shall incorporate architectural features
into the building's design that limit the visual impact of the
proposed building.
(3) Footprint and orientation.
(a) Desirable examples of building orientation exist in the Main
Street corridor from Saco Island to the King Street/Fairfield
Street intersection, and the North Street corridor from Main
Street to the former Eastern rail line. These areas include a
human-scaled street wall, and site elements such as clearly
defined front entrances, landscaping, lighting and off-street
parking located to the side or rear of buildings. Compatibility
shall be determined based on the pattern of buildings and
spaces along the street wall, placement of the building on the
lot, and the building footprint in relation to lot size and to
nearby buildings.
§ 230-729 SACO CITY CODE § 230-729
173:768
(b) Residential buildings shall be oriented so that the front of the
building and primary entrance face the street and continue any
existing street wall, unless the applicant can demonstrate that
the circumstances of a given application merit an alternative
orientation. In the case of a corner lot, the Planning Board shall
indicate to the applicant which street the front of the building
and primary entrance shall face.
(4) Materials. The relationship of materials and textures of the exterior
of a building shall be compatible with that of buildings with which it
is visually related, or that are traditionally used in Saco. For
facades of buildings visible from a public way, preference shall be
given to clapboard, brick, shingle and other materials commonly
used in local architecture; however, these materials are not
required. Cinder block, metal siding, stucco, and T-111-type siding
are expressly discouraged but not prohibited, while recognizing
that superior design practices may incorporate any or all such
materials in a building that successfully meets the intent of these
standards.
(5) Roof. The shape and proportion of the roof shall be articulated so as
to lend visual interest and reduce the apparent size of new
buildings with a building footprint greater than 10,000 square feet.
Preference shall be given to pitched roofs, while recognizing that
flat roofs may be appropriate for very large buildings or downtown
areas but should be offset by the use of detailed architectural
elements in the upper portion of the building facade. Outside of
industrial districts, the roof design shall screen or camouflage
rooftop protrusions so as to minimize the visual clutter of typical
rooftop installations such as air-conditioning units, exhaust vents,
transformer boxes, air-handler units, dish antennas and the like.
§ 230-729 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-729
173:769
The shape and proportion of the roof shall be articulated so as to
reduce the apparent size of new buildings and lend visual
interest.
(6) Walls. A wall shall not extend a length greater than 50 linear feet
without an architectural feature such as a window, dormer,
recessed corner, pilaster, cornice, porch or visually compatible
door. Buildings shall be designed with a complex massing that
includes varying rooflines, projections/recesses, or smaller
additions to a main building.
§ 230-729 SACO CITY CODE § 230-729
173:770
The primary entrance shall face the street and be identified
through the use of architectural details that may include awnings
or roofs for shelter, recessing, decorative lighting, trim or
railings, in addition to pedestrian walkways connecting to
parking areas and public sidewalks.
(7) Windows and doors.
(a) Windows and doors should be visually compatible with the
architectural style of the building and with local architectural
styles. Multi-paned windows are a common element of the local
architecture and while not required shall be encouraged. The
applicant may employ the services of a licensed architect to
provide design options that meet the intent of these standards.
(b) The primary entrance shall face the street, unless the applicant
can demonstrate that the circumstances of a given application
merit an alternative orientation. The entrance shall be
identified through the use of architectural details that may
include awnings or roofs for shelter, recessing, decorative
lighting, trim or railings, in addition to pedestrian walkways
connecting to parking areas and public sidewalks.
§ 230-729 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-729
173:771
Awnings (temporary and movable) and canopies (permanent)
are encouraged in order to visually integrate a series of
buildings through compatible or coordinated placement and
design.
(8) Awnings and canopies. Awnings (temporary and movable) and
canopies (permanent) are encouraged but not required in order to
visually integrate a series of buildings through compatible or
coordinated placement and design. Awnings and canopies shall be
integrated with the building facade, be human-scaled, and result in
a consistent pattern through placement, size and shape.
F. Findings. Prior to final action on a site plan or conditional use permit
application, the Planning Board shall consider findings of fact that
address the standards in Subsection E and find that these standards
have been adequately addressed by the applicant.
G. Additional standards in the MU-1 District. All buildings and structures
subject to these additional standards shall comply with the following
requirements, unless the Planning Board finds that a deviation from one
or more of these standards will still enable the project to meet the
intent and purpose of these standards:
(1) Scale. The scale of the building must conform to the standard of
Subsection E(1) above.
(2) Location of the building with respect to the front lot line. The
building must maintain the established relationship of the front
walls of buildings to the street for the block in which it is located.
The front wall of a new building must be located within +/- 5 feet of
§ 230-729 SACO CITY CODE § 230-729
173:772
the average of the front setbacks for the existing principal
buildings in the same zone facing the same street in the block
in which the building is located. Existing buildings that are set
back significantly further from the front lot line than the pattern
of the block should be excluded from the calculation. If an existing
building that is set back more than the desired setback is being
reconstructed, the building shall be modified to move the front wall
closer to the street if this is feasible.
(3) Minimum building height. The height of the building must conform
to the standard of Subsection E(2). New or reconstructed buildings
must have a minimum of two usable stories above grade at the front
of the building. The total usable floor area of the upper floors must
be a minimum of 50% of the usable floor area of the first or ground
floor.
(4) Parking and vehicular access. Except for single-family and twofamily
dwellings where parking is provided in a residential
driveway, off-street parking must be located to the side or rear of
the building. No parking shall be located in the area between the
front wall of the principal building and the front property line
extending the entire width of the lot. No new vehicular access
drives or service areas shall be located between the sidewalk and
the front wall of the building, unless the Planning Board determines
that no reasonable alternative exists for safe traffic flow into and
out of the site and within the site. If parking is provided under a
building, the first or ground floor must have habitable space
extending the full width of the front of the building, except for
reasonable provisions for access drives to service parking under
the building. If there is a conflict between this provision and flood
management requirements, the front of the building must be
designed so that the parking area is screened from the street and
the front wall is treated as part of the building facade.
(5) Connection of the building to the sidewalk/street. The area
between the front wall of a new, expanded, or reconstructed
building and the public sidewalk or front property line of the lot if
there is no sidewalk shall be designed and maintained as a
nonvehicular area and shall be either landscaped or improved with
pedestrian amenities. Where there is a public sidewalk, a walkway
shall be established in accordance with § 230-708C(4). [Amended
10-3-2011]
H. (Reserved)
I. Additional standards in the R-2, R-3 and R-4 Districts. All multifamily
dwellings and multi-unit residential projects located in the R-2, R-3 or
R-4 District shall conform to the following standards, unless the
Planning Board finds that a deviation from one or more of these design
standards will still enable the project to meet the intent and purpose of
these standards and be compatible with the neighborhood:
§ 230-729 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-729
173:773
(1) Neighborhood compatibility. Multifamily dwellings and multi-unit
residential projects are appropriate in the R-2, R-3 and R-4
Districts only if they are developed in a manner that reflects an
overall pattern of development that is compatible with the
adjacent, established neighborhood. The overall layout and design
of the site and buildings shall be compatible with the general
character of the immediate neighborhood adjacent to the proposed
development, including the relationship of the buildings to the
established streetscape, the design and placement of vehicle
access, the scale and orientation of the buildings, the treatment of
walls facing existing residential units or public streets, the layout of
the building sites, provisions for pedestrian facilities, and
provisions for a perimeter buffer.
(2) Streetscape. The location and design of the buildings shall reflect
the established streetscape of the street(s) which provides the
vehicular access to the lot. Where there is a reasonably uniform
relationship of buildings to the street, the placement and
orientation of the new buildings must reflect this relationship to the
extent feasible. The development should avoid creating gaps or
irregularities in the streetscape unless there is a clear benefit in
the overall use of the property that is compatible with the
neighborhood.
(3) Access drives.
(a) The location and design of any streets, driveways or
accessways shall minimize the impact on existing residential
properties. If an accessway will serve more than two dwelling
units, the edge of the travelway should be at least 25 feet from
any principal residential building on an adjacent lot. The
accessway should be no less than 18 feet wide and no more
than 20 feet wide, unless the Planning Board determines that a
wider travelway is necessary for adequate safety or access to
the project due to the unique characteristics of the site or the
scale of the development. The design of the accessway,
including the grade, pavement width, and turning radii at the
intersection with the street, shall conform to the requirements
of the Public Works Department.
(b) A buffer consisting of berms, landscaping, and/or fencing shall
be provided to minimize the impact of the accessway on
adjacent property whenever the edge of the travelway of an
accessway serving more than two dwelling units is located
within 35 feet of an existing principal residential building on an
adjacent lot. The width and treatment of the buffer shall be
determined by the Planning Board during the site plan review
based on the physical characteristics of the site and
anticipated volume of traffic, with more-intensive and/or wider
buffer treatments required when separation distances are less
or the volume of traffic is greater.
§ 230-729 SACO CITY CODE § 230-729
173:774
(4) Scale. The scale of the building(s) shall conform to the standard of
Subsection E(1) above. The horizontal length of walls shall be
visually compatible with the length of walls that exist in the
surrounding neighborhood. Walls that are longer than typically
found in the neighborhood are permissible if the building is
designed with offsets or other design features that visually break
up the scale of the wall.
(5) Treatment of walls. Walls that face a public street or that are
adjacent to the wall of an existing principal residential building on
an adjacent lot shall not be a blank wall and shall be designed with
windows, doors, porches, or other building elements that provide
scale and openness to the facade.
(6) Site layout. If buildings will get their vehicular access from an
internal accessway, the layout and design of the site shall reflect
the traditional urban pattern of "streets" and "lots" in which the
areas devoted to vehicular circulation are physically separated
from the areas devoted to the building sites and associated
parking. A design that merges the accessway and parking areas
into a single large paved surface is unacceptable. The internal
accessways should be separated from the buildings and their
associated parking by landscaping or other design features.
(7) Pedestrian facilities. If the street(s) serving the development has
(have) sidewalks or if sidewalks will be provided as part of the
project, pedestrian facilities shall be provided to link the dwelling
units to the sidewalk system. The type of pedestrian facility should
be appropriate for the scale of the development. A narrow paved
and striped shoulder added to the accessway may be appropriate
for a limited number of units while a sidewalk or pedestrian path is
appropriate for a larger project.
(8) Perimeter buffer. A buffer consisting of landscaping and/or fencing
shall be provided to minimize the impact of the development on
adjacent residential property whenever a building is located within
35 feet of an existing principal residential building on an adjacent
lot. The width and treatment of the buffer shall be determined by
the Planning Board during the site plan review based on the
physical characteristics of the site and the scale and massing of the
proposed buildings, with more-intense or wider buffer treatments
required when the separation distances are less or the scale of the
building is larger. [Amended 11-16-2011]
J. Additional standards in the B-2c District. All buildings and structures
subject to these additional standards shall comply with the following
requirements, unless the Planning Board finds that a deviation from one
or more of these standards will still enable the project to meet the
intent and purpose of these standards:
§ 230-729 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-729
173:775
(1) Location of the building with respect to the front lot line. The frontfacing
wall shall be designed so that it features enough windows
and other architectural features, such as porches, variation in the
facade, high-quality materials, varied rooflines, and other
architectural features, so that the front of the building addresses
the public way as an important facade of the building.
(2) Location of parking and service areas. Parking and service areas
should be located to the side or rear of buildings where feasible.
[Amended 9-4-2012]
K. Additional standards in the B-8 District. All buildings and structures
subject to these additional standards shall comply with the following
requirements, unless the Planning Board finds that a deviation from one
or more of these standards will still enable the project to meet the
intent and purpose of these standards:
(1) Campus environment. An objective of the B-8 District is to create a
high-quality visual environment in which the individual buildings
are harmonious elements in a cohesive office park environment.
Therefore, it is desirable that buildings and sites have consistent
design features, such as signs, exterior lighting, and sidewalk
furniture, that create a common image throughout the district.
(2) Open space. An objective of the B-8 District is to create an
attractive, green environment. At least 25% of the total area of the
development shall be devoted to green space. This requirement can
be met by green space provided as part of an overall development
plan for the office park or by green space provided as part of the
development of individual lots, or by a combination thereof. The
subdivision plan for the overall development shall demonstrate how
this requirement will be met. The application for subdivision
approval must address the ownership and maintenance of the open
space and include a plan addressing these issues together with
appropriate legal documents. If some or all of the open space will
be provided as part of a subdivision that includes a mix of business
and residential lots, the requirements of this provision shall be
coordinated with the requirements of Section 10.2 of the
Subdivision Regulations pertaining to residential subdivisions, and
the open space shall be designed and used to meet both open space
requirements. If the project involves the development of a lot that
is not part of a subdivision that has provided for the set aside of
open space, at least 25% of the lot shall be devoted to green space.
The open space in a subdivision or on an individual lot shall protect
areas that are identified as having significant natural resource
value, provide for continuous networks of green space, create
recreational opportunities for residents and users of the office
park, and enhance the overall office park environment.
(3) Storage and service areas. All storage and service areas (including
dumpsters) that are not fully enclosed within a building shall be
§ 230-729 SACO CITY CODE § 230-729
173:776
§ 230-730. Small wind energy systems. [Amended 6-2-2008]
located to minimize their impact on the visual environment of the
individual site and the overall park and shall be located within
landscaped and fenced enclosures that are visually compatible with
the overall park environment. [Amended 9-4-2012]
A. The intent of the City is to regulate the placement and construction of
small wind energy systems (SWES) in order to promote the safe and
efficient use of SWES installed to reduce the on-site consumption of
utility-supplied electricity, and to minimize the visual, environmental,
and operational impacts of SWES on the City and its residents.
B. Submission requirements. The following information shall be submitted
as part of the building permit application to the Code Enforcement
Office for an SWES:
(1) A detailed description of the proposed SWES, to include:
(a) Specifications and drawings, including power-generation
capacity, of the generator, hub and blade prepared by the
manufacturer or a professional engineer.
(b) Proposed height.
(c) A line drawing, photograph or equivalent graphic
representation of the wind turbine.
(d) Structural drawings of the wind tower, base or foundation,
prepared by the manufacturer or a professional engineer. If
attachment to an existing structure is proposed, a description
or drawing acceptable to the Code Enforcement Office shall be
submitted.
(e) Documentation from the manufacturer that the SWES will
produce noise levels in compliance with § 230-801 of this
chapter.
(f) Photographs of the proposed site.
(2) If connection to the publicly regulated utility grid is proposed, a
copy of the contract between the applicant and the utility verifying
that the proposed connection is acceptable and/or other evidence
making clear that the utility is aware of the proposed connection
and finds it acceptable.
(3) Any additional information deemed necessary by the Code
Enforcement Office.
C. Height. SWES height shall be the distance measured from the ground
level to the center of the turbine. Height shall be limited to 100 feet,
excepting municipal parcels or installations which shall be exempt from
height restrictions.
§ 230-729 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-730
173:777
D. Siting requirements for SWES. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
determine that the following standards will be met prior to issuance of a
building permit for an SWES:
(1) Illumination, signals and signs and antennas are prohibited on
SWES, except as required by the Federal Communications
Commission or the Federal Aviation Administration.
(2) All elements of an SWES shall be set back 100% of the distance
from the ground to the center of the turbine from all boundaries of
the applicant's property, or shall adhere to the side yard or rear
yard setback, whichever is greater. If less than a 100% setback is
proposed from all boundaries, then the Code Enforcement Officer
shall require that the SWES and foundation design, taking into
consideration soil conditions at the installation site, be certified by
a State of Maine licensed professional engineer.
(3) If site layout is such that the collapse or structural failure of an
SWES could reasonably be anticipated to be a threat to persons,
buildings, vehicles, vegetation or other features of abutting
property(ies) that would be harmed by such a failure, then proof of
insurance against failure shall be submitted to the City. Said
insurance shall be maintained as long as the SWES remains in
place.
(4) More than one SWES shall be permitted per lot and shall only
generate energy for use for or in support of a main building and/or
accessory buildings located on the same lot. This standard is not
intended to prohibit the transfer of excess energy to the grid.
(5) The SWES shall be designed with a monopole without guy wires
support structure. Lattice towers are prohibited.
E. Noise requirements.
(1) Both a manual and automatic braking, governing or feathering
system shall be required to prevent uncontrolled rotation.
(2) After approval and installation of the SWES, the Code Enforcement
Officer may require the applicant to perform sound measurements
at the closest property line to determine and report ambient and
operating decibel levels.
(3) Sound from any source controlled by this chapter shall not exceed
the following limits at the lot line of the "receiving" property:
Sound-Pressure Level Limits Measured in dB(A)
District Day Night
Industrial districts 65 dBA 60 dBA
Commercial districts 60 dBA 50 dBA
§ 230-730 SACO CITY CODE § 230-730
173:778
§ 230-731. Marinas. [Amended 6-2-2008]
Sound-Pressure Level Limits Measured in dB(A)
District Day Night
Residential and
conservation
districts
55 dBA 45 dBA
F. Exemptions. The following are exempt from the provisions of this
section:
(1) SWES on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the
City of Saco.
(2) An SWES with a rated capacity of less than 500 watts.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish minimum
requirements for the siting, design, construction and operation of
marinas to serve the needs of boaters, to protect the natural resources
affected by marinas, and to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of Saco. In order to meet these purposes, a marina proposal
shall be subject to this section and to all applicable standards within
this chapter.
B. Applicability. This section shall apply to:
(1) Any commercial, public, or private marina that is proposed as a
new use, or a proposed expansion of an existing marina, that is on
or adjacent to the water and contains five or more slips or
moorings, and/or provides berthing for commercial vessels that can
accommodate more than 20 people.
(2) Any vessel maintenance or repair yard that is on or adjacent to the
water.
(3) All public or commercial boat ramps.
C. Exemptions. This section shall not apply to:
(1) Private slips or ramps that serve a single residence and are
constructed exclusively for the personal use of the occupants of
that residence. See § 230-7A05.
D. Submission requirements. A marina shall be subject to site plan review
and, as such, is subject to submission requirements found in Article XI.
In addition, written responses and any additional evidence or exhibits
requested by City staff or the Planning Board shall be submitted in
order to adequately respond to the items in Subsections E and F of this
section. To the extent that an application is subject to shoreland zoning
review, all provisions and requirements set forth in Article VIIA shall
also be applicable.
§ 230-730 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-731
173:779
E. Planning and design requirements.
(1) Marinas shall only be located in areas which offer safe and
convenient access to waters of navigable depth. Safe and
convenient access shall be determined by factors such as existing
water depths, the size and draft of vessels for which the marina is
proposed, and tidal and wave action.
(2) Marinas shall be designed to minimize adverse impacts on the
existing use and enjoyment of immediate and nearby waters.
(3) Marinas shall be sited and designed to afford adequate protection
against wakes caused by vessel traffic to the maximum extent
practicable.
(4) Adequate restroom facilities for the use of marina patrons shall be
provided so as to encourage the use of shoreside facilities, to
discourage the overboard discharge of untreated or inadequately
treated sewage from vessels, and to protect water quality.
(5) Vessel maintenance areas shall be sited as far from the water as is
practicable and shall be designed so that all maintenance activities
that are potential sources of air or waterborne contaminants shall
be accomplished over dry land or indoors. A management plan for
the control and disposal of hazardous materials, by-products,
debris, residues, spills and stormwater runoff from maintenance
areas shall be submitted. All drains from maintenance areas shall
lead to a sump, holding tank, or pump-out facility from which the
wastes can be removed for treatment and/or disposal.
(6) Fuel storage and delivery facilities shall be in accordance with local
and state fire codes and/or with NFPA 303, "Fire Protection
Standards for Marinas and Boatyards." All vessel fueling
operations shall be undertaken at the fueling station or other
specifically designated remote location in accordance with NFPA
302, "Fire Protection Standards for Pleasure and Commercial
Motor Crafts."
(7) Life safety equipment. Flotation devices shall be provided at
regular intervals throughout the marina to ensure the safety of
marina users.
(8) Lighting shall be in accordance with United States Coast Guard
and/or United States Army Corps of Engineers requirements and is
subject to § 230-804 of this chapter. In general, lighting shall be
designed to ensure public safety while minimizing visual impacts.
(9) The owner or operator of a proposed marina shall maintain, at a
minimum, insurance policies for comprehensive general liability,
marina operators legal liability, pollution coverage/endorsement/
riders, and any other policies as may be mandated by any state or
federal agency as part of any permitting, approvals, license
§ 230-731 SACO CITY CODE § 230-731
173:780
conditions or otherwise. Verification of said policies shall be
submitted to the City prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy by the Code Enforcement Office.
(10) Marina structures in, on or over submerged lands shall be designed
to comply with applicable requirements of the State of Maine and
with the following:
(a) They shall be designed to minimize adverse impacts on
navigation, public use of waters, and natural resources.
(b) They shall not significantly restrict water flows.
(c) The width and length of all structures shall be limited to what
is reasonable for the intended use and shall minimize the
shading of marine vegetation.
(d) Barrier-free access for the handicapped that complies with the
Americans with Disabilities Act and the Architectural Barriers
Act Accessibility Guidelines shall be provided for all marina
structures.
(e) They shall have sufficient strength to resist all anticipated
loading required of buildings in the City of Saco, including, but
not limited to, dead, live, wind, earthquake, snow, and impact
loading.
(f) They shall not be constructed using creosote-treated timber.
(g) No structure shall exceed 35 feet in height, as measured either
from the mean original grade at the downhill side of the
structure or from the surface of the water.
F. Standards. In addition to criteria found in Article XI, the Planning Board
shall consider the following factors in reaching a decision:
(1) Potential impacts to water quality and to visual and aesthetic
enjoyment of the waters of the Saco River and of Saco Bay will be
minimized to the maximum extent practicable.
(2) Unavoidable impacts to aquatic and terrestrial resources have
been or can be compensated for to a practicable and appropriate
extent.
(3) The potential effect on the public with respect to commerce,
navigation, recreation, aesthetic enjoyment and natural resources
has been minimized to the greatest practicable extent.
(4) The extent to which structures that extend beyond the normal highwater
mark of coastal or tidal waters are dependent upon water
access for their primary purpose. Restaurants, decks, dwellings,
and other non-water-dependent structures that extend beyond the
§ 230-731 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-731
173:781
§ 230-732. Standards for high-voltage transmission lines. [Amended
12-15-2008]
§ 230-733. Special provisions for the B-3 District, outside of the
Historic Preservation District. [Adopted 3-1-2010; amended
1-18-2011]
normal high-water mark of coastal or tidal waters shall not be
authorized by this section.
(5) The proposed location does not unreasonably interfere with access
to existing marine structures or points of public access or with
existing developed or natural beach areas.
A. Findings. Scientific studies have raised concerns about adverse health
effects of electromagnetic fields on people living or working near highvoltage
lines. In addition, high-voltage transmission lines have the
appearance of large-scale industrial facilities and are frequently
incompatible with nearby residential areas. The City intends to limit or
mitigate, where possible, such adverse impacts.
B. Burial. All high-voltage transmission lines shall be buried where they
pass within 200 feet of any residence, school building, school
playground, publicly owned recreational facility, field or park, or any
occupied place of employment, but otherwise they may be placed
aboveground. When installed underground, they shall be installed in
locations and in sections of sufficient length so that unsightly transition
structures shall be minimized.
C. Contract zoning. A party wishing to erect high-voltage transmission
lines may apply for a contract zone, outside of RP Districts, provided it
follows the procedures and meets the conditions set forth in Article XIV
of this chapter.
A. Size limitation.
(1) New commercial buildings are limited to footprints not exceeding
4,500 square feet.
(2) Within new commercial or mixed-use buildings, each retail
occupancy is limited to 4,500 square feet.
(3) Within buildings which exist on the date of passage of this
amendment, new retail uses are limited to 4,500 square feet.
B. Certificate for demolition in B-3 District.
(1) Scope and purpose.
(a) The following provisions apply to any proposal involving the
demolition or removal of any building or structure built before
1895, or any appurtenance thereto, in the B-3 Zoning District,
except for those buildings already in the Downtown Historic
§ 230-731 SACO CITY CODE § 230-733
173:782
Preservation District. Such buildings may not be demolished
without a certificate for demolition.
(b) The purpose of this section is to afford the City the opportunity
to preserve neighborhood character and to preserve historic
buildings and structures or important portions and features
thereof.
(2) Procedure and submissions. The Planning Board shall hold a public
hearing on each application within 30 days of submission. Notice
shall be given in the same manner as required for a site plan
review. The Planning Board may waive any application requirement
if it determines it is not necessary to an application. There is no fee
for this application. Applicants shall file with the Planning Board an
application for a certificate for demolition, which shall include at
least the following:
(a) The applicant's name, address, and interest in the subject
property. If not representing the owner, the applicant shall
provide evidence of right, title, or interest in the property.
(b) The owner's name, address, and signature, if different from the
applicant's.
(c) The address and the Tax Map and lot number.
(d) The present use and zoning classification of the subject
property.
(e) Photographs of the building involved and of adjacent buildings.
(f) A brief description of the new construction, reconstruction,
alteration, maintenance, demolition or removal requiring the
issuance of the certificate of demolition.
(g) Evidence which supports one or more of the standards of
approval below. This might include evidence from a structural
engineer, a Building Inspector, an architectural historian, a
builder, an appraiser, or other qualified expert.
(3) Standards of approval for a certificate for demolition.
(a) The building may be demolished within 60 days, unless the
Planning Board makes the following three findings based on
the record:
[1] The building is of historical significance as defined in
§ 230-413B and D of this chapter;
[2] Prudent and feasible alternatives to demolition exist; or
[3] The property is not deteriorated beyond reasonable repair.
§ 230-733 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-733
173:783
§ 230-734. Medical marijuana. [Amended 9-19-2016]
Where permitted by this chapter, uses engaged in the provision of medical
marijuana, including caregiver (growing) and growing facility, shall comply
with the following standards:
(b) If the Planning Board finds that any of the three standards are
not met, it shall issue a certificate for demolition. If it does not
make such findings within 60 days of the public hearing or if it
issues a certificate of demolition, the Code Enforcement
Officer may issue a demolition permit.
(4) Conditions of approval. In approving an application for the
demolition, the Planning Board may impose reasonable conditions,
including, but not limited to, the following conditions:
(a) Photographic, video, or drawn recording of the property to be
demolished; and/or
(b) Reasonable salvage and curation of significant elements and/or
other reasonable mitigation measures.
(5) Hazard buildings. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior
architectural feature. Nothing in the section shall prevent the
construction, reconstruction, or demolition of any building or
feature which the Code Enforcement Officer shall determine is
required because of concerns about structural deficiencies, the
safety of the building and the safety of its occupants.
A. Neither of the referenced uses shall be permitted to generate offensive
or harmful odors perceptible beyond their property lines, either at
ground or habitable elevation.
B. Neither of the referenced uses shall be allowed in a location less than
500 feet, measured in a straight line, to the nearest point on the
boundary of any property which is occupied by a public or private
school, day-care center, or day-care home.
C. An enclosed outdoor area used for the cultivation of marijuana shall
have a privacy fence at least six feet high that obscures the view of the
marijuana in order to discourage theft and unauthorized intrusion.
D. There shall be no outside displays, window displays, or interior displays
visible from the outside of the building intended to attract attention to
or generate interest in either of the referenced uses.
E. Adequate measures for security of the facility, which may include a
security system, security fencing, security cameras and other
measures, shall be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Code
Enforcement Office prior to issuance of either a building permit or a
certificate of occupancy. The Code Officer shall consult with the Police
§ 230-733 SACO CITY CODE § 230-734
173:784
Department if the adequacy of proposed security measures is in
question.
F. The owner(s) of a building intended for lease to a caregiver (growing)
or a growing facility shall apply for and receive a business license from
the City Clerk's office. Each lessee within said building shall apply for
and receive a business license from the City Clerk's office. Failure to
secure a City of Saco business license shall disqualify either an owner
or a lessee from operating as a caregiver (growing) or a growing facility
in Saco.
G. A caregiver (growing) or a growing facility shall receive an annual
safety inspection by the Fire Department, Code Office, and Electrical
Inspector.
H. Both a caregiver (growing) and a growing facility shall identify all
principal officers/owners by name and address.
I. Evidence of compliance with all applicable state laws shall be submitted
to the Code Enforcement Office prior to issuance of a certificate of
occupancy.
§ 230-734 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-734
173:785

ARTICLE VIIA
Natural Resource Districts/Shoreland Performance Standards
[Amended 6-29-2009; 10-24-2016]
§ 230-7A01. Purposes.
The purposes of this article are to further the maintenance of safe and
healthful conditions; to prevent and control water pollution; to protect fish
spawning grounds, aquatic life, bird and other wildlife habitats; to protect
buildings and lands from flooding and accelerated erosion; to protect
archaeological and historic resources; to protect commercial fishing and
maritime industries; to protect freshwater and coastal wetlands; to manage
building sites, placement of structures and land uses; to conserve shore
cover, and visual as well as actual points of access to inland and coastal
waters; to conserve natural beauty and open space; and to anticipate and
respond to the impacts of development in shoreland areas.
§ 230-7A02. Applicability; map; when effective.
A. Applicability. The provisions of this article apply to:
(1) All land areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the:
(a) Normal high-water line of any great pond or river;
(b) Upland edge of a coastal wetland, including all areas affected
by tidal action; or
(c) Upland edge of a freshwater wetland; and
(2) All land areas within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of a stream.
B. Official Shoreland Zoning Map. The areas to which this article is
applicable are divided into the following districts as shown on the
Zoning Map of the City of Saco, which is a part of this chapter:
Resource Protection District
Saco River Overlay District
Shoreland Overlay District
Coastal Development Overlay District
(1) Resource Protection District. The RP District shall include the
areas shown as RP on the Official Zoning Map and the following
areas when they occur within the limits of the Shoreland Zone as
mandated by the State of Maine Mandatory Shoreland Zoning Act,
38 M.R.S.A. § 435 et seq., except that areas which are currently
developed need not be included within the Resource Protection
District:
§ 230-7A01 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-7A02
173:787
(a) Areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge
of salt marshes and salt meadows that are rated "moderate" or
"high" value by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and
Wildlife (MDIF&W) as of January 1, 1973; and areas within 250
feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of freshwater
wetlands and wetlands associated with rivers, which are rated
"moderate" or "high" value waterfowl and wading bird
habitats, including nesting and feeding areas, by the MDIF&W,
that are depicted on a GIS data layer maintained by either
MDIF&W or the DEP as of December 31, 2008; and the area
within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of the
unrated mapped freshwater wetlands along Stackpole Creek
and the Nonesuch River.
(b) Land areas within the one-hundred-year floodplains adjacent
to tidal waters as shown on FEMA's Flood Insurance Rate
Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps.
(c) Areas of two or more contiguous acres with sustained slopes of
20% or greater.
(d) Areas of two or more contiguous acres with hydric soils and
supporting wetland vegetation that are not part of a freshwater
or coastal wetland, as defined, and that are not surficially
connected to a water body during the period of normal high
water.
(e) Land areas adjacent to tidal waters that are subject to severe
erosion or mass movement, such as steep coastal bluffs.
(f) All land areas within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of a stream.
(g) All land area within 250 feet, horizontal distance, from the
following natural features:
[1] Cascade Brook Falls.
[2] Nonesuch River Fault.
[3] Saco Heath.
(h) All land area known as Stratton Island, Bluff Island, Ram Island
and Eagle Island.
(i) All land area currently being used as general public access to
tidal beaches or the Saco River.
(j) All land area within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of Philips
Spring, Seal Rock Spring, Heath Road Spring and Jenkins Road
Spring.
§ 230-7A02 SACO CITY CODE § 230-7A02
173:788
(k) Areas designated by federal, state or municipal government as
natural areas of significance to be protected from
development, including:
[1] Ferry Beach State Park.
[2] Rachel Carson Wildlife Preserve.
(2) Saco River Overlay District. The Saco River Overlay District
includes all lands subject to the jurisdiction of the Saco River
Corridor Commission. The overlay district includes all lands
adjacent to the Saco River to a distance of 500 feet, as measured on
a horizontal plane, from the mean high-water line of the river or to
the edge of the one-hundred-year floodplain if the floodplain
extends beyond 500 feet, up to a maximum of 1,000 feet from the
mean high-water line.
(3) Shoreland Overlay District.
(a) The Shoreland Overlay District includes all lands subject to
shoreland zoning as mandated by the State of Maine
Mandatory Shoreland Zoning Act, 38 M.R.S.A. § 435 et seq.,
that are not included in the Resource Protection District or the
Saco River Overlay District.
(b) This section also applies to any structure built on, over or
abutting a dock, wharf or pier, or other structure extending
beyond the normal high-water line of a water body or within a
wetland. In addition, this section applies to various areas listed
on the State Register of Critical Areas. The provisions of this
article are in addition to the provisions of the underlying zone.
(4) Coastal Development Overlay District.
(a) The Coastal Development Overlay District includes all lands
subject to shoreland zoning as mandated by the State of Maine
Mandatory Shoreland Zoning Act, 38 M.R.S.A. § 435 et seq.,
that are not included in the Resource Protection District, the
Shoreland Overlay Zone or the Saco River Overlay District.
(b) This section also applies to any structure built on, over or
abutting a dock, wharf or pier, or other structure extending
beyond the normal high-water line of a water body or within a
wetland. In addition, this section applies to various areas listed
on the State Register of Critical Areas. The provisions of this
article are in addition to the provisions of the underlying zone.
C. Effective date.
(1) Effective date of article and article amendments. This article, which
was amended by the municipal legislative body on October 24,
2016, shall not be effective unless approved by the Commissioner
of the Department of Environmental Protection. A certified copy of
§ 230-7A02 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-7A02
173:789
§ 230-7A03. Land use standards.
Activities within the districts subject to these requirements shall conform
with the following additional dimensional requirements:
the article as amended, attested and signed by the Municipal Clerk,
shall be forwarded to the Commissioner for approval. If the
Commissioner fails to act on this article amendment within 45
days of his/her receipt of the amendment, it shall be automatically
approved.
(2) Any application for a permit submitted to the municipality within
the forty-five-day period shall be governed by the terms of this
article as amended if the amendment is approved by the
Commissioner.
A. Minimum lot requirements.
(1) The minimum lot size and lot area per dwelling unit for uses in the
Resource Protection District are set forth in Table 412-1.112
(2) The minimum lot size and minimum lot area per dwelling unit in the
Saco River Overlay District shall be the requirements of the
underlying district unless a larger lot is required by the Corridor
Commission's requirements.
(3) The minimum lot size and minimum lot area per dwelling unit in the
Shoreland Overlay District and the Coastal Development Overlay
District shall be the requirements of the underlying district.
(4) If more than one residential dwelling unit, principal governmental,
institutional, commercial or industrial structure or use, or
combination thereof, is constructed or established on a single
parcel, all dimensional requirements shall be met for each
additional dwelling unit, principal structure, or use.
B. Minimum shorefront requirements.
(1) Lots in the Resource Protection District shall have a minimum
shore frontage of 200 feet.
(2) Lots in the C-1 or R-1a District subject to the Saco River, Coastal
Development Overlay or Shoreland Overlay provisions shall have a
minimum shore frontage of 150 feet.
(3) Lots in all other districts subject to the Saco River, Coastal
Development Overlay or Shoreland Overlay provisions shall have a
minimum shore frontage of 100 feet.
(4) If more than one residential dwelling unit, principal governmental,
institutional, commercial or industrial structure or use, or
112. Editor's Note: Table 412-1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 230-7A02 SACO CITY CODE § 230-7A03
173:790
§ 230-7A04. Principal and accessory structures.
combination thereof, is constructed or established on a single
parcel, all dimensional requirements shall be met for each
additional dwelling unit, principal structure, or use.
C. Minimum lot width. Within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland, the
minimum width of any portion of any lot shall be equal to or greater
than the required shore frontage for the proposed use.
D. Maximum height. Principal or accessory structures and expansions of
existing structures which are permitted in the Resource Protection,
Saco River Overlay, Shoreland Overlay, and Coastal Development
Overlay Districts shall not exceed 35 feet in height. This provision shall
not apply to structures such as transmission towers, windmills,
antennas, and similar structures having no floor area. Cupolas, domes,
widow's walks or similar features shall be exempt.
A. All new principal and accessory structures shall be set back from the
normal high-water line of freshwater bodies, the maximum spring high
tide level (MHHW) of tidal waters, and the upland edge of a wetland,
depending upon the district in which they are located as shown in Table
412-1.
B. The water body or wetland setback provision shall neither apply to
structures which require direct access to the water as an operational
necessity, such as piers, docks and retaining walls, nor to other
functionally water-dependent uses.
C. The lowest floor elevation or openings of all buildings and structures
including basements shall be elevated at least one foot above the
elevation of the one-hundred-year flood, the flood of record, or, in the
absence of these, the flood as defined by soil types identified as recent
floodplain soils. Accessory structures may be placed in accordance with
City Code Chapter 106, Floodplain Management, and need not meet the
elevation requirements of this subsection.
D. Lot coverage.
(1) With the exception of the B-4 and B-5 Districts, nonvegetated
surfaces shall not exceed a total of 20% of the portion of the lot
located within the Shoreland Zone. This limitation does not apply to
public boat launching facilities, regardless of the district in which
the facility is located.
(2) In the B-4 and B-5 Districts located adjacent to coastal wetlands, or
rivers that do not flow to great ponds, nonvegetated surfaces shall
not exceed a total of 70% of the portion of the lot located within the
Shoreland Zone. The total nonvegetated surface shall not exceed
40% of a lot or a portion thereof located within the Coastal
Development Overlay District.
§ 230-7A03 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-7A04
173:791
(3) For the purposes of calculating lot coverage, nonvegetated
surfaces include, but are not limited to, the following: structures,
driveways, parking areas, and other areas from which vegetation
has been removed. Naturally occurring ledge and rock
outcroppings are not counted as nonvegetated surfaces when
calculating lot coverage for lots of record on March 24, 1990, and
in continuous existence since that date.
(4) For the purposes of this article, a building is a structure designed
for habitation, shelter, storage, or as a gathering place that has a
roof. For the purposes of this rule, the foundation is considered to
be a part of the building. A porch with a roof, attached to the
exterior walls of a building, is considered part of the building.
E. Notwithstanding the requirements stated above, stairways or similar
structures may be allowed, with a permit from the Code Enforcement
Officer, to provide shoreline access in areas of steep slopes or unstable
soils, provided that the structure is limited to a maximum of four feet in
width; that the structure does not extend below or over the normal
high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland (unless
permitted by the Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to
the Natural Resources Protection Act, 38 M.R.S.A. § 480-C); and that
the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable access alternative exists
on the property.
F. For principal structures, water and wetland setback measurements
shall be taken from the top of a coastal bluff that has been identified on
coastal bluff maps as being "highly unstable" or "unstable" by the Maine
Geological Survey pursuant to its "Classification of Coastal Bluffs" and
published on the most-recent Coastal Bluff Map. If the applicant and the
permitting official(s) are in disagreement as to the specific location of a
"highly unstable" or "unstable" bluff, or where the top of the bluff is
located, the applicant may, at his or her expense, employ a Maine
registered professional engineer, a Maine certified soil scientist, a
Maine state geologist, or other qualified individual to make a
determination. If agreement is still not reached, the applicant may
appeal the matter to the Board of Appeals.
G. On a nonconforming lot of record on which only a residential structure
exists, and on which it is not possible to place an accessory structure
meeting the required setbacks, whether from water body, tributary
stream or wetlands, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue a permit
to place a single accessory structure not to exceed 80 square feet in
area nor eight feet in height, with no utilities, for the storage of yard
tools and similar equipment. The accessory structure shall be located as
far from the shoreline or tributary stream or wetland as practical and
shall meet all other applicable standards, including lot coverage and
vegetation clearing standards. The accessory structure shall not be
located closer to the shoreline, tributary stream or wetland than the
principal structure.
§ 230-7A04 SACO CITY CODE § 230-7A04
173:792
H. Retaining walls that are not necessary for erosion control shall meet the
structure setback requirement, except for low retaining walls and
associated fill, provided each of the following conditions are met:
(1) The site has been previously altered and an effective vegetated
buffer does not exist;
(2) The wall is at least 25 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal
high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of
a wetland;
(3) The site where the retaining wall will be constructed is legally
existing lawn or is a site eroding from lack of naturally occurring
vegetation, and which cannot be stabilized with vegetative
plantings;
(4) The total height of the wall, in the aggregate, is not more than 24
inches;
(5) The location is outside the one-hundred-year floodplain on rivers,
streams, coastal wetlands, and tributary streams, as designated on
the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA) Flood
Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps;
(6) The area behind the wall is revegetated with grass, shrubs, trees,
or a combination thereof, and no further structural development
will occur within the setback area, including patios and decks; and
(7) A vegetated buffer area is established within 25 feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary
stream, or upland edge of a wetland when a natural buffer area
does not exist. The buffer area must meet the following
characteristics:
(a) The buffer must include shrubs and other woody and
herbaceous vegetation. Where natural ground cover is lacking,
leaf or bark mulch or an equivalent alternative acceptable to
the Code Enforcement Officer shall be utilized.
(b) Plantings, native species only, shall be installed to retard
erosion and provide for effective infiltration of stormwater
runoff.
(c) A minimum buffer width of 15 feet, horizontal distance, is
required, measured perpendicular to the normal high-water
line or upland edge of a wetland.
(d) A footpath no greater than four feet in width may traverse the
buffer at a right angle.
(8) All permits required by the Maine DEP and/or other regional, state
or federal agencies shall have been issued prior to the start of
work.
§ 230-7A04 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-7A05
173:793
§ 230-7A05. Piers, docks, wharves, and other marine structures
extending over or below the normal high-water line of a water body,
or within a wetland.
A. Performance standards.
(1) All applications for temporary piers, docks, wharves and other
marine structures shall be reviewed by the Code Enforcement
Officer, and all applications for permanent piers, docks, wharves
and other marine structures shall be reviewed by the Planning
Board. All such applications shall be reviewed for conformance
with the following standards listed below.
(2) If the reviewing authority is unable to reach a decision using the
criteria below due to either inconclusive or conflicting information,
the reviewing authority will require the applicant to submit an
environmental impact analysis assessing the proposal's impact on
natural areas, including impacts of the proposed structure in
conjunction with other adjacent or abutting structures.
(3) The reviewing authority may also require that the proposal be
modified to ensure conformance with the standards set forth below.
Mitigation measures may include, but are not limited to, changes in
the design and construction of the marine structure, or changes in
magnitude, duration, and location of activities carried out at the
marine structure.
(4) An application shall be approved by the reviewing authority if there
is a finding that:
(a) No more than one pier, dock, wharf or similar structure
extending or located below the normal high-water line of a
water body or within a wetland is allowed on a single lot;
except that when a single lot contains at least twice the
minimum shore frontage as specified in § 230-7A03B, a second
structure may be allowed and may remain as long as the lot is
not further divided.
(b) Access from the shore shall be developed on soils appropriate
for such use, as determined through consultation with the local
Soil and Water Conservation District office. Whenever possible,
access from the shore to the marine structure shall be placed
on bedrock. Measures shall be taken to minimize soil erosion
both during and after construction.
(c) The proposed location of the marine structure shall not
unreasonably interfere with access to existing marine
structures or points of public access, nor shall it unreasonably
interfere with existing developed or natural beach areas.
(d) The marine structure shall be designed, sited, and constructed
to mitigate unreasonable adverse impacts on significant
§ 230-7A05 SACO CITY CODE § 230-7A05
173:794
wildlife habitats or unique natural areas, including, but not
limited to: fin fish and shellfish fisheries, salt marshes, eel
grass beds, shorebird feeding and nesting habitats, critical fish
spawning and nursery areas, etc.
(e) Unreasonable interference with the natural flow of any surface
or subsurface waters or impedance of the flow of the current of
any river or channel shall be minimized during the
construction and subsequent use of the marine structure.
(f) The marine structure shall be designed, sited, and constructed
so as not to encroach upon federally designated navigation
channels or mooring areas or otherwise obstruct by any means
whatsoever the free use of piers, docks, and other common
landing places.
(g) The marine structure shall be no larger than necessary to
accomplish the purposes for which it is designed,
notwithstanding the dimensional limits listed below. Its size
and construction shall not change the intensity of the adjoining
land use, and by no means shall it exceed a total distance of
more than 1/3 the width of the water body, when proposed for
coastal or inland waterways. The applicant may request a
variance from the dimensional requirements due to the
additional requirement of handicap access or unusual wind or
wave conditions.
Type
Maximum Width
(feet)
Maximum Length
(feet)
Private piers 6 100*
Commercial piers 12 100*
Ramps 4 As appropriate
Docks, floats 200 square feet
NOTES:
* Landward of the mean low-water line
(h) New subdivisions that propose docks as part of the subdivision
shall provide a community dock in lieu of the development of
docks on individual lots. The applicant may request a variance
for additional community docks, provided a demonstrated need
can be shown for the additional facilities.
(i) No new structure shall be built on, over or abutting a pier,
wharf, dock or other structure extending beyond the normal
high-water line of a water body or within a wetland unless the
structure requires direct access to the water as an operational
necessity.
§ 230-7A05 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-7A05
173:795
(j) No existing structures built on, over or abutting a pier, dock,
wharf or other structure extending beyond the normal highwater
line of a water body or within a wetland shall be
converted to residential dwelling units in any district.
(k) Except in business districts, including the Marine Business and
Residential District, structures built on, over or abutting a pier,
wharf, dock or other structures extending beyond the normal
high-water line of a water body or within a wetland shall not
exceed 20 feet in height above the pier, wharf, dock or other
structure.
(l) New permanent piers and docks on nontidal waters shall not
be permitted unless it is clearly demonstrated to the Planning
Board that a temporary pier or dock is not feasible and a
permit has been obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection pursuant to the Natural Resources
Protection Act.113
(m) Vegetation may be removed in excess of the standards in
§ 230-7A12 of this chapter in order to conduct shoreline
stabilization of an eroding shoreline, provided that a permit is
obtained from the Planning Board. Construction equipment
must access the shoreline by barge when feasible, as
determined by the Planning Board.
[1] When necessary, the removal of trees and other vegetation
to allow for construction equipment access to the
stabilization site via land must be limited to no more than
12 feet in width. When the stabilization project is
complete, the construction equipment accessway must be
restored.
[2] Revegetation must occur in accordance with § 230-7A12.
[3] A permit pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act
is required from the Department of Environmental
Protection for shoreline stabilization activities.
(n) A deck over a river may be exempted from the shoreland
setback requirements if it is part of a downtown revitalization
project that is defined in a project plan approved by the
legislative body of the municipality, and may include the
revitalization of structures formerly used as mills that do not
meet the structure setback requirements, if the deck meets the
following requirements:
[1] The total deck area attached to the structure does not
exceed 700 square feet;
113. Editor's Note: See 38 M.R.S.A. § 480-A et seq.
§ 230-7A05 SACO CITY CODE § 230-7A05
173:796
§ 230-7A06. Campgrounds.
[2] The deck is cantilevered over a segment of a river that is
located within the boundaries of the downtown
revitalization project;
[3] The deck is attached to or accessory to an allowed
commercial use in a structure that was constructed prior
to 1971 and is located within the downtown revitalization
project;
[4] The construction of the deck complies with all other
applicable standards, except the shoreline setback
requirements in § 230-7A04; and
[5] The construction of the deck complies with all other state
and federal laws. New permanent structures, and
expansions thereof, projecting into or over water bodies
shall require a permit from the Department of
Environmental Protection pursuant to the Natural
Resources Protection Act, 38 M.R.S.A. § 480-C. Permits
may also be required from the Army Corps of Engineers if
located in navigable waters.
B. Application submission requirements. In addition to the information
listed in Article XI of this chapter, Site Plan Review, all applications
shall contain the following information:
(1) A photocopy of relevant locational maps indicating the site of the
project;
(2) Site plan, plan and section drawings (to scale) of the proposed
structure, including an indication on separate scale drawings of
any shoreline stabilization or other modification required by the
project;
(3) A complete list of materials to be used, including a list of all
intended coatings (paint, etc) for all proposed marine structures.
A. Campgrounds shall conform to the minimum requirements imposed
under state licensing procedures, § 230-703 of this chapter, and the
following:
(1) Campgrounds shall contain a minimum of 5,000 square feet of land,
not including roads and driveways, for each site. Land supporting
wetland vegetation and land below the normal high-water line of a
water body shall not be included in calculating land area per site.
(2) The areas intended for placement of a recreational vehicle, tent or
shelter, and utility and service buildings shall be set back a
minimum of 75 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-
§ 230-7A05 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-7A06
173:797
§ 230-7A07. Parking areas.
§ 230-7A08. Roads, driveways and drainage systems.
water line of water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of
a wetland.
A. In addition to the requirements of § 230-708 of this chapter, parking
areas shall meet the shoreline and tributary stream setback
requirements for structures for the district in which such areas are
located, except that in the Marine Business and Residential District,
parking areas shall be set back at least 25 feet from the normal highwater
line or the upland edge of a wetland. The setback requirement for
parking areas serving public boat launching facilities in other districts
may be reduced to no less than 50 feet from the normal high-water line
or upland edge of a wetland if the Planning Board finds that no other
reasonable alternative exists.
B. Parking areas shall be designed to prevent stormwater runoff from
flowing directly into a water body and, where feasible, to retain all
runoff on site.
C. All parking spaces shall be nine feet wide and 18 feet long, except that
parking spaces for a vehicle and boat trailer shall be 40 feet long.
A. The following standards shall apply to the construction of roads and/or
driveways and drainage systems, culverts and other related features:
(1) Setback.
(a) Roads and driveways shall be set back at least 75 feet,
horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of water
bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland,
unless no reasonable alternative exists as determined by the
Planning Board. If no other reasonable alternative exists, the
road and/or driveway setback requirement shall be no less
than 50 feet, horizontal distance, upon clear showing by the
applicant that appropriate techniques will be used to prevent
sedimentation of the water body. Such techniques may include,
but are not limited to, the installation of settling basins, and/or
the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts
placed so as to avoid sedimentation of the water body, tributary
stream, or wetland.
(b) On slopes of greater than 20%, the road and/or driveway
setback shall be increased by 10 feet, horizontal distance, for
each five-percent increase in slope above 20%.
(c) This subsection shall neither apply to approaches to water
crossings nor to roads or driveways that provide access to
permitted structures, and facilities located nearer to the
shoreline due to an operational necessity.
§ 230-7A06 SACO CITY CODE § 230-7A08
173:798
(2) Existing public roads may be expanded within the legal road rightof-
way regardless of its setback from a water body, tributary stream
or wetland.
(3) New roads and driveways are prohibited in a Resource Protection
District except to provide access to permitted uses within the
district, or as approved by the Planning Board upon a finding that
no reasonable alternative route or location is available outside the
district, in which case the road and/or driveway shall be set back as
far as practicable from the normal high-water line of a water body,
tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland.
(4) Road and driveway banks shall be no steeper than a slope of two
horizontal to one vertical and shall be graded and stabilized in
accordance with the provisions for erosion and sedimentation
control contained in § 230-7A12.
(5) Road and driveway grades shall be no greater than 10% except for
short segments of less than 200 feet.
(6) In order to prevent road and driveway surface drainage from
directly entering water bodies, tributary streams or wetlands,
roads and driveways shall be designed, constructed, and
maintained to empty onto an unscarified buffer strip at least 50 feet
plus two times the average slope, in width between the outflow
point of the ditch or culvert and the normal high-water line of a
water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland. Surface
drainage which is directed to an unscarified buffer strip shall be
diffused or spread out to promote infiltration of the runoff and to
minimize channelized flow of the drainage through the buffer strip.
(7) Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips and water
turnouts shall be installed in a manner effective in directing
drainage onto unscarified buffer strips before the flow gains
sufficient volume or head to erode the road, driveway or ditch. To
accomplish this, the following shall apply:
(a) Ditch relief culverts, drainage dips and associated water
turnouts shall be spaced along the road or driveway at
intervals no greater than indicated in the following table:
Grade
(percent)
Spacing
(feet)
0% to 2% 250
3% to 5% 200 to 135
6% to 10% 100 to 80
11% to 15% 80 to 60
16% to 20% 60 to 45
21+ % 40
§ 230-7A08 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-7A08
173:799
§ 230-7A09. Mineral exploration and extraction.
(b) Drainage dips may be used in place of ditch relief culverts only
where the grade is 10% or less.
(c) On sections having slopes greater than 10%, ditch relief
culverts shall be placed at approximately a thirty-degree angle
downslope from a line perpendicular to the center line of the
road or driveway.
(d) Ditch relief culverts shall be sufficiently sized and properly
installed in order to allow for effective functioning, and their
inlet and outlet ends shall be established with appropriate
materials.
(8) Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other
stormwater runoff control installations associated with roads and
driveways shall be maintained on a regular basis to assure effective
functioning.
A. Mineral exploration to determine the nature or extent of mineral
resources shall be accomplished by hand sampling, test boring, or other
methods which create minimal disturbance of less than 100 square feet
of ground surface. A permit from the Code Enforcement Officer shall be
required for mineral exploration which exceeds the above limitation. All
excavations, including test pits and holes, shall be immediately capped,
filled or secured by other equally effective measures so as to restore
disturbed areas and to protect the public health and safety.
B. Mineral extraction may be permitted under the following conditions:
(1) A reclamation plan shall be filed with and approved by the Planning
Board before a permit is granted. Such plan shall describe in detail
procedures to be undertaken to fulfill the requirements of
Subsection B(4) below.
(2) No part of any extraction operation, including drainage and runoff
control features, shall be permitted within 75 feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of any water body, tributary
stream, or the upland edge of a wetland. Extraction operations
shall not be permitted within 150 feet, horizontal distance, of any
property line.
(3) Gravel pits within the Shoreland Zone shall be set back as far as
practicable from the normal high-water line and no less than 75
feet and screened from the river by existing or planted landscaping
vegetation.
(4) Within 12 months following the completion of extraction operations
at any extraction site, which operations shall be deemed complete
when less than 100 cubic yards of materials are removed in any
§ 230-7A08 SACO CITY CODE § 230-7A09
173:800
§ 230-7A10. Agriculture.
consecutive twelve-month period, ground levels and grades shall
be established in accordance with the following:
(a) All debris, stumps, and similar material shall be removed for
disposal in an approved location or shall be buried on site. Only
materials generated on site may be buried or covered on site.
(b) The final graded slope shall be 2:1 slope or flatter.
(c) Topsoil or loam shall be retained to cover all disturbed land
areas, which shall be reseeded and stabilized with vegetation
native to the area. Additional topsoil or loam shall be obtained
from off-site sources if necessary to complete the stabilization
project.
(5) In keeping with the purposes of this chapter, the Planning Board
may impose such conditions as are necessary to minimize the
adverse impacts associated with mineral extraction operations on
surrounding uses and resources.
A. All spreading of manure shall be accomplished in conformance with the
Manure Utilization Guidelines published by the former Maine
Department of Agriculture on November 1, 2001, and the Nutrient
Management Law (7 M.R.S.A. §§ 4201-4209).
B. Manure shall not be stored or stockpiled within 300 feet, horizontal
distance, of a water body, tributary stream, or wetland. All manure
storage areas within the Shoreland Zone must be constructed or
modified such that the facility produces no discharge of effluent or
contaminated stormwater.
C. Agricultural activities involving tillage of soil greater than 40,000
square feet in surface area within the Shoreland Zone shall require a
conservation plan to be filed with the Planning Board. Nonconformance
with the provisions of said plan shall be considered to be a violation of
this chapter.
D. There shall be no new tilling of soil within 75 feet, horizontal distance,
from water bodies nor within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of tributary
streams and wetlands. Operations in existence on the effective date of
this chapter and not in conformance with this provision may be
maintained, provided that such tilling is conducted in accordance with a
soil and water conservation plan.
E. Newly established livestock grazing areas shall not be permitted within
75 feet, horizontal distance, of water bodies nor within 25 feet,
horizontal distance, of tributary streams and wetlands. Livestock
grazing associated with ongoing farm activities, and which is not in
conformance with the above setback provisions, may continue,
§ 230-7A09 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-7A10
173:801
§ 230-7A11. (Reserved)
§ 230-7A12. Clearing or removal of vegetation for activities other
than timber harvesting.
provided that such grazing is conducted in accordance with a
conservation plan that has been filed with the Planning Board.
A. Within a Resource Protection District, the cutting or removal of
vegetation shall be limited to that which is necessary for uses expressly
authorized in that district and shall be demonstrated on a lot clearing
plan to be presented to the CEO or Planning Board as appropriate.
B. Buffer strip.
(1) In areas that are not in RP, within 75 feet, horizontal distance, from
any water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland,
a buffer strip of vegetation shall be preserved as follows:
(a) There shall be no cleared opening greater than 250 square feet
in the forest canopy (or other existing woody vegetation if a
forested canopy is not present), as measured from the outer
limits of the tree or shrub crown. However, a single footpath
not to exceed six feet in width, as measured between tree
trunks and/or shrub stems, is allowed for accessing the
shoreline, provided that a cleared line of sight to the water
through the buffer strip is not created.
(b) Selective cutting of trees within the buffer strip is allowed,
provided that a well-distributed stand of trees and other
natural vegetation is maintained. For the purposes of this
section, a "well-distributed stand of trees" adjacent to water
bodies, tributary streams, and wetlands is defined as
maintaining a minimum rating score of 16 or more per twentyfive-
foot by fifty-foot rectangular area (1,250 square feet) as
determined by the following rating system.
Diameter of Tree at
4 1/2 feet Above
Ground Level
(inches) Points
2 to < 4 1
4 to < 8 2
8 to < 12 4
12 or greater 8
(c) For the purposes of Subsection B(1)(b), "other natural
vegetation" is defined as retaining existing vegetation under
three feet in height and other ground cover and retaining at
§ 230-7A10 SACO CITY CODE § 230-7A12
173:802
least five saplings less than two inches in diameter at 4 1/2
feet above ground level for each twenty-five-foot by fifty-foot
rectangular area. If five saplings do not exist, no woody stems
less than two inches in diameter can be removed until five
saplings have been recruited into the plot.
Notwithstanding the above provisions, no more than 40% of
the total volume of trees four inches or more in diameter,
measured at 4 1/2 feet above ground level, may be removed in
any ten-year period.
(d) Pruning of tree branches on the bottom 1/3 of the tree is
allowed.
(e) In order to maintain a buffer strip of vegetation, when the
removal of storm-damaged, dead or hazard trees results in the
creation of cleared openings, these openings shall be replanted
with native tree species unless existing new tree growth is
present.
(f) In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitats, existing
vegetation under three feet in height and other ground cover,
including leaf litter and the forest duff layer, shall not be cut,
covered, or removed, except to provide for a footpath or other
permitted uses as described above.
(g) In order to maintain the vegetation in the shoreline buffer,
clearing or removal of vegetation for allowed activities,
including associated construction and related equipment
operation, within or outside the shoreline buffer, must comply
with the requirements of this § 230-7A12.
(2) The provisions contained in Subsection B(1) above shall not apply
to those portions of public recreational facilities adjacent to public
swimming areas. Cleared areas, however, shall be limited to the
minimum area necessary.
C. Selective cutting.
(1) At distances greater than 75 feet, horizontal distance, from the
normal high-water line of any water body, tributary stream, or the
upland edge of a wetland, there shall be allowed on any lot, in any
ten-year period, selective cutting of not more than 40% of the
volume of trees four inches or more in diameter, measured 4 1/2
feet above ground level. Tree removal in conjunction with the
development of permitted uses shall be included in the fortypercent
calculation. For the purposes of these standards, volume
may be considered to be equivalent to basal area.
(2) In no event shall cleared openings for any purpose, including, but
not limited to, principal and accessory structures, driveways, lawns
and sewage disposal areas, exceed, in the aggregate, 25% of the lot
§ 230-7A12 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-7A12
173:803
§ 230-7A13. Hazard trees, storm-damaged trees, and dead tree
removal.
area within the Shoreland Zone or 10,000 square feet, whichever
is greater, including land previously cleared. This provision applies
to the portion of a lot within the Shoreland Zone, including the
buffer area, but shall not apply to industrial or business districts,
including the Marine Business and Residential District (B-5).
D. Legally existing nonconforming cleared openings may be maintained
but shall not be enlarged, except as allowed by this section.
E. Fields and other cleared openings which have reverted to primarily
shrubs, trees, or other woody vegetation shall be regulated under the
provisions of this section.
A. Hazard trees in the Shoreland Zone may be removed without a permit
after consultation with the Code Enforcement Officer if the following
requirements are met:
(1) Within the shoreline buffer, if the removal of a hazard tree results
in a cleared opening in the tree canopy greater than 250 square
feet, replacement with native tree species is required, unless there
is new tree growth already present. New tree growth must be as
near as practicable to where the hazard tree was removed and be
at least two inches in diameter, measured at 4.5 feet above the
ground level. If new growth is not present, then replacement trees
shall consist of native species and be at least four feet in height and
be no less than two inches in diameter. Stumps may not be
removed.
(2) Outside of the shoreline buffer, when the removal of hazard trees
exceeds 40% of the volume of trees four inches or more in diameter,
measured at 4.5 feet above ground level in any ten-year period,
and/or results in cleared openings exceeding 25% of the lot area
within the Shoreland Zone, or 10,000 square feet, whichever is
greater, replacement with native tree species is required, unless
there is new tree growth already present. New tree growth must be
as near as practicable to where the hazard tree was removed and
be at least two inches in diameter, measured at 4.5 feet above the
ground level. If new growth is not present, then replacement trees
shall consist of native species and be at least two inches in
diameter, measured at 4.5 feet above the ground level.
(3) The removal of standing dead trees, resulting from natural causes,
is permissible without the need for replanting or a permit, as long
as the removal does not result in the creation of new lawn areas, or
other permanently cleared areas, and stumps are not removed. For
the purposes of this provision, dead trees are those trees that
contain no foliage during the growing season.
§ 230-7A12 SACO CITY CODE § 230-7A13
173:804
§ 230-7A14. Exemptions to clearing and vegetation removal
requirements.
(4) The Code Enforcement Officer may require the property owner to
submit an evaluation from a licensed forester or arborist before any
hazard tree can be removed within the Shoreland Zone.
(5) The Code Enforcement Officer may require more than a one-for-one
replacement for hazard trees removed that exceed eight inches in
diameter measured at 4.5 feet above the ground level.
B. Storm-damaged trees in the Shoreland Zone may be removed without a
permit after consultation with the Code Enforcement Officer if the
following requirements are met:
(1) Within the shoreline buffer, when the removal of storm-damaged
trees results in a cleared opening in the tree canopy greater than
250 square feet, replanting is not required, but the area shall be
required to naturally revegetate, and the following requirements
must be met:
(a) The area from which a storm-damaged tree is removed does
not result in new lawn areas or other permanently cleared
areas;
(b) Stumps from the storm-damaged trees may not be removed;
(c) Limbs damaged from a storm event may be pruned even if they
extend beyond the bottom 1/3 of the tree; and
(d) If, after one growing season, no natural regeneration or
regrowth is present, replanting of native tree seedlings or
saplings is required at a density of one seedling per every 80
square feet of lost canopy.
(2) Outside of the shoreline buffer, if the removal of storm-damaged
trees exceeds 40% of the volume of trees four inches or more in
diameter, measured at 4.5 feet above the ground level, in any tenyear
period or results, in the aggregate, in cleared openings
exceeding 25% of the lot area within the Shoreland Zone or 10,000
square feet, whichever is greater, and no natural regeneration
occurs within one growing season, then native tree seedlings or
saplings shall be replanted on a one-for-one basis.
A. The following activities are exempt from the clearing and vegetation
removal standards set forth in § 230-7A12, provided that all other
applicable requirements of this chapter are complied with and the
removal of vegetation is limited to that which is necessary:
(1) The removal of vegetation that occurs at least once every two years
for the maintenance of legally existing areas that do not comply
with the vegetation standards in this chapter, such as, but not
§ 230-7A13 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-7A14
173:805
limited to, cleared openings in the canopy or fields. Such areas
shall not be enlarged, except as allowed by this section. If any of
these areas, due to lack of removal of vegetation every two years,
reverts back to primarily woody vegetation, the requirements of
§ 230-7A12 apply;
(2) The removal of vegetation from the location of allowed structures
or allowed uses, when the shoreline setback requirements of Table
412-1 are not applicable;
(3) The removal of vegetation from the location of public swimming
areas associated with an allowed public recreational facility;
(4) The removal of vegetation associated with allowed agricultural
uses, provided best management practices are utilized, and
provided all requirements of § 230-7A10 are complied with;
(5) The removal of vegetation associated with brownfields or voluntary
response action program (VRAP) projects, provided that the
removal of vegetation is necessary for remediation activities to
clean up contamination on a site in a general development district,
commercial fisheries and maritime activities district or other
equivalent zoning district approved by the Commissioner that is
part of a state or federal brownfields program or a voluntary
response action program pursuant 38 M.R.S.A. § 343-E and that is
located along:
(a) A coastal wetland; or
(b) A river that does not flow to a great pond classified as GPA
pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A. § 465-A.
(6) The removal of nonnative invasive vegetation species, provided the
following minimum requirements are met:
(a) If removal of vegetation occurs via wheeled or tracked
motorized equipment, the wheeled or tracked motorized
equipment is operated and stored at least 25 feet, horizontal
distance, from the shoreline, except that wheeled or tracked
equipment may be operated or stored on existing structural
surfaces, such as pavement or gravel;
(b) Removal of vegetation within 25 feet, horizontal distance, from
the shoreline occurs via hand tools; and
(c) If applicable clearing and vegetation removal standards are
exceeded due to the removal of nonnative invasive species
vegetation, the area shall be revegetated with native species to
achieve compliance.
(7) The removal of vegetation associated with emergency response
activities conducted by the Department, the United States
§ 230-7A14 SACO CITY CODE § 230-7A14
173:806
§ 230-7A15. Revegetation requirements.
Environmental Protection Agency, the United States Coast Guard,
and their agents.
A. When revegetation is required in response to violations of the
vegetation standards set forth in § 230-7A12, to address the removal of
nonnative invasive species of vegetation, or as a mechanism to allow for
development that may otherwise not be permissible due to the
vegetation standards, including removal of vegetation in conjunction
with a shoreline stabilization project, the revegetation must comply
with the following requirements:
(1) The property owner must submit a revegetation plan, prepared
with and signed by a qualified professional, that describes
revegetation activities and maintenance. The plan must include a
scaled site plan, depicting where vegetation was or is to be
removed, where existing vegetation is to remain, and where
vegetation is to be planted, including a list of all vegetation to be
planted.
(2) Revegetation must occur along the same segment of shoreline and
in the same area where vegetation was removed and at a density
comparable to the preexisting vegetation, except where a shoreline
stabilization activity does not allow revegetation to occur in the
same area and at a density comparable to the preexisting
vegetation, in which case revegetation must occur along the same
segment of shoreline and as close as possible to the area where
vegetation was removed:
(3) If part of a permitted activity, revegetation shall occur before the
expiration of the permit. If the activity or revegetation is not
completed before the expiration of the permit, a new revegetation
plan shall be submitted with any renewal or new permit
application.
(4) Revegetation activities must meet the following requirements for
trees and saplings:
(a) All trees and saplings removed must be replaced with native
noninvasive species;
(b) Replacement vegetation must at a minimum consist of
saplings;
(c) If more than three trees or saplings are planted, then at least
three different species shall be used;
(d) No one species shall make up 50% or more of the number of
trees and saplings planted;
§ 230-7A14 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-7A15
173:807
§ 230-7A16. Erosion and sedimentation control.
(e) If revegetation is required for a shoreline stabilization project,
and it is not possible to plant trees and saplings in the same
area where trees or saplings were removed, then trees or
saplings must be planted in a location that effectively
reestablishes the screening between the shoreline and
structures; and
(f) A survival rate of at least 80% of planted trees or saplings is
required for a minimum five-year period.
(5) Revegetation activities must meet the following requirements for
woody vegetation and other vegetation under three feet in height:
(a) All woody vegetation and vegetation under three feet in height
must be replaced with native noninvasive species of woody
vegetation and vegetation under three feet in height, as
applicable;
(b) Woody vegetation and vegetation under three feet in height
shall be planted in quantities and variety sufficient to prevent
erosion and provide for effective infiltration of stormwater;
(c) If more than three woody vegetation plants are to be planted,
then at least three different species shall be planted;
(d) No one species shall make up 50% or more of the number of
planted woody vegetation plants; and
(e) Survival of planted woody vegetation and vegetation under
three feet in height must be sufficient to remain in compliance
with the standards contained within this chapter for a
minimum of five years.
(6) Revegetation activities must meet the following requirements for
ground vegetation and ground cover:
(a) All ground vegetation and ground cover removed must be
replaced with native herbaceous vegetation, in quantities and
variety sufficient to prevent erosion and provide for effective
infiltration of stormwater;
(b) Where necessary due to a lack of sufficient ground cover, an
area must be supplemented with a minimum four-inch depth of
leaf mulch and/or bark mulch to prevent erosion and provide
for effective infiltration of stormwater; and
(c) Survival and functionality of ground vegetation and ground
cover must be sufficient to remain in compliance with the
standards contained within this chapter for a minimum of five
years.
§ 230-7A15 SACO CITY CODE § 230-7A16
173:808
§ 230-7A17. Septic waste disposal.
A. All activities which involve filling, grading, excavation or other similar
activities which result in unstabilized soil conditions and which require
a permit shall also require a written soil erosion and sedimentation
control plan. The plan shall be submitted to the permitting authority for
approval and shall include, where applicable, provisions for:
(1) Mulching and revegetation of disturbed soil.
(2) Temporary runoff control features, such as hay bales, silt fencing or
diversion ditches.
(3) Permanent stabilization structures, such as retaining walls or
riprap.
B. In order to create the least potential for erosion, development shall be
designed to fit with the topography and soils of the site. Areas of steep
slopes where high cuts and fills may be required shall be avoided
wherever possible, and natural contours shall be followed as closely as
possible.
C. Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall apply to all aspects
of a proposed project involving land disturbance and shall be in
operation during all stages of the activity. The amount of exposed soil at
every phase of construction shall be minimized to reduce the potential
for erosion.
D. Any exposed ground area shall be temporarily or permanently
stabilized within one week from the time it was last actively worked, by
use of riprap, sod, seed, and mulch, or other effective measures. In all
cases, permanent stabilization shall occur within nine months of the
initial date of exposure. In addition:
(1) Where mulch is used, it shall be applied at a rate of at least one
bale per 500 square feet and shall be maintained until a catch of
vegetation is established.
(2) Anchoring the mulch with netting, peg and twine or other suitable
method may be required to maintain the mulch cover.
(3) Additional measures shall be taken where necessary in order to
avoid siltation into the water. Such measures may include the use of
staked hay bales and/or silt fences.
E. Natural and man-made drainageways and drainage outlets shall be
protected from erosion from water flowing through them.
Drainageways shall be designed and constructed in order to carry
water from a twenty-five-year storm or greater and shall be stabilized
with vegetation or lined with riprap. [Amended 4-3-2002]
§ 230-7A16 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-7A17
173:809
§ 230-7A18. Soils.
All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which the proposed uses
or structures can be established or maintained without causing adverse
environmental impacts, including severe erosion, mass soil movement,
improper drainage, and water pollution, whether during or after
construction. Proposed uses requiring subsurface wastewater disposal, and
commercial or industrial development and other similar intensive land uses,
shall require a soils report based on an on-site investigation and be
prepared by state-certified professionals. Certified persons may include
Maine certified soils scientists, Maine registered professional engineers,
Maine state certified geologists and other persons who have training and
experience in the recognition and evaluation of soil properties. The report
shall be based upon the analysis of the characteristics of the soil and
surrounding land and water areas, maximum groundwater elevation,
presence of ledge, drainage conditions, and other pertinent data which
the evaluator deems appropriate. The soils report shall include
recommendations for a proposed use to counteract soil limitations where
they exist.
§ 230-7A19. Water quality.
No activity shall deposit on or into the ground or discharge to the waters of
the state any pollutant that, by itself or in combination with other activities
or substances, will impair designated uses of the water classification of the
water body, tributary stream or wetland.
§ 230-7A20. Archaeological sites.
Any proposed land use activity involving structural development or soil
disturbance on or adjacent to sites listed on, or eligible to be listed on,
the National Register of Historic Places, as determined by the permitting
authority, shall be submitted by the applicant to the Maine Historic
Preservation Commission for review and comment, at least 20 days prior
to action being taken by the permitting authority. The permitting authority
shall consider comments received from the Authority prior to rendering a
decision on the application.
A. All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be installed in
conformance with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal
Rules and the following:
(1) Clearing or removal of woody vegetation necessary to site a new
system and any associated fill extension shall not extend closer
than 75 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line
of a water body or the upland edge of a wetland.
(2) A holding tank is not allowed for a first-time residential use in the
Shoreland Zone.
§ 230-7A17 SACO CITY CODE § 230-7A20
173:810
ARTICLE VIII
"Good Neighbor" Performance Standards
[Amended 5-4-1987]
The standards contained in this article shall apply to all uses in all zoning
districts, unless otherwise stated.
§ 230-801. Noise.
A. Maximum permissible sound-pressure levels.
(1) Excessive noise at unreasonable hours shall be required to be
muffled so as not to be objectionable due to intermittence, heat
frequency, shrillness or volume (please refer to table below). The
maximum permissible sound-pressure level of any continuous,
regular or frequent source of sound produced by any activity
regulated by this chapter shall be as established by the time period
and type of land use listed below. Sound from any source controlled
by this chapter shall not exceed the following limits at the lot line of
the "receiving" property.
Sound-Pressure Level Limits Measured in dB(A)
District Day Night
Industrial districts 65 dBA 60 dBA
Commercial districts 60 dBA 50 dBA
Residential and
conservation
districts
55 dBA 45 dBA
(2) Where the emitting and receiving premises are in different zones,
the limits governing the stricter zone shall apply to any regulated
noise entering that zone.
(3) The levels specified may be exceeded by 10 dBA for a single period,
no longer than 15 minutes, in any one day.
(4) Noise shall be measured with a sound-level meter meeting the
standards of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI
S1.4-1961) "American Standard Specification for General Purpose
Sound Level Meters." The instrument shall be set to the A-weighted
response scale and the meter to the slow response. Measurements
shall be conducted in accordance with ANSI S1.2-1962, "American
Standard Method for the Physical Measurements of Sounds."
(5) No person shall engage in, cause, or permit any person to be
engaged in loud construction activities on a site abutting any
residential use between the hours of 9:00 p.m. of one day and 7:00
a.m. of the following day.
§ 230-801 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-801
173:811
§ 230-802. Dust, fumes, vapors and gases.
Emission of dust, fly ash, fumes, vapors or gases which could damage
human health, animals, vegetation, or property, or which could soil or stain
persons or property, at any point beyond the lot line of the commercial or
industrial establishment creating that emission shall be prohibited. All such
activities shall also comply with applicable federal and state regulations.
§ 230-803. Odors.
No land use or establishment shall be permitted to produce offensive or
harmful odors perceptible beyond their lot lines, either at ground or
habitable elevation.
§ 230-804. Exterior lighting. [Amended 10-15-2001]
All new or revised exterior lighting, including the replacement or
modification of existing lighting, shall be designed to provide only the
minimum lighting necessary to ensure adequate vision, safety, and comfort
B. Exempt activities. The following uses and activities shall be exempt
from the sound-pressure level regulations:
(1) Home maintenance activities;
(2) Noise created by chainsaws, construction, and maintenance
activities other than home maintenance, between 7:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and between 10:00 a.m. and
7:00 p.m. on Sunday;
(3) The noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency
pressure relief valves and any other emergency activity;
(4) Traffic noise on existing public roads;
(5) Noise created by refuse and solid waste collection, provided that
the activity is conducted between 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.;
(6) Emergency construction or repair work by public utilities, at any
hour;
(7) Noise created by any recreational activities which are permitted by
law and for which a license or permit has been granted by the
Town, including, but not limited to, parades, sporting events,
concerts, and fireworks displays.
C. Nonconformance of existing industrial sources. Existing industrial
noise sources that are in operation at the time of enactment of this
chapter shall be provided a permanent 10 dB(A) noise level allowance
over noise levels otherwise required herein.
D. Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the City Police Department to
enforce this section.
§ 230-801 SACO CITY CODE § 230-804
173:812
and to not cause glare beyond the limits of the property boundaries. In
addition, new or revised lighting serving nonresidential uses and
multifamily housing shall conform to the following standards:
A. Lighting fixtures. All exterior lighting fixtures and installations for
nonresidential uses, other than outdoor sports and recreational fields
and courts, and for multifamily housing uses that are located outside
the right-of-way of a public street shall meet the following standards:
(1) Lighting fixtures mounted on masts or poles shall be cutoff fixtures.
Floodlighting or other directional lighting may be used for
supplemental illumination of vehicle sales or storage areas or other
exterior sales display areas, provided that the floodlights are
installed no higher than 12 feet above ground level, are aimed to
avoid direct brightness being seen from adjacent streets or
properties, and utilize lamps with an initial lumen rating not
exceeding 39,000 lumens. The City shall have the right to inspect
the completed lighting installation and, if floodlights are used, to
require that the floodlights be re-aimed or fitted with face louvers if
necessary to control direct brightness or glare.
(2) Except for ornamental lighting fixtures that utilize lamps with
initial lumen ratings not exceeding 8,500 lumens, wall-mounted
building lights shall include full face shielding consisting of either a
solid panel or full face louvers. Exposed lamps, reflectors or
refractors shall not be visible from any part of the fixture except the
bottom, light-emitting surface.
(3) Light fixtures located on or within canopies shall be recessed into
the ceiling of the canopy so that the lamp, reflector, or lens is not
visible from public streets and so as to limit the direction of light as
required for a "cutoff fixture." Refractors or diffusing panels that
are dropped below the canopy ceiling surface are not permitted.
(4) The maximum light fixture height for pole-mounted or mastmounted
light fixtures shall be 20 feet for areas with less than
20,000 square feet of area, 25 feet for areas with 20,000 to 80,000
square feet of area, and 30 feet for areas larger than 80,000 square
feet. The maximum light fixture height for building-mounted light
fixtures shall be the upper limit of the vertical building face.
(5) Lamps in exterior light fixtures shall be incandescent, metal halide,
or high-pressure sodium. Low-pressure sodium lights may be used
only in industrial zones. This provision shall not prohibit the use of
fluorescent lamps in internally lighted signs where such signs are
otherwise permitted.
(6) Period or historical fixtures that do not meet the requirements of
this section may be used as an alternative to conventional lighting,
provided that, if the fixtures are not cutoff fixtures, the maximum
initial lumens generated by each fixture shall not exceed 2,000 for
incandescent lamps, and 8,500 for metal halide lamps if the lamp is
§ 230-804 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-804
173:813
§ 230-805. Stormwater runoff. [Amended 3-2-1992; 6-18-2001;
6-1-2009; 7-16-2012; 3-28-2016]
internally recessed within the fixture or is shielded by internal
louvers or refractors. The mounting height of period or historical
fixtures shall not exceed 15 feet above the adjacent ground.
B. Illumination standards for nonresidential uses and multifamily housing.
(1) The illumination of access drives shall provide for a uniformity ratio
of not more than 4:1 (ratio of average to minimum illuminance).
The illumination of parking lots and vehicle sales areas shall
provide for a uniformity ratio of not more than 20:1 (ratio of
maximum to minimum illuminance).
(2) The maximum illumination level within access drives, parking lots
and sales areas shall be not more than 8.0 footcandles measured at
the ground surface.
(3) The maximum illumination level at the property line of a
nonresidential or multifamily housing use with abutting properties
in a residential district (including the B-7 District) shall be not
more than 0.1 footcandle.
(4) Areas directly under canopies shall be illuminated so that the
uniformity ratio (ratio of average to minimum illuminance) shall be
not greater than 3:1 with an average illumination level of not more
than 20 footcandles. Areas of access drives, parking lots, sales
display areas, etc., which are adjacent to canopies shall taper down
in illumination level from the illumination level permitted under the
canopy to the maximum illumination level permitted for the access
drive, parking lot, or sales display area adjacent to the canopy
within a horizontal distance equivalent to the height of the canopy.
(5) The maximum illumination levels and uniformity ratios for areas
other than parking lots, access drives, sales areas, and canopies
shall be compatible with the overall lighting of the project and shall
be specifically approved by Planning Department staff or the
Planning Board.
A. General provisions.
(1) In general, surface water runoff shall be minimized, and it shall be
the responsibility of the person developing the land to demonstrate
that the work will not have an adverse impact on abutting or
downstream properties. Sites shall be designed to minimize the
amount of impervious area with a focus on reducing vehicle areas,
including parking, drives aisles, and service areas.
(2) The volume of stormwater discharged from any parcel shall be
minimized through the use of on-site infiltration, detention, or
retention to the extent practical. When stormwater must be
§ 230-804 SACO CITY CODE § 230-805
173:814
discharged from a parcel, the preferred method is to discharge into
the natural drainage system. Discharge of stormwater to the City's
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) shall be allowed
only when on-site retention and/or discharge to the natural system
is not practical.
(3) Infiltration, detention, or retention of stormwater shall assure that
the total maximum daily loads (TMDLs) that have been established
by the United States Environmental Protection Agency for various
water bodies in the City will be met to the extent practical. The
disposal of stormwater shall not constitute a threat to public
health, safety and welfare and shall not degrade the quality of
surface water or groundwater below City, state or federal
standards.
(4) The City is a regulated community under the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) MS4 Program; therefore,
provisions for stormwater runoff management are required for all
new development or redevelopment projects (site plan and
subdivision) that result in one or more acres of disturbed area. In
determining if the threshold has been met, all disturbed area
created after December 27, 2006 (original effective date of this
provision), shall be included in this total. This provision also applies
to projects disturbing less than one acre, if the construction activity
is part of a larger common plan or development or sale that would
disturb one or more acres. This provision does not apply to any new
development or redevelopment on a parcel that is part of a
subdivision previously approved under this chapter that has a
compliant post-construction stormwater management plan with
sufficient capacity to accept and treat increases in stormwater
discharges associated with the project.
(5) Projects resulting in one or more acres of disturbed area shall be
subject to the requirements of the Maine general construction
permit (MGCP); Maine State Stormwater Management Law, 38
M.R.S.A. § 420-D, and the latest revision of the "Stormwater
Management Rules," Chapters 500, 501 and 502; and the
requirements of Subsections B and C of this section. Where the
standards or provisions of such stormwater rules conflict with City
ordinances, the stricter (more-protective) standard shall apply.
(6) Smaller projects resulting in less than one acre of disturbed area
but more than 10,000 square feet of new or redeveloped
impervious area are subject to the requirements of Subsection D of
this section.
B. Stormwater quantity and quality control. All projects subject to this
section shall be designed with adequate provisions for the proper
quantity and quality control management of all stormwater from a
proposed development through a stormwater drainage system that will
not have adverse impacts on abutting or downstream properties. The
§ 230-805 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-805
173:815
stormwater drainage system shall be designed to meet the standards
contained in the most recently revised version of the Maine Department
of Environmental Protection's "Stormwater Management Rules,"
Chapters 500, 501 and 502; comply with the practices described in
the most recently revised version of the "Maine Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual"; and meet the requirements of
Subsection C of this section.
(1) To the extent possible, the design shall dispose of stormwater
runoff on the land at the proposed development through the
appropriate use of the natural features of the site. Stormwater
runoff systems will infiltrate, detain, or retain stormwater falling on
the site such that the rate of flow from the site does not exceed that
which would occur in the undeveloped state for a storm of intensity
equal to the two-, ten-, twenty-five- and fifty-year storm events.
(2) If the post-development peak runoff rate exceeds the
predevelopment peak runoff rate, on-site mitigation measures,
such as detention basins or flow restrictors, shall be required.
(3) All natural drainageways shall be preserved at their natural
gradients and shall not be filled or converted to a closed system
except as approved by the Planning Board and appropriate state
agencies.
(4) The design of the storm drain system shall fully incorporate the
existing upstream runoff which must pass over and/or through the
site to be developed. The system shall be designed to pass
upstream flows without surcharging the system. Any special
roadway culvert crossing designed to meet other applicable state
regulations (i.e., fish passage) shall be specifically identified on the
plans.
(5) Proposed alterations in stormwater drainage paths shall not enable
the crossing of runoff over a City street in order to enter a drainage
system.
(6) A waiver may be granted by the Department of Public Works to
discharge an insignificant increase in stormwater runoff to the MS4
when all of the following conditions are met:
(a) A drainage study is prepared by a professional engineer
licensed in the State of Maine, which demonstrates that the
increase has no adverse impact to the downstream conditions,
including impacts on abutting or City properties.
Improvements may be required of the developer to prevent
adverse downstream impacts caused by the project.
(b) The increase in the peak flow from the site or in the peak flow
of the receiving waters cannot be avoided by reasonable
changes in project design or density.
§ 230-805 SACO CITY CODE § 230-805
173:816
(c) Written authorization to discharge the increased peak flow
rates has been provided by the Director of Public Works.
(7) At the time of application, the applicant shall notify the Department
of Public Works if its stormwater management system includes any
stormwater BMP(s) that will discharge to the City's MS4 and shall
include in this notification a listing of which stormwater BMP(s)
will so discharge.
C. Post-construction stormwater management plan. All projects subject to
this section shall be designed to meet the following requirements:
(1) The applicant may meet the quantity and quality standards listed in
Subsection B above either on site or off site; but where off-site
facilities are used, the applicant shall submit documentation to the
City that the applicant has sufficient property interest where the
off-site facilities are located - by perpetual easement or other
appropriate legal instrument - to ensure that the facilities will be
available to provide post-construction stormwater management for
the project and that the property will not be altered in a way that
interferes with the off-site facilities.
(2) Where the applicant proposes to retain ownership of the
stormwater management facilities shown in its post-construction
stormwater management plan, and the stormwater management
facilities will not be dedicated to the City, the applicant shall enter
into a maintenance agreement with the City. The form of the
maintenance agreement is attached as Form 1. The applicant shall
cause the maintenance agreement to be recorded in the York
County Registry of Deeds within 30 days of the date of execution of
the agreement. Failure to comply with the terms of the
maintenance agreement shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(3) Whenever elements of the stormwater management facilities are
not within the right-of-way of a public street and the facilities will
not be offered to the City for acceptance as public facilities, the
Planning Board may require that perpetual easements be provided
to the City allowing access for maintenance, repair, replacement
and improvement of the stormwater management facilities in
accordance with the approved drainage maintenance agreement. If
an offer of dedication is proposed, the applicant shall be
responsible for the maintenance of these stormwater management
facilities until such time (if ever) as they are accepted by the City.
Nothing in this chapter requires the City to accept any stormwater
management facilities offered or dedicated by the applicant.
(4) Any person, business, corporation or other entity owning, leasing
or having control over stormwater management facilities required
by a post-construction stormwater management plan shall
demonstrate compliance with that plan as follows:
§ 230-805 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-805
173:817
(a) That person shall, at least annually, inspect, clean and maintain
the stormwater management facilities, including, but not
limited to, any parking areas, catch basins, drainage swales,
detention basins and ponds, pipes and related structures, in
accordance with all City and state inspection, cleaning and
maintenance requirements of the approved post-construction
stormwater management plan.
(b) That person shall repair any deficiencies found during
inspection of the stormwater management facilities.
(c) That person shall, on or by July 15 of each year, provide a
completed and signed certification to the Department of Public
Works certifying that the person has inspected, cleaned and
maintained the stormwater management facilities, describing
any deficiencies found during inspection of the stormwater
management facilities, and certifying that the person has
repaired any deficiencies in the stormwater management
facilities noted during the annual inspection. The form of the
annual stormwater certification is attached as Form 2.
(d) The required inspection(s) must be conducted by a qualified
inspector employed by the responsible person. The qualified
inspector shall perform an initial inspection to determine the
status of the stormwater management facilities. If the initial
inspection identifies any deficiencies with the facilities, the
same qualified inspector shall reinspect the facilities after they
have been maintained or repaired to determine if they are
performing as intended.
(e) The "qualified inspector" means a person who conducts postconstruction
stormwater management facilities, best
management practice ("BMP") inspections and meets the
following qualifications:
[1] The inspector shall not have any ownership or financial
interest in the property being inspected nor be an
employee or partner of any entity having an ownership or
financial interest in the property; and
[2] The inspector shall have a working knowledge of Chapter
500, Stormwater Management Rules, and Maine's
Stormwater BMP Manual, and
[3] The qualified inspector shall meet at least one of the
following criteria outlined in Subsection C(4)(e)[3][a][i] to
[iii] below; or the qualified inspector must be on the DEP's
list of approved post-construction stormwater BMP
inspectors.
[a] Nonproprietary stormwater management facilities.
§ 230-805 SACO CITY CODE § 230-805
173:818
[i] Has a college degree in environmental science or
civil engineering and is a professional engineer
with at least three years of experience designing,
evaluating or inspecting stormwater management
facilities; or
[ii] Has a college degree in an environmental science
or civil engineering, or comparable expertise, and
has demonstrated a practical knowledge of
stormwater hydrology and stormwater
management techniques, including the
maintenance requirements for stormwater
management facilities, and has the ability to
determine if stormwater facilities are performing
as intended. This qualification must be
accompanied by two professional references to be
valid; or
[iii] Has successfully completed the requirements of a
DEP training course on inspecting postconstruction
stormwater management facilities.
Note: successful completion may require
receiving a passing grade in an examination at the
conclusion of the course.
[b] Proprietary stormwater management facilities.
[i] Proprietary stormwater management facilities
must be inspected by a person approved by the
manufacturer.
(5) In order to determine compliance with this section and with the
post-construction stormwater management plan, the Director of
the Department of Public Works or his/her designee may enter
upon a property at reasonable hours and after making a good-faith
effort to contact the owner, occupant or agent to inspect the
stormwater management facilities. Entry into a building shall only
be after actual notice to the owner, occupant or agent.
(6) Submission requirements.
(a) The post-construction stormwater management plan shall
conform to the applicable submission requirements of Section
8 of DEP Chapter 500 Rules.
[1] The applicant shall provide the City with an electronic
version of the post-construction stormwater management
plan in a format that is compatible with the City's
requirements. Following completion of construction, the
applicant shall provide the City with an updated version of
the plan showing the stormwater management facilities as
actually constructed.
§ 230-805 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-805
173:819
[2] The Planning Board may modify or waive any of the
submission requirements for a post-construction
stormwater management plan if the Board finds that, due
to the unique physical characteristics of the site or the
scale of the proposed activity, the information is not
required to allow the Board to determine if the applicable
stormwater management standards are met.
(b) As-built certification. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for a project requiring a post-construction
stormwater management plan under this chapter, the applicant
shall submit evidence in the form of a letter with as-built
survey plan prepared and stamped by a professional engineer
who either prepared the post-construction stormwater
management plan and its associated facilities or supervised the
plan and facilities construction and implementation. The letter
or plan shall certify that the stormwater management facilities
have been installed in accordance with the approved postconstruction
stormwater management plan and that they will
function as intended by said plan. The as-built survey plan shall
be performed for all post-construction stormwater facilities to
document general conformance with the approved plans.
D. Drainage plan.
(1) Activities that are not subject to site plan review that result in the
expansion or alteration of an existing building or structure that
results in the creation or redevelopment of 10,000 square feet of
impervious surface area shall meet the requirements for a drainage
plan. New principal buildings that are located in a subdivision with
an approved post-construction stormwater management plan are
not required to comply with the requirement for a drainage plan if
the approved stormwater management plan contains provisions
that adequately address surface drainage related to the
construction of the building as determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
(2) The drainage plan shall meet the "urban impaired stream standard"
when located within a watershed designated by the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection as an urban impaired
watershed.
(3) The drainage plan shall demonstrate that the proposed
improvements are designed to minimize the amount of stormwater
leaving the site. This shall include consideration of the design and
location of improvements to minimize the total area of impervious
surface on the site and stormwater management techniques to
minimize both the volume and rate of runoff from the lot. The
drainage plan shall provide for the treatment of 0.5 inch of runoff
from 90% of the new or redeveloped impervious area and 0.2 inch
of runoff from 75% of the new or redeveloped nonimpervious
§ 230-805 SACO CITY CODE § 230-805
173:820
surface area. The use of LID practices appropriate for the type of
development as set forth in Chapter 10 of the DEP Stormwater
Manual, Volume III - BMPs Technical Design Manual, is encouraged
but not required.
(4) The drainage plan must also demonstrate that:
(a) Any stormwater draining onto or across the lot in its preimprovement
state will not be impeded or redirected so as to
create ponding on, or flooding of, adjacent lots;
(b) Any increase in volume or rate of stormwater draining from the
lot onto an adjacent lot following the improvement can be
handled on the adjacent lot without creating ponding, flooding
or other drainage problems and that the owner of the lot being
improved has the legal right to increase the flow of stormwater
onto the adjacent lot;
(c) Any increase in volume or rate of stormwater draining from the
lot onto City property following the improvement can be
handled without creating ponding, flooding or other drainage
problems and that the owner of the lot being improved has the
legal right to increase the flow of stormwater onto the City's
property; and
(d) Any increase in volume or rate of stormwater draining from the
lot into the City's separate storm sewer system can be
accommodated in the system without creating downstream
problems or exceeding the capacity of the storm sewer system.
(5) Submission requirements.
(a) A drainage plan must include a written statement
demonstrating how the project has been designed to minimize
the volume and rate of stormwater leaving the site, including
provisions for minimizing the area of impervious surface or the
use of LID practices, and a plan and supporting documentation
with at least the following information:
[1] The location and characteristics of any streams or
drainagecourses existing on the parcel and/or abutting
parcels.
[2] The existing and proposed grading of the site using onefoot
contours.
[3] The location and area of existing and proposed buildings
and impervious surfaces on the site.
[4] The existing pattern of stormwater drainage on the site,
including points of discharge to the City's storm sewer
system or adjacent properties.
§ 230-805 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-805
173:821
§ 230-806. Erosion control. [Amended 3-2-1992]
[5] The proposed pattern of stormwater drainage after
development, including the location and design of any
stormwater facilities.
(b) The Planning Board may modify or waive any of the submission
requirements for a drainage Plan if the Planning Board
determines that the information is not required to determine if
the drainage standard is met.
E. Standards for easements and rights-of-way. Drainage easements
containing components of the stormwater water runoff system lying
outside of the public right-of-way lines shall conform to the following
standards:
(1) The minimum width of the easement shall be 30 feet, provided that
where a watercourse or retention area is wider than 30 feet, the
Planning Board may require a drainage easement of adequate
width to conform substantially to the lines of such watercourse or
retention area, including additional width to provide access. The
Planning Board may reduce the width of the easement upon a
positive recommendation from the Director of Public Works if the
narrower easement will allow the stormwater facilities to be
maintained or if the unique characteristics of the site make the
creation of a wider easement impractical.
(2) Where a drainage easement will contain an open channel, stream
or drainageway, the easement shall be designed and landscaped to
further the objectives of the stormwater management plan. The
natural landscape shall be retained to the extent practical as
determined by the Planning Board.
(3) Where a drainage easement will contain a closed conduit, the
easement shall be centered along the conduit.
(4) Any public stormwater management system that will be offered to
the City for acceptance as public facilities shall be located on the
separate parcel of land deeded to the City.
A. Erosion of soil and sedimentation of watercourses and water bodies
shall be minimized by employing the following the specifications of the
"Environmental Quality Handbook" (published by the Soil Conservation
Service) and in accordance with the latest practices endorsed by the
York County Soil and Water Conservation District. Items addressed
shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Stripping of vegetation, soil removal, and regrading or other
development shall be accomplished in such a way as to minimize
erosion.
§ 230-805 SACO CITY CODE § 230-806
173:822
§ 230-807. Screening.
(2) The duration of exposure of the disturbed area shall be kept to a
practical minimum.
(3) Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect
exposed critical areas during development.
(4) Permanent (final) vegetation and mechanical erosion control
measures shall be installed as soon as practicable after
construction ends.
(5) Until a disturbed area is stabilized, sediment in runoff water shall
be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps,
or other acceptable methods as determined by the Planning Board.
(6) The top of a cut or the bottom of a fill section shall not be closer
than 10 feet to an adjoining property, unless otherwise specified by
the Planning Board. Extraction operations (sandpits, etc.) shall not
be permitted within 150 feet of any property line, except as
provided for in this chapter.
(7) During grading operations, methods of dust control shall be
employed, wherever practicable.
A. Exposed areas. Exposed storage areas, exposed machinery installation,
sand and gravel extraction operations, and areas used for the storage
or collection of discarded automobiles, auto parts, metal or any other
articles of salvage or refuse shall have sufficient setbacks and screening
to provide a visual buffer sufficient to minimize their adverse impact on
other land uses within the development area and surrounding
properties. At a minimum, the screening shall include a dense
evergreen hedge six feet or more in height. All such plantings shall be
maintained as an effective visual screen; plants that die shall be
replaced within one growing season. Where a potential safety hazard to
children would be likely to arise, physical screening sufficient to deter
small children from entering the premises shall be provided and shall
be maintained in good condition.
B. Nonresidential uses abutting residential districts. [Amended
3-2-1992]
(1) The side and rear yard of a nonresidential use which abuts a
residential, conservation, or Resource Protection District shall be
maintained in their natural state to provide a visual screen between
districts.
(2) Where natural buffering does not exist, all side and rear yards shall
be landscaped to provide a visual screen between districts. A buffer
screen no less than six feet in width and four feet in height shall be
established, consisting of tree plantings, hedges, fencing, earth
berms, stone walls or combinations thereof.
§ 230-806 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-808
173:823
§ 230-808. Explosive materials. [Amended 5-15-1989; 8-22-1994]
§ 230-809. Water quality.
A. No highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored
in bulk above ground, unless they are located in anchored tanks at least
75 feet from any lot line, town way, or interior roadway, or 40 feet from
lot lines for underground tanks. All relevant federal, state and local
regulations shall be met.
B. Propane gas tanks are exempt from the above subsection and are
governed by the following guidelines. The Fire Department may require
underground propane tanks when circumstances warrant.
C. The setbacks of aboveground propane tanks shall be governed by the
BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, except that:
(1) Any propane tank on a lot adjacent to a residential zone or on any
lot adjacent to a lot developed for residential use shall be required
to maintain a twenty-five-foot setback from the lot line of the
residential district or lot.
(2) (Reserved)
(3) Freestanding propane tank installations shall be fully fenced or
fully screened with vegetation.
(4) When propane tanks are installed in parking lots or other areas
where they may be endangered by vehicles, a fence, bollards or
other structure sturdy and sufficient to protect the tanks from
damage shall be installed. This determination shall be made by the
Fire Department.
A. Sanitary waste disposal.
(1) All plumbing shall be connected to public collection and treatment
facilities where such facilities are available. When public facilities
are not available, wastewater disposal facilities shall be installed in
compliance with the regulations of the Maine Department of
Human Services and/or the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection.
(2) A subsurface waste disposal system or other underground system
for on-site sewage disposal shall not be used for any individual
residential use or combination of residential uses that has a design
sewage flow according to the Maine State Plumbing Code of more
than 2,000 gallons per day and is located over a mapped sand and
gravel aquifer as shown on the map Significant Sand and Gravel
Aquifers - 1998, published by the Maine Geological Survey.
(3) A subsurface waste disposal system or other underground system
for on-site sewage disposal shall not be used for any individual
commercial, service, industrial, or other nonresidential use or for
§ 230-808 SACO CITY CODE § 230-809
173:824
any combination of these uses that has a design sewage flow
according to the Maine State Plumbing Code of more than 2,000
gallons per day. [Amended 2-19-2002]
(4) Applicability. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Section
4.1 of the City of Saco Subdivision Regulations, the following
amendments shall not apply to any property for which a sketch plan
review application for a residential subdivision not to exceed 13
dwelling units in new structures plus any dwelling units and/or bedand-
breakfast units permissible in existing structures was filed
under Section 4.2 of the Subdivision Regulations on or before
February 19, 2002, provided a complete application for preliminary
subdivision approval and any required applications for site plan
and/or conditional use approval are submitted within six months
after the filing of the sketch plan application, the subdivision is
approved within two years of the filing of the sketch plan
application, and substantial construction of the subdivision is
commenced within two years after approval. [Note: This
applicability preamble was adopted by the City Council on
February 19, 2002. It applies to the last subsection of § 230-809A,
Footnote 13 to Table 412-1, as well as other amendments to
§ 230-809 as outlined in the Council minutes of February 19, 2002.
It also applies to the B-6 use list in § 230-410.15 and amendments
adopted by the Council on February 19, 2002, and outlined in
Council minutes of that date as "Proposed Amendments to Article
IV, District Regulations, January 7, 2002.")
B. Storage and handling of chemicals and similar materials. [Amended
2-19-2002]
(1) All outdoor storage facilities for liquid fuels, chemicals, industrial
wastes, and potentially harmful materials shall be located on
impervious pavement or other impervious surface approved by the
Director of Public Works, and shall be completely enclosed by an
impervious dike which shall be high enough to contain the total
volume of liquid kept within the storage area, plus the rain falling
into this storage area during a fifty-year, twenty-four-hour storm, so
that such liquid shall not be able to spill onto or seep into the
ground surrounding the paved storage area. Storage tanks for
"home heating oil" and vehicle fuel, not exceeding two fivehundred-
fifty-gallon vessels, may be exempted from this
requirement in situations where neither a high seasonal water
table (within 15 inches of the surface) nor rapidly permeable sandy
soils are involved.
(2) Any new or expanded commercial, service, industrial or other
nonresidential use shall conform to the following additional
standards:
§ 230-809 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-809
173:825
(a) Facilities shall be designed and operated so that all stored,
spilled or leaked liquid fuels, chemicals, wastes, or other
potentially harmful materials cannot infiltrate into the ground.
(b) Areas for the loading, unloading, and transfer of fuel,
chemicals, and similar materials shall be designed to prevent
discharge to the groundwater or runoff to the surface of the
land.
(c) Uncovered storage areas shall have stormwater drainage
facilities that provide for the disposal of stormwater runoff in a
manner that will not adversely affect groundwater quality.
(d) The discharge of fluids from any motor vehicle or equipment
onto the ground shall not be permitted. Any vehicle or
equipment service shall be done on an impervious surface that
is designed to prevent discharge to the groundwater or runoff
to the surface of the land. All damaged or junked vehicles shall
be stored on an impervious surface that is designed to prevent
discharge to the groundwater or runoff to the surface of the
land, unless the Planning Board finds that other municipal or
state regulations are adequate to prevent the discharge of
fluids onto the ground.
(e) The discharge from any interior floor drain shall not be
directed to a stream, storm drain, dry well, or subsurface
wastewater disposal system.
(3) Any established existing nonresidential use as of the date of
adoption of this section that stores three or more damaged or junk
vehicles for a period of more than 72 hours and which is not
licensed by the City as a junkyard or recycling facility shall store all
damaged or junk vehicles on an impervious surface that is designed
to prevent discharge to the groundwater or runoff to the surface of
the land. Damaged vehicles include, but are not limited to,
unregistered vehicles, uninspected vehicles, unserviceable
vehicles, junk vehicles, insurance wrecks, and other vehicles likely
to leak fluids. Existing vehicle storage areas that do not meet this
requirement shall conform with this provision no later than January
1, 2005.
C. Water quality. No activity shall deposit on or into the ground or
discharge to the waters of the state any pollutant that, by itself or in
combination with other activities or substances, will impair designated
uses or the water classification of the water body. [Amended
4-21-1992]
§ 230-809 SACO CITY CODE § 230-809
173:826
ARTICLE IX
Conditional Uses and Variances
[Amended 6-18-1987]
§ 230-901. Conditional uses.
A. Conditional use permit required. A building, structure or parcel of land
may be employed for a conditional use, as defined in Article III, if the
Planning Office finds the use meets the application standards of
Subsection L below, or if the Planning Board finds that the use meets
the standards of Subsection D, that it meets any special standards of
this chapter, and that it is of one of the following four types of
conditional uses: [Amended 11-6-1989; 10-4-1993; 6-6-2016]
(1) The conditional use is specifically listed in the regulations
governing the zoning district in which the use is proposed; or
(2) A parcel of land in single ownership as of the effective date of this
chapter is transected by a zoning boundary line, in which case
extensions penetrating no more than 100 feet into a morerestrictive
zone may be approved as a conditional use in
accordance with § 230-404B; or
(3) A change from one nonconforming use to another use equally or
more appropriate to the zoning district and meeting the standards
of § 230-503D and this section; or
(4) Certain conversions of buildings to multifamily use as described in
§ 230-412F.
B. Application for conditional use permit. [Amended 6-6-2016]
(1) The applicant shall submit building and site plans in 10 copies,
drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 20 feet. The
building plans shall show, at a minimum, the first-floor plan and all
elevations, with indication of the proposed construction material.
The site plan shall include the following information:
(a) A map of the site with reference to surrounding areas and
existing street locations.
(b) The name and address of the owner and conditional use permit
applicant, together with evidence of sufficient right, title or
interest in the premises to permit the applicant to undertake
the use for which conditional use permit approval has been
requested.
(c) The names and addresses of the owners of all properties within
200 feet of the property in question when the property is
located in the R-3, Business (B) or MU Zones and within 600
feet when the property in question is located in the
Conservation Zone, any industrial district or the R-1, R-2 and
§ 230-901 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-901
173:827
R-4 Districts, as shown by the most-recent tax records of all
municipalities in which such properties lie. [Amended
10-3-2011]
(d) A plan of the area showing lot line dimensions, applicable zone
or zones, and the normal high-water mark, if applicable.
(e) The location of all existing and proposed buildings and
structures, streets, easements, driveways, entrances and exits
on the site and within 100 feet thereof.
(f) All setbacks from bodies of water and lot lines.
(g) All existing physical features on the site and within 200 feet of
the site, including streams, watercourses and existing
woodlands. Soil conditions as reflected by a medium-intensity
survey (such as wetlands, rock ledge, and areas of high water
table) shall be shown, and the Planning Office or Planning
Board may require a high-intensity soils survey where
necessary. The applicant shall provide, as part of the
application, a narrative and sketch sufficient to describe trees
and other vegetation located on the site. The Planning Office or
Planning Board may require mapping of trees proposed to be
preserved as part of the site and landscaping plans presented
for approval.
(h) Topography showing existing and proposed contours at fivefoot
intervals for slopes averaging 5% or greater and at twofoot
intervals for land of lesser slope. A reference benchmark
shall be clearly designated. Where variations in the topography
may affect the layout of buildings and roads, the Planning
Office or Planning Board may require that the topographic
maps be based on an on-site survey.
(i) Parking, loading and unloading areas shall be indicated with
dimensions, traffic patterns, access aisles and curb radii.
(j) Improvements such as roads, curbs, bumpers and sidewalks
shall be indicated with cross sections, design details and
dimensions.
(k) The location and design of existing and proposed stormwater
systems, sanitary waste disposal systems and potable water
supply, and methods of solid waste storage and disposal.
(l) A landscaping and buffering plan showing what will remain
and what will be planted, indicating botanical and common
names of plants and trees, dimensions, approximate time of
planting and maintenance plans.
(m) Lighting details indicating type of fixtures, location, radius and
intensity of light.
§ 230-901 SACO CITY CODE § 230-901
173:828
(n) The location, dimensions and details of signs.
(o) The proposed use of all floor area.
(2) The application for conditional use permit review for business,
commercial and industrial uses shall also include:
(a) A written description of the proposed operations in sufficient
detail to indicate the degree to which the operations will create
traffic congestion, noise, toxic or noxious matter, vibration,
odor, heat, glare, air pollution, waste, and other objectionable
effects, along with engineering and architectural plans for
mitigating such effects.
(b) The proposed number of shifts to be worked and the maximum
number of employees of each shift.
(c) A list of all hazardous materials to be hauled, stored, used,
generated or disposed of on the site, and any pertinent state or
federal permits required.
(3) Where the Planning Board (or the Planning Office in case of minor
conditional uses as provided below in Subsection L) finds that, due
to special circumstances of a particular plan, the submission of
required exhibits is not necessary or is inappropriate because of
the nature of the proposed development, it may waive such
requirements subject to appropriate conditions. The Planning
Board or Planning Office may require submission of such additional
information as it deems necessary for proper review. A written
request for such a waiver shall accompany the application.
(4) The purpose of these provisions is to ensure that all required
information is presented to the Planning Board or Planning Office
when it initially reviews an application. However, an application is
not deemed to be complete until declared to be so by decision of
the Planning Office in the case of minor conditional use
applications as provided below in Subsection L, or by vote of the
Planning Board, which may, in any case, request additional
information and materials beyond those described in Subsection
B(1).
C. Hearing required. [Amended 10-4-1993; 6-6-2016]
(1) For each application for a conditional use permit, except those
reviewed pursuant to Subsection L, the Planning Board shall
conduct a public hearing.
(2) The Planning Board shall cause public notice to be posted and
published in both the City Building and at least one newspaper of
circulation in the area, of any public hearing which the Board shall
conduct, indicating the property involved, the nature of the appeal,
and the time and place of the public hearing.
§ 230-901 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-901
173:829
(3) The Board shall also cause to have notified all property owners
within 600 feet of the property when the applicant's property is
located in the Conservation District, any industrial district or R-1,
R-2, and R-4 Districts and within 200 feet when the applicant's
property is located in the R-3 District or any business district. The
Board shall cause a list of such property owners to be drawn off
from the Assessor's records, and such notices to property owners
shall be sent by mail at least seven days prior to the date set for the
public hearing.
(4) The Planning Board shall not continue hearings to a future date
except for good cause. Written notice of the decision of the Board
shall be sent to the appellant and the Building Inspector.
(5) (Reserved)
(6) If the development proposal under conditional use permit review is
also subject to site plan review under Article XI of this chapter,
conditional use permit review and site plan review may occur
simultaneously.
D. Standards for a conditional use permit. It is the applicant's burden to
establish that the proposed use or activity meets each of the following
standards: [Amended 10-4-1993]
(1) The proposed use will meet the definition and specific
requirements set forth in this chapter and will be in compliance
with applicable state or federal laws.
(2) The proposed use will provide adequate access to the site, and to
the buildings on the site, for emergency vehicles and will not create
firesafety hazards.
(3) The proposed exterior lighting will not create hazards to motorists
traveling on adjacent public streets, is adequate for the safety of
occupants or users of the site and will not damage the value and
diminish the usability of adjacent properties.
(4) The provisions for buffers and on-site landscaping will provide
adequate protection to neighboring properties from detrimental
features of the development.
(5) The proposed use will not have a significant detrimental effect on
the use and peaceful enjoyment of abutting property as a result of
noise, vibrations, fumes, odor, dust, glare or other cause.
(6) The provisions for vehicular loading and unloading and parking and
for vehicular and pedestrian circulation on the site and onto
adjacent public streets will not create hazardous and unsafe
conditions.
§ 230-901 SACO CITY CODE § 230-901
173:830
(7) The proposed use will not have a significant detrimental effect on
the value of adjacent properties that could be avoided by
reasonable modification of the plan.
(8) The design of the site will not result in significant flood hazards or
flood damage and will be in conformance with applicable flood
hazard protection requirements.
(9) Adequate provision has been made for disposal of wastewater and
solid waste and for the prevention of ground or surface water
contamination.
(10) Adequate provision has been made to control erosion or
sedimentation.
(11) Adequate provision has been made to handle stormwater runoff
and other drainage problems on the site.
(12) The proposed water supply will meet the demands of the proposed
use and for fire protection purposes.
(13) Adequate provision has been made for the transportation, storage
and disposal of hazardous substances and materials as defined by
state law.
(14) The proposed use will not have an adverse impact on significant
scenic vistas or on significant wildlife habitats that could be
avoided by reasonable modification of the plan.
(15) The use will not cause unreasonable safety hazards for pedestrians,
cyclists, and operators of motor vehicles and will not result in a
decrease in level of service below LOS D at study area intersections
or the project driveway during the design hour. (Levels of service
are defined by the latest edition of the Highway Capacity Manual,
published by the Transportation Research Board. The design hour
is defined as the 30th highest hour of the year for the intersection.)
However, at signalized intersections where the level of service is
already below LOS D; or at signalized intersections predicted to
drop below LOS D where physical improvements cannot be made to
attain LOS D; or at unsignalized intersections where physical
improvements cannot be made to improve the level of service to
LOS D, and provided that warrants for a traffic signal are not met,
or signal installation is not desirable, the Board may approve the
application if it finds that an adequate level of safety can be
attained through imposing conditions of approval such as upgrades
in signalization, one-way driveways, prohibiting certain turning
movements, construction of turning lanes, sidewalks, bicycle paths,
or other improvements, or through a program of transportation
demand management measures. [Amended 4-30-2007]
(16) Existing off-site ways and traffic facilities can safely and
conveniently accommodate the increased traffic generated by the
§ 230-901 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-901
173:831
development as far away from the development as the effects of the
development can be traced with reasonable accuracy.
E. Additional standards in Resource Protection, Saco River and Shoreland
Areas. For conditional use permit applications within RP, SR, and SO
Districts, the Planning Board, in addition to the standards for a
conditional use permit, shall find that the proposed conditional use:
[Amended 6-6-2016]
(1) Will maintain safe and healthful conditions;
(2) Will not result in water pollution, erosion, or sedimentation to
surface waters;
(3) Will adequately provide for the disposal of all wastewater;
(4) Will not have an adverse impact on spawning grounds, fish, aquatic
life, bird or other wildlife habitats;
(5) Will conserve shore cover and visual, as well as actual, points of
access to inland and coastal waters;
(6) Will protect archaeological and historic resources as in accordance
with the Comprehensive Plan;
(7) Will not adversely affect existing commercial fishing or maritime
activities in a Marine Business and Residential District;
(8) Will avoid problems associated with floodplain development and
use;
(9) Is in conformance with the provisions of § 230-7A03, Land use
standards; and
(10) If located in a structure, the structure is located in an approved
subdivision and will not violate any other local ordinance or
regulation or any state law which Saco is responsible for enforcing.
[Amended 4-3-2002]
F. Conditions of approval. The Planning Board, and in the case of minor
conditional uses the Planning Office, may attach such conditions, in
addition to those required elsewhere in this chapter, that it finds
necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. Violation of any of
these conditions shall be a violation of this chapter. Such conditions
may include, but are not limited to, specifications for: type of
vegetation, specified sewage disposal and water supply facilities,
landscaping and planting screens, period of operation, operational
controls, professional inspection and maintenance, sureties, deed
restrictions, restrictive covenants, type of construction, or any other
reasonable conditions necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter.
[Amended 6-6-2016]
G. Limits on conditional use permits. [Amended 6-6-2016]
§ 230-901 SACO CITY CODE § 230-901
173:832
(1) Work or construction, or occupancy if no construction is involved,
shall commence within 12 months of the issuance of a conditional
use permit. If work or occupancy is not commenced within this
period, the conditional use permit shall be null and void. The
deadline may be extended for one additional six-month period by
the Planning Board, or the Planning Office in the case of minor
conditional uses, upon the written request of the applicant. The
written request for an extension must be submitted before the date
of expiration of the conditional use permit. After the conditional use
permit has expired or an extension is denied by the Planning Board,
the applicant may reapply for a conditional use permit at any time
without prejudice.
(2) Requests for extensions shall be approved unless one or more of
the following occurs:
(a) Additional information that indicates that the plan does not
meet the conditional use standards;
(b) Failure to meet a condition of approval;
(c) An amendment in this chapter that prohibits or alters the
proposed conditional use.
H. Reapplication. If a conditional use permit is denied, a second request of
a similar nature shall not be resubmitted within two years from the date
of the first request, unless, in the opinion of the majority of the Planning
Board (or by the Planning Office in the case of minor conditional use),
substantial new evidence can be brought forward, or unless the Board
or the Planning Office finds, in its sole judgment, that an error of law or
misunderstanding of facts has been made, or unless amendment has
been made to this chapter which changes the status, circumstances, or
conditions of the application which was originally submitted.
[Amended 6-6-2016]
I. Expiration of conditional use permit. Provided all conditions and
standards of approval are met, including Subsection G and/or
Subsection L, a conditional use permit issued under this article
authorizes only the particular activity for which it was issued and based
upon a plan for such activity which was approved. The conditional use
permit shall automatically expire and cease to be of any force or effect if
such use is discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive months.
[Amended 9-18-1989; 10-4-1993; 6-6-2016]
J. Appeals. Decisions on minor conditional uses made by the Planning
Office may be appealed by an aggrieved party to the Planning Board
within 30 days of the date of the decision. This review by the Planning
Board shall be de novo and may include new evidence and testimony.
Decisions by the Planning Board regarding a minor conditional use
application or regarding an application for a conditional use permit may
be appealed by an aggrieved party, in writing to the Zoning Board of
§ 230-901 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-901
173:833
Appeals, within 30 days of the Planning Board's decision. The Zoning
Board of Appeals may reverse the Planning Board's decision only upon
a finding that there has been an abuse of discretion, an error of law or
that there are not substantial facts in the record to support the decision
of the Planning Board. The review shall not be de novo. [Amended
6-6-2016]
K. Nonconformance. Conditional uses are permitted in buildings which
are legally nonconforming in respect to the standards of Table 412-1 of
this chapter upon a decision of the Planning Office, or finding by the
Planning Board, that this nonconformance does not cause the use to
violate any of the conditional use standards or special standards of
Article VII for certain conditional uses. [Amended 10-4-1993]
L. Minor conditional uses. In order to process applications more
efficiently, certain conditional uses, due to the limited nature of the
proposed use, may be reviewed by the Planning Office, as authorized in
30-A M.R.S.A. § 4353. The Planning Office may, however, decline to
review an application requesting approval for a minor conditional use
and forward such application to the Planning Board. Only uses that
meet all of the following applicability standards may be reviewed as
minor conditional uses: [Amended 2-19-2002; 6-6-2016]
(1) Applicability. This article shall apply to:
(a) Home occupations in which there is no point of purchase for
retail merchandise at the home. Phone and mail order
businesses, wholesale businesses and other similar businesses
may be reviewed as minor conditional uses.
(b) Home occupations in which the required number of parking
spaces for all uses on the lot does not exceed four spaces.
(c) Home occupations in which there are not significant exterior
alterations to the building or site.
(d) Two-family dwellings.
(2) Administration.
(a) Application contents. An application for a minor conditional
use shall include four copies of the information required under
Subsection B(1), except the items required under Subsection
B(1)(c), (g), (h) and (j), which may be required by the Planning
Office if deemed warranted.
(b) Notice and public comment. Upon receipt of an application for
minor conditional use, the Planning Office shall send a notice
of the application, including the name of the applicant, address
of the applicant, the nature and address of the proposed use, to
all property owners within 200 feet. The notice shall also
§ 230-901 SACO CITY CODE § 230-901
173:834
§ 230-902. Variances. [Amended 11-6-1989; 6-17-1995; 11-19-2007]
include a deadline for comment on the application, to be 10
calendar days from the date of the notice.
(c) Time frame for decisions. The Planning Office shall act upon all
applications for minor conditional uses, approval, or referral to
the Planning Board, within five days of the close of the public
comment period.
(3) Criteria for approval. Minor conditional use applications shall be
approved, or approved with conditions, by the Planning Office
unless the proposed use does not satisfy the approval criteria in
Subsection D, or other relevant sections of this chapter, or other
local, state and federal laws. Notice of decisions by the Planning
Office shall be provided to those parties detailed above in
Subsection L(2). If, in the opinion of the Planning Office, an
application does not meet the applicability criteria set out in
Subsection L(1), then the application shall be referred to the
Planning Board for a full conditional use review.
(4) Planning Board jurisdiction. The Planning Board shall review any
application for a minor conditional use upon a determination by the
Planning Office that the potential impacts from a proposed use
warrant a public hearing before the Planning Board. Upon referral
to the Planning Board, the applicant shall submit a full application
for conditional use.
A. Applicability.
(1) A variance, as defined in Article III, is authorized for only the
following space and bulk requirements, and for certificates of
appropriateness, governed by § 230-413, Historic preservation:
(a) Minimum lot area;
(b) Lot area per dwelling unit;
(c) Minimum street frontage;
(d) Minimum yards and setbacks;
(e) Maximum lot coverage;
(f) Maximum height;
(g) On lots divided by district boundaries, the extension of uses
allowed in the less-restricted zone more than 50 feet into the
more-restricted zone;
(h) The parking standards in § 230-708 of this chapter;
(i) The curb cut standards in § 230-709A of this chapter;
§ 230-901 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-902
173:835
(j) The sign standards of § 230-707, except for decisions by the
Planning Board under § 230-707E(3); [Amended 6-17-1995]
(k) The private road dimensional standards found in
§ 230-724A(9)(a) and (j) of this chapter. However, this variance
shall only be granted if the applicant can present a letter from
the Saco Fire Department stating that the variance will result
in a private road which is adequate for public safety purposes.
[Amended 3-15-2004]
(2) Establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not
be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of
the presence of nonconforming structures in the particular zone or
adjoining zones. [Amended 11-6-1989]
B. Application for a variance. Application to the Zoning Board of Appeals
for a variance shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer on
forms provided for that purpose, accompanied by a fee as may be
established by the City Council for such applications. The application
shall clearly state the location of the property, the relief sought, and the
reason(s) for requesting the variance. [Amended 11-6-1989]
C. Standards. Prior to voting to grant a variance, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall review the application and find that the following
standards have been met:
(1) That a literal interpretation of the requirements of this chapter will
impose an undue hardship on the property owner. The term "undue
hardship" shall mean specifically that:
(a) The land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a
variance is granted; and
(b) The need for the variance is due to unique circumstances of the
property and not to the general conditions of the
neighborhood; and
(c) The hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant
or a prior owner.
(2) That the granting of the variance will not alter the essential
character of the locality.
(3) No variance shall be granted merely to relieve inconvenience to the
property owner or for economic considerations alone.
(4) Any variance granted by the Board of Appeals shall be the
minimum variance from the terms of this chapter as will relieve the
hardship pleaded.
D. Variance in shoreland areas. [Amended 6-29-2009]
§ 230-902 SACO CITY CODE § 230-902
173:836
(1) A copy of each variance request, including the application and all
supporting information supplied by the applicant, shall be
forwarded by the municipal officials to the Commissioner of the
Department of Environmental Protection at least 20 days prior to
action by the Board of Appeals. Any comments received from the
Commissioner prior to the action by the Board of Appeals shall be
made part of the record and shall be taken into consideration by
the Board of Appeals.
(2) Prior to voting to grant a variance within the mandated shoreland
area, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall, in addition, find that the
proposed variance:
(a) Will not result in unsafe or unhealthful conditions;
(b) Will not result in erosion or sedimentation;
(c) Will not result in water pollution;
(d) Will not result in damage to spawning grounds, fish, aquatic
life, and bird and other wildlife habitats;
(e) Will conserve shoreland vegetation;
(f) Will conserve visual points of access to waters as viewed from
public facilities;
(g) Will conserve actual points of public access to waters;
(h) Will conserve natural beauty; and
(i) Will avoid problems associated with floodplain development
and use.
(3) The Board shall cause written notice of its decision to be mailed or
hand-delivered to the applicant and to the Department of
Environmental Protection within seven days of the Board's
decision.
E. Conditions of approval. The Zoning Board of Appeals may impose such
conditions on its approval of a variance as are necessary, in its
judgment, to protect surrounding property owners or the City from
adverse impacts resulting from the variance.
F. Limits on variances. A variance granted by the Board of Appeals shall
expire if the work or change involved is not commenced within six
months of the date on which the variance was granted or if the work or
change is not substantially completed within a twelve-month period,
unless extended by the Board.
G. Reapplication. If the Board of Appeals shall deny a variance, a second
request of a similar nature shall not be brought before the Board within
two years from the date of the first request, unless, in the opinion of a
majority of the Board, substantial new evidence can be brought
§ 230-902 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-902
173:837
forward, or unless the Board finds, in its sole and exclusive judgment,
that an error of law or misunderstanding of facts has been made, or
unless amendment has been made to this chapter which changes the
status, circumstances, or conditions of the matter which was appealed.
H. Prior work. Any construction activity commenced prior to the granting
of a required variance shall be a violation of this chapter.
I. Special standards for certain variances for single-family dwellings.
[Amended 7-10-1995]
(1) Pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4353, Subdivision 4-B, the Zoning
Board of Appeals may also grant setback variances for single-family
detached dwellings under the alternate definition of "undue
hardship" below. Variances granted under this section are limited
to the following:
(a) Single-family detached dwellings that are the primary yearround
residence of the petitioner.
(b) Variances in front yard or side yard and rear yard as outlined in
Table 412-1, Lines D and E, not to exceed 20% of the setback
requirement.114
(c) Variances granted under this subsection shall not cause the
area of the dwelling to exceed the maximum lot coverage
permitted in the district as outlined in Table 412-1, Line H.
(d) Variances granted under this subsection shall be the minimum
variance needed.
(e) Variances granted under this subsection shall not cause the
house which receives the variance to be within 15 feet of an
occupied building on the adjacent lot.
(2) Prior to voting to grant a variance, the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall review the application and find that all of the following
standards defining "undue hardship" for this subsection only have
been met:
(a) The need for the variance is due to unique circumstances of the
property and not to the general conditions of the
neighborhood;
(b) The granting of a variance will not alter the essential character
of the locality;
(c) The hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant
or a prior owner;
114. Editor's Note: Table 412-1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 230-902 SACO CITY CODE § 230-902
173:838
(d) The granting of the variance will not substantially reduce or
impair the use of abutting property; and
(e) That the granting of a variance is based upon demonstrated
need, not convenience, and no other feasible alternative is
available.
§ 230-902 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-902
173:839

ARTICLE X
Board of Appeals
§ 230-1001. Organization.
§ 230-1002. Terms of office; vacancies. [Amended 6-6-2016]
A. Creation of Board. The City of Saco Zoning Board of Appeals,
hereinafter the "Board," is hereby created, which Board shall consist of
seven regular members and two alternates, who shall be appointed by
the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council, none of whom
shall hold any elective office or any other appointive position in the City
government. The Board shall elect a Chairman and a Secretary from its
members. [Amended 10-3-1988; 6-6-2016]
B. Quorum. A quorum shall consist of four members, at least two of whom
shall be regular members. All decisions concerning Board action shall
consist of a simple majority vote by the members present at a meeting,
but under no circumstances shall fewer than three members constitute
a majority vote. Alternates shall vote only in the absence of regular
members. In the event of absence of a regular member or member(s),
the alternate who has served the longest time shall fill the first vacancy,
and the alternate who has served the second longest time shall fill the
second vacancy. In the event that both alternates shall have served the
same period of time, selection of an alternate to fill the vacancy shall be
by lot. [Amended 10-3-1988]
C. Qualifications. [Amended 6-6-2016]
(1) Only residents of Saco may serve as a member of the Board.
(2) There shall be no more than two members on the Board who are
residents of the same ward.
(3) No City Council member, nor any spouse of a City Council member,
may be a member of the Board.
A. Terms. The term of the appointive members shall be five years, and
terms shall be staggered with twelve-month intervals. Any vacancy
during the unexpired term of an appointive member shall be filled in the
same manner for the remainder of the term.
B. Vacancies.
(1) Vacancies on the Board shall be created under any of the following
circumstances:
(a) A member submits their resignation in writing to the Mayor.
(b) A member's official residence is no longer within the City of
Saco, in which instance the Secretary of the Board shall notify,
in writing, the Mayor.
§ 230-1001 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-1002
173:841
§ 230-1003. Powers and duties. [Amended 6-6-2016]
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear the following matters:
(c) Upon expiration of the term of a member.
(d) A member fails to attend three or more consecutive meetings
of the Board, without being excused by the Board.
(2) In the case of vacancies occurring in the manner described in
Subsection B(1)(d) above, the Chairman of the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall first contact the absent member to determine their
ability to attend future hearings on a regular basis, and the Board
shall then recommend appropriate action to the City Council.
(3) Any vacancy during the unexpired term of an appointive member
shall be filled by a person appointed by the Mayor for the unexpired
term.
(4) Any member of the Board may be removed for cause by the City
Council, provided that the member shall first be notified in writing
and given the opportunity for a hearing.
A. Administrative appeals. An aggrieved party may appeal a decision of
the Code Enforcement Officer regarding a zoning violation, a building
permit or a certificate of occupancy in those cases where it is alleged
the Code Enforcement Officer has made an error of law, or has abused
their discretion, or the evidence of record compelled a different
decision. An aggrieved party may also appeal to the Board if a permit
holder has meaningfully exceeded the authority contained in their
building permit or their certificate of occupancy. Any appeal filed
hereunder must be brought within 30 days of the alleged act, action or
failure to act. This provision is intended to effectuate the process set
out by the Legislature in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691, Subdivision 4. The
appeal review shall be de novo as set out below in § 230-1004F. The
Board may affirm or reverse the decision of the Code Enforcement
Officer, and that decision may be appealed as set out in § 230-1005.
B. Planning Board appeals. To hear appeals of decisions by the Planning
Board on applications for conditional use permits, subject to the
limitations of § 230-901 of this chapter. Pursuant to § 230-901J, the
appeal review shall not be de novo. The Zoning Board shall not have
jurisdiction or authority to hear appeals from site plan decisions made
by either the Planning Board or the City Planner. The Board may affirm
or reverse the decision of the Planning Board on appeal, or it can order,
not more than one time, a remand to the Planning Board for further
consideration.
C. In general; variances from decisions by code enforcement.
(1) The Board shall have authority to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny applications for variances from decisions made
§ 230-1002 SACO CITY CODE § 230-1003
173:842
§ 230-1004. Procedures.
by the Code Enforcement Officer regarding standards of this
chapter as allowed under § 230-902. The review conducted by the
Board on such variances shall be de novo as set out below in
§ 230-1004F. Such decisions by the Board may be appealed as set
out in § 230-1005.
(2) All variances, including those described here, and in Subsections D
and F below, shall meet the requirements and conditions set out in
§ 230-902. [Amended 3-2-1987]
D. Variances from historic preservation conditions. The Board shall have
authority to approve, approve with conditions, or deny applications for
variances as further detailed in § 230-413M of this chapter. The review
conducted by the Board shall be de novo as set out below in
§ 230-1004F below.
E. Appeals from Historic Preservation Commission. To hear appeals of
decisions made by the Historic Preservation Commission under
§ 230-413J(5). A decision by the Historic Preservation Commission on
an application for a certificate of appropriateness may be appealed, in
writing, to the Zoning Board of Appeals within 30 days of the
Commission's decision. The Board may affirm the decision, or it may
reverse the Commission's decision upon a finding that there has been
an error of law or that the facts leading to the decision of the
Commission were erroneous. The review made by the Board shall not
be de novo. If the Board reverses the decision of the Commission, it
shall be remanded to the Commission for further consideration, but not
more than once. Thereafter, the parties shall have their appeal rights as
allowed under § 230-1005. [Amended 3-2-1987; 3-18-1991]
F. Shoreland and Natural Resource District variances. The Board shall
have authority to approve, approve with conditions, or deny
applications for a variance from shoreland and natural resource
standards set out in § 230-7A03 of this chapter. The review conducted
by the Board shall be de novo as set out in § 230-1004F below.
[Amended 6-6-2016]
A. Denial of building permit. All applicants for building permits denied for
any reason shall be advised, in writing, of the right of appeal.
B. Application for a variance and filing of an appeal.
(1) An appeal or application for a variance shall be commenced as set
forth below in Subsection D.
(2) Such appeal or application for a variance shall include the
following information:
(a) A concise, written statement indicating what relief is
requested and why it should be granted.
§ 230-1003 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-1004
173:843
(b) A description of the regulation, ordinance provision, or permit
that is subject to review or from which relief is requested.
(c) A sketch, drawn to scale, showing lot lines, location of existing
buildings and structures and other physical features of the lot
pertinent to the relief sought.
(d) If applicable, a demarcation on the sketch showing low tide
and mean high tide and designating the one-hundred-year
flood area, any applicable wetlands, shorelines, or other
pertinent natural features.
(e) If applicable, color pictures of the exterior features at issue if
the appeal or variance is of, or concerns, a structure found in
the Historic District.
(3) Upon being notified of an appeal or of an application for a variance,
the Code Enforcement Officer and the Board Clerk shall arrange to
secure and transmit to the Board all of the papers and evidence
constituting the record of the decision that is to be reviewed.
C. Public hearing required.
(1) For all appeals from decisions of the Code Enforcement Officer, for
all requests for any variance, and for review of the decisions of the
Planning Board on applications for conditional use permits, the
Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing, but the Board shall
only take and hear new evidence or testimony in those matters
where de novo review is expressly permitted. The hearing shall be
held within 35 days of the receipt of an appeal or application for
variance.
(2) The Board shall cause public notice to be posted and published in
both the City Building and at least one newspaper of circulation in
the area, of any public hearing which the Board shall conduct,
indicating the property involved, the nature of the appeal, and the
time and place of the public hearing.
(3) The Board shall also cause to have notified all property owners of
property within 600 feet of the property when the applicant's
property is located in the Conservation District, an industrial
district, or R-1, R-2, and R-4 Districts and within 200 feet when the
applicant's property is located in the R-3 District or any business
district. The Board shall cause a list of such property owners to be
drawn off from the Assessor's records, and such notices to property
owners shall be sent by mail at least seven days prior to the date
set for the public hearing.
(4) The Board shall not continue hearings to a future date except for
good cause. Written notice of the decision of the Board shall be sent
to the appellant and the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 230-1004 SACO CITY CODE § 230-1004
173:844
D. Time for appeal, forms and fees.
(1) When a person is aggrieved by a decision of the Code Enforcement
Officer, by a decision of the Historic Preservation Commission, or
by a decision of the Planning Board, if an appeal or variance
application is authorized elsewhere under this chapter, the
aggrieved person must file their appeal or variance application
within 30 days of the day the decision was rendered. Appeals and
applications for variances must be filed with the Clerk of the Board
on those forms provided for that purpose by the Clerk of the Board.
The Clerk of the Board, after receiving the application and
stamping the date of receipt, shall transmit the application to the
Board of Appeals.
(2) Any appeal or application for variance to the Board of Appeals shall
be accompanied by a fee as established by the City Council.
[Amended 4-3-1986]
E. Rules of procedure. The Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure
for the conduct of its business not inconsistent with this chapter and the
statutes of Maine. Such rules shall be filed with the Board Secretary
and the City Clerk. Any rule so adopted and not mandated by this
chapter or the statutes of Maine may be waived by the Chairman of the
Board for good cause shown. [Amended 6-16-2016]
F. Submission of evidence. Provided the Board's review is not otherwise
limited by this chapter, including § 230-1003B and E, the Board may
receive any oral or documentary evidence, including new evidence and
testimony, but shall provide as a matter of policy for the exclusion of
irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence. Every party shall
have the right to present his own case or defense by oral or
documentary evidence, to submit rebuttal evidence, and to conduct
such cross-examination as may be required for a full and true disclosure
of the facts. [Amended 6-6-2016]
G. Presence of Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer,
unless prevented by illness or absence from the state, shall attend all
hearings and shall present to the Board of Appeals all plans,
photographs or other factual material that is appropriate to an
understanding of the appeal. [Amended 6-6-2016]
H. Conflict of interest. No member of the Board shall vote on a matter in
which they have a direct or indirect financial or personal interest. Any
question of whether a particular issue involves a conflict of interest
sufficient to disqualify a member from voting thereon shall be decided
by a majority vote of the members, except the member who is either
requesting a decision or who is being challenged.
I. Records and decisions.
(1) The Secretary shall maintain a permanent record of all Board
meetings and all correspondence of the Board. The Secretary shall
§ 230-1004 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-1004
173:845
§ 230-1005. Appeals.
Decisions of the Zoning Board of Appeals may be appealed to the Superior
Court in accordance with state law.
§ 230-1006. Reapplication.
If the Board of Appeals shall deny an appeal, a second request of a similar
nature shall not be brought before the Board within two years from the
date of the first request, unless, in the opinion of a majority of the Board,
substantial new evidence can be brought forward, or unless the Board finds,
in its sole and exclusive judgment, that an error of law or misunderstanding
of facts has been made, or unless amendment has been made to this chapter
which changes the status, circumstances, or conditions of the matter which
was appealed.
be responsible for maintaining those records which are required as
part of the various proceedings which may be brought before the
Board. All records to be maintained or prepared by the Secretary
are deemed public, shall be filed in the Municipal Clerk's office and
may be inspected at reasonable times.
(2) The transcript of testimony, if any, and exhibits, together with all
papers and requests filed in the proceedings, shall constitute the
record. All decisions shall become a part of the record and shall
include a statement of findings and conclusions, as well as the
reasons or basis therefor, upon all the material issues of fact, law or
discretion presented and the appropriate order, relief or denial
thereof.
(3) Notification of decision. The City Clerk, Planning Board, and
Building Inspector shall be notified, in writing, within seven days of
all decisions of the Board. Written notice to the appellant shall be
sent within seven days after the date of the decision. The notice
shall include, as every decision of the Board shall include, findings
of fact; shall refer to the evidence in the record and the exhibits,
plans, or specifications upon which such decision is based; shall
specify the reason or reasons for such decision; and shall contain a
conclusion or statement separate from the findings of fact setting
forth the specific relief granted or denied.
§ 230-1004 SACO CITY CODE § 230-1006
173:846
ARTICLE XI
Site Plan Review
§ 230-1101. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the review of commercial,
industrial, institutional and multifamily residential developments that are
of a scale that they may affect the environment, the provision of public
services, and the value and rights of adjoining properties, and thereby to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Saco.
§ 230-1102. Applicability.
This article shall apply to:
A. Proposals for new construction, outside of an industrial district, of
nonresidential buildings or structures, including accessory buildings or
structures, having a total floor area of more than 1,000 square feet.
B. Proposals for new construction, in an industrial district, of
nonresidential buildings or structures, including accessory buildings
and structures, having a total floor area of more than 10,000 square
feet.
C. Proposals to enlarge nonresidential buildings or structures, including
accessory buildings or structures, by more than 1,000 square feet of
ground floor area within a five-year period if outside of an industrial
district, or by more than 10,000 square feet if within an industrial
district.
D. Proposals for new construction of multifamily dwellings, or the
construction of a multi-unit residential project, or for conversion of
single family or two-family dwellings to multifamily use, or for
enlargement of multifamily dwellings, either by the addition of units
within an existing structure or expansion of the structure to
accommodate new units. [Amended 11-16-2011]
E. Proposals to convert structures in residential districts to professional
offices.
F. Proposals to pave, strip, or grade more than 10,000 square feet within a
five-year period, or to remove earth materials of more than 10,000
square feet in area within a five-year period.
G. In the B-5 Zone, boat building and repair facilities, and marinas, piers,
docks, boat houses, and port facilities.
H. The addition of any drive-in window.
I. Site developments needing approval under 38 M.R.S.A. §§ 481-488, to
the degree permitted under 38 M.R.S.A. § 489-A, shall be reviewed
under the procedures of Article XI, Site Plan Review, of this chapter and
shall meet the standards of 38 M.R.S.A. §§ 481 to 490, as amended, as
§ 230-1101 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-1102
173:847
§ 230-1103. Administration.
well as those in the regulations of the DEP, including Chapters 371, 372,
373, 374, 375, 376, 377, and others which may be issued by the DEP,
which are hereby adopted by reference for projects falling under this
article. Projects subject to this section shall also meet the standards
of this chapter. The City will notify the Department of Environmental
Protection upon the submission of any projects subject to this article.
J. Site developments requiring stormwater permits pursuant to 38
M.R.S.A. § 420-D shall, to the extent permitted under 38 M.R.S.A.
§ 489-A, be reviewed under the procedures of Article XI of this chapter;
and they shall meet and comply with those rules promulgated by the
Bureau of Environmental Protection pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A. § 420-D,
specifically Rules 500 and 502, adopted September 22, 2005, said rules
taking effect November 16, 2005, as enacted by Legislative Resolve,
Chapter 87, Public Laws of 2005 (LD 625/HP 458). [Amended
3-20-2006]
K. Private roads, see § 230-724.
L. Marinas, see § 230-731. [Amended 6-2-2008]
A. No building permit, plumbing permit, or certificate of occupancy shall
be issued by the Code Enforcement Officer or Local Plumbing Inspector
for any use or development within the scope of this article until a site
plan of development has been approved and signed by the Planning
Board, or in the case of minor site plans under § 230-1103G, approved
and signed by the City Planner.
B. Every applicant applying for site plan approval shall submit to the
Planning Department 12 copies of a complete site plan of the proposed
development, which shall be prepared in accordance with § 230-1104,
accompanied by a fee as prescribed by the City's Cost Recovery
Ordinance.115 Applicants submitting minor site plans for review by the
City Planner shall submit four copies.
C. After an application is submitted, the Planning Department, within 10
working days, shall determine whether all information required under
§ 230-1104, or requests for waivers of submission for items that have
not been addressed, have been submitted. Any requests for waivers
must be explained in detail and supported by substantial evidence
where appropriate. If the application appears to be complete, it shall be
scheduled for Planning Board consideration within four weeks. Nothing
in this subsection shall preclude a determination by the Planning Board
that additional information is needed before the application is treated
as complete. A determination of completeness by the Planning Board
does not constitute approval of any waiver requests, unless a specific
115. Editor's Note: See Ch. 83, Cost Recovery.
§ 230-1102 SACO CITY CODE § 230-1103
173:848
finding to that effect is made by the Planning Board. [Amended
7-7-2008]
D. Public hearing; notice requirements.
(1) Prior to taking final action on a site plan review application, the
Planning Board shall hold a public hearing. Property owners shall
be notified by first-class mail at least seven days prior to a public
hearing. Property owners in the Conservation District, any
industrial district, the Resource Protection District, or the R-1, R-2,
and R-4 Districts shall be notified of the hearing if their property is
within 600 feet of the applicant's property. Property owners in the
R-3 District, any business district or the MU Districts shall be
notified if their property is within 200 feet of the applicant's
property. Failure of any property owner to receive a notice shall not
necessitate another hearing or invalidate any action by the
Planning Board. The hearing shall also be advertised in a local
newspaper at least seven days prior to a public hearing. [Amended
10-3-2011]
(2) Minor site plans shall be subject to first-class mail notification
requirements as described above.
(3) The applicant shall erect a sign on the lot in question, reading,
"Public Notice – This property is the subject of a site plan review
application now before the Saco Planning Board. For information
please contact the Saco Planning Department, 282-3487." The sign
shall be of a size no smaller than two feet by three feet, with twoinch
letters in black on a white background, and shall be clearly
visible to passersby. [Amended 10-17-2001]
E. The Planning Board shall act to approve, approve with modifications or
conditions, or disapprove the site plan within 30 days of the close of the
public hearing, or by a date mutually agreeable with the applicant.
F. No application for site plan review shall be considered complete and
acted upon by the Planning Board until all conditional uses and/or
variances which may be required for the proposed development first
have been obtained. The Planning Board may conduct its review of a
conditional use, shoreland zoning permit, or subdivision application
simultaneously with its site plan review.
G. Minor site plans. [Amended 2-19-2002; 6-6-2016]
(1) In order to process site plans more efficiently, site plans for the
following items shall be reviewed by the City Planner rather than
the Planning Board:
(a) Buildings, structures or additions of less than 6,000 square
feet;
(b) Private roads;
§ 230-1103 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-1103
173:849
(c) Nonresidential buildings or structures in an approved
industrial park, including accessory buildings and structures,
having a total floor area of not more than 30,000 square feet.
(2) The City Planner shall approve, approve with modifications or
conditions, or deny the site plan within 15 working days of
receiving a complete plan. The City Planner shall consider
comments from all applicable City departments during the course
of plan review. If the City Planner has not acted within 15 working
days, the applicant may seek approval from the Planning Board,
rather than the City Planner. Inaction by the City Planner does not
constitute approval or disapproval of the plan. If a party is not
satisfied with the determination of the City Planner, the aggrieved
party may appeal the decision to the Planning Board. The City
Planner can decline review, for any reason, and forward a minor
site plan to the Planning Board for site plan review. Any minor plan
that also requires conditional use, subdivision, or any other review
by the Planning Board shall be reviewed by the Planning Board.
The City Planner shall, within 30 days, inform the Planning Board
and abuttors after making a determination on a minor site plan.
Any appeal from a determination of the City Planner to the
Planning Board shall be governed by § 230-1114 hereinbelow.
H. Site location of development amendment. Once approved and signed by
the Planning Board, no changes may be made to approved plans
without an amended approval from the Planning Board in the case of a
major amendment, or from the City Planner in the case of a minor
amendment. For the purposes of the site location of development
reviews, minor amendments can include any of the following, or similar
issues: changes in the record owner, altering phases of development,
the addition of accessory structures of less than 2,000 square feet each,
the addition of impervious area of less than 5,000 square feet, the
addition of minor site features, such as lighting, signs or other
amenities, reductions in performance guarantees, and changes in
construction details necessitated by changing circumstances found
during construction. In the case of a major amendment, the Board shall
conduct a public hearing. Any proposed minor change to a site location
permit that would require Board approval to amend a local approval
will be referred to the Board. The City Planner will have the authority to
refer any changes to the Board if it is determined to be necessary. If the
applicant or the abutter is not satisfied with the determination of the
City Planner, the applicant or abutter shall be permitted to have the
entire application reviewed by the Planning Board, if such a request is
made within 30 days of the City Planner's determination. The City
Planner shall inform the Planning Board after making a determination
on a minor amendment. [Amended 11-7-1994]
I. Neighborhood meeting required.
(1) Applicability and purpose. An applicant intending to file a site plan
review application for certain projects shall hold a neighborhood
§ 230-1103 SACO CITY CODE § 230-1103
173:850
meeting in accordance with the requirements of this section before
submitting an application for site plan review. The goal of the
meeting is to inform the public about the project and to identify
concerns so they might be addressed in the design and review
of the project. The neighborhood meeting, as described in this
section, shall be held for any potential application for site plan
review that involves:
(a) The construction or expansion of a commercial, industrial, or
other nonresidential structure with more than 1,000 square
feet of total floor area that is located in a mixed-use or
residential zoning district or that abuts a residential zoning
district.
(b) The construction or expansion of a multi-unit residential
project that will create six or more new dwelling units in a
mixed-use or residential zoning district or that abuts a
residential zoning district.
(2) Timing and location of the neighborhood meeting. An applicant for
a site plan review shall conduct at least one neighborhood meeting
no more than 90 days prior to submitting the site plan application.
The meeting shall be held at a convenient City building. All costs
associated with the neighborhood meeting shall be borne by the
applicant.
(3) Procedures for the neighborhood meeting.
(a) Notice. The applicant shall mail notice of the neighborhood
meeting to all property owners who will be entitled to receive
notice when the site plan review application is filed and to the
Planning Department at least 10 days before the meeting. The
date of the meeting shall be coordinated with the Planning
Department so that a member of the Department can attend.
The notice shall be mailed by first-class mail with a post office
certificate of mailing. The notice shall contain a brief
description of the potential project, the location of the project,
the permits for which the applicant will be seeking approval,
and the date, time and place of the neighborhood meeting. The
post office certificate(s) of mailing with the list of the people
who were mailed the notice shall be provided to the Planning
Department.
(b) Digital copy. The applicant shall provide the Planning
Department with a digital copy of the neighborhood meeting
notice, at least 10 days before the meeting, which the City may
forward to other interested persons or groups.
(c) Presentation. At the meeting, the applicant shall present a
summary of the proposed project and a plan or drawing of the
project, indicate what permits and licenses are required for the
§ 230-1103 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-1103
173:851
§ 230-1104. Submission requirements.
project, and provide adequate opportunity for public questions
and comments.
(d) Attendance sheet. At the neighborhood meeting, the applicant
shall circulate a sign-in sheet for those in attendance who
choose to sign. The sign-up sheet shall be submitted to the
Planning Department and shall become part of the application
submitted to the Planning Board.
(e) Minutes. The applicant shall keep minutes of the meeting to be
submitted to the Planning Department and, as part of the
application, to the Planning Board. Any other person attending
the meeting may submit comments on the neighborhood
meeting to the Planning Department or Planning Board.
[Amended 11-16-2011]
A. Basic information. When the applicant or his authorized agent makes
formal application for site plan review, his application shall contain at
least the following exhibits and information. The Planning Board or the
City Planner may require the submission of additional information if the
submissions below are insufficient to determine whether the
application meets the criteria for approval. [For minor site plans
submitted under § 230-1103G, four copies of the items in Subsection
A(1), (2), (3), (4), (8), (9), (11), (12) and (15) below shall be submitted.
The City Planner may require additional submissions if these are
inadequate to evaluate the plan.]
(1) A fully executed and signed copy of the application for site plan
review.
(2) Site plan. [Amended 12-19-2002]
(a) Twelve copies of a site plan on paper not larger than 24 inches
by 36 inches nor smaller than 11 inches by 17 inches, drawn at
a scale sufficient to allow review of the items listed under the
approval criteria herein, but at not more than 50 feet to the
inch for that portion of the total tract of land being proposed
for development.
(b) The site plan shall be prepared by an engineer, architect,
landscape architect, or land surveyor registered in Maine
using the following standards:
[1] Plan units: decimal feet, NAD83, Maine State Plane West,
vertical datum NAVD1988
[2] Georeferencing: drawing features should be tied into state
plane coordinates
§ 230-1103 SACO CITY CODE § 230-1104
173:852
[3] Rotation of grid north maintained. Plan data should not be
"rotated" in any way which might compromise data
coordinate integrity. (Alternately, a "dview twist" or similar
CAD display operation will allow for convenient plotting/
layout fitting while still properly maintaining spatial
reference.)
[4] Coordinates shall be shown on at least four corners of the
site plan. Coordinates shall be referenced to the Maine
State Coordinate System. [Amended 3-16-2009]
(c) The site plan shall show the following:
[1] Owner's and applicant's name and address, names and
addresses of consultants who aided in preparing the plan,
if any, and the name and address of the person or company
leasing the property, if applicable, and, in order to
establish right, title and interest, a deed, an executed
lease, option, or purchase and sale agreement.
[2] Names and addresses of all abutting property owners.
[3] Sketch map showing the general location of the site within
the City and North arrow.
[4] Boundaries of the property and of all contiguous property
under the control of the owner or applicant, regardless of
whether all or part is being developed at this time.
[5] Zoning classification(s) of the property, and the location of
zoning district boundaries if the property is located in two
or more zoning districts or abuts a different zone.
[6] The location and width of all building setbacks required by
this chapter.
[7] The location and delineation of site elements, including: all
existing and proposed buildings (including dimensions,
where appropriate), driveways, sidewalks, parking spaces,
loading areas, open spaces, large trees, wetlands
preservation measures and protection measures,
stormwater control facilities, dumpsters and recycling
facilities, etc. [Amended 2-19-2002]
[8] The location and widths of nearby streets.
[9] The location and delineation of natural resource areas,
historic features and archaeological features of the site,
including, but not limited to, floodplains, wetlands, open
drainagecourses, sand and gravel aquifers, scenic areas,
significant wildlife habitats, habitat areas for rare and
endangered plants and animals, deer wintering areas,
stands of trees, stone walls, graveyards, fences, unique
§ 230-1104 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-1104
173:853
natural areas, historically significant structures or
features, archaeologically significant features, or other
important unusual natural areas and site features.
[Amended 2-19-2002; 2-17-2004; 3-18-2004]
(3) Copies of existing and proposed easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions.
(4) Copies of applicable local and state approvals and permits;
provided, however, that the Planning Board, or in the case of minor
site plans the City Planner, may approve site plans subject to the
issuance of specified state licenses and permits in cases where it
determines that it is not feasible for the applicant to obtain them at
the time of site plan review.
(5) Names and addresses and Tax Map and lot numbers of all property
owners within 600 feet of the applicant's property if it is located in
the Conservation District, any industrial district, the Resource
Protection District or the R-1, R-2, and R-4 Districts, or within 200
feet when the applicant's property is located in the R-3 District or
any business district.
(6) For site plans in which 10,000 square feet of impervious surface
will be created, a stormwater drainage plan, prepared by a
registered Maine professional engineer, showing:
(a) The existing and proposed method of handling stormwater
runoff;
(b) The direction of flow of the runoff through the use of arrows;
(c) The location, elevation, and size of all catch basins, dry wells,
drainage ditches, swales, retention basins, and storm sewer
engineering calculations used to determine drainage
requirements based upon the two-, ten-, twenty-five and fiftyyear,
twenty-four-hour storm event that show the
predevelopment and post-development runoff rates. If the postdevelopment
runoff rate exceeds the predevelopment runoff
rate, on-site mitigation measures, such as detention basins or
flow restrictors, shall be required, unless a drainage plan
prepared by a Maine registered engineer demonstrates that
the increase has no adverse impact to the downstream
conditions.
(7) Existing and proposed topography of the site at two-foot contour
intervals, or such other interval as the Board may determine.
(8) A utility plan showing provisions for water supply and wastewater
disposal, including the size and location of all piping, holding tanks,
and leach fields, and showing the location and nature of all
electrical, telephone and any other utility services to be installed on
the site.
§ 230-1104 SACO CITY CODE § 230-1104
173:854
(9) A landscape plan, with a planting schedule keyed to the site plan
and indicating the varieties and sizes of trees, shrubs and other
plants to be planted on the site.
(10) A standard boundary survey by a registered land surveyor showing
the location of all property lines. The Board may waive the
requirement of a boundary survey when sufficient information is
available to establish, on the ground, all property boundaries.
(11) The location, size and character of all signs.
(12) A waste disposal plan describing how all solid waste will be
handled on site, how it will be removed from the site, the disposal
facilities to which it will be transported, and, if the waste is of an
unusual nature, information indicating that a suitable disposal
facility will accept the waste. For businesses which use industrial
chemicals and produce hazardous waste, the name, amount, and
nature of all chemicals used, and the manner of disposal of all
chemical, hazardous and industrial wastes.
(13) A medium-intensity soils map of the site. (This may be obtained at
the Planning Office.) The Board may require a high-intensity soils
map if issues of water quality, wetlands, or other natural
constraints are noted.
(14) For projects which will create over 10,000 square feet of
impervious surface, a plan showing the methods of controlling
erosion and sedimentation both during and after construction,
including a written description of these methods and a schedule for
implementing them in accordance with the requirements of the
York County Soil and Water Conservation District.
(15) An estimate of the amount and type of traffic generated daily and at
peak hours. For sites that generate more than 400 one-way vehicle
trips per day, a traffic impact analysis, prepared by a licensed
professional engineer with experience in traffic engineering and
transportation, shall be submitted. The study area should extend,
at a minimum, to intersections where traffic attributable to the
subdivision equals or exceeds 35 vehicles in a lane in a peak hour.
The analysis shall show, at a minimum: existing traffic volumes;
proposed traffic generation; proposed access; types of vehicles
expected; effect on level of service within the study area; sight
lines; and accident history in the study area. The report will
recommend improvements both on site and off site to meet the
requirements of this chapter. [Amended 4-30-2007]
(16) Hydrogeologic assessment.
(a) A hydrogeologic assessment may be required by the Board for
projects in which groundwater quality is a concern. Such
instances include, but are not limited to, sites:
§ 230-1104 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-1104
173:855
[1] Over a sand and gravel aquifer;
[2] Not served by public water or sewer;
[3] Where the depth to groundwater is less than 48 inches;
[4] In soils rated by the SCS Soil Survey as poor or very poor
for subsurface septic systems;
[5] In coarse soils categorized as having "severe" limitations
for septic systems;
[6] Where a septic system of over 2,000 gallons per day is
proposed.
(b) When a hydrogeologic assessment is submitted, the
assessment shall contain at least the following information:
[1] A map showing the basic soil types;
[2] The depth to the water table at representative points
throughout the lot;
[3] Drainage conditions throughout the project;
[4] Data on the existing groundwater quality, from test wells
in the project or from existing wells on neighboring
properties;
[5] A map showing the location of any subsurface wastewater
disposal systems and drinking water wells within the
project and within 200 feet of the project boundaries;
[6] An analysis and evaluation of the effect of the project on
groundwater resources. In the case of residential
developments, the evaluation shall, at a minimum, include
a projection of post-development nitrate - nitrogen
concentrations at any wells within the project, at the
project boundaries, and at a distance of 1,000 feet from
potential contamination sources, whichever is a shorter
distance. Projections of groundwater quality shall be
based on the assumption of drought conditions (assuming
60% of annual average precipitation).
(17) If the project is subject to the stormwater quality standards of
§ 230-805B, a stormwater quality management plan that includes
the following: [Amended 6-18-2001]
(a) A narrative describing how the site is oriented within the
watershed, identifying downstream water bodies, including
wetlands, and addressing the potential effects of site runoff.
The narrative shall identify and discuss the stormwater
treatment methods proposed to be used on the site.
§ 230-1104 SACO CITY CODE § 230-1104
173:856
(b) A plan showing relevant existing contours, proposed contours,
existing and proposed subwatersheds, proposed topographic
features, and existing and proposed site features, including
buildings and other facilities, natural and man-made
drainageways, streams, channels, culverts, catch basins, and
stormwater treatment facilities. The plan shall include detail
drawings of the stormwater best management practices
proposed to be used and the location of both structural and
nonstructural BMPs.
(c) Calculations demonstrating that the proposed stormwater
treatment facilities will meet the standards of § 230-805B.
(d) A stormwater facilities management plan which sets forth the
types and frequencies of proposed maintenance activities
needed to maintain the efficiency of the stormwater treatment
facilities and which identifies the party that will be responsible
for carrying out each maintenance activity and for submitting
the annual maintenance report and the proposed institutional
arrangements that will assure that all maintenance occurs as
proposed.
(18) A lighting plan, prepared by a qualified lighting professional,
showing at least the following at the same scale as the site plan:
(a) The location of all buildings, landscaping, parking areas, and
proposed exterior lighting fixtures;
(b) Specifications for all proposed lighting fixtures, including
photometric data, designation as "cutoff" fixtures, color
rendering index (CRI) of all lamps (bulbs), and other
descriptive information on the fixtures;
(c) The proposed mounting height of all exterior lighting fixtures;
(d) Analyses and illuminance level diagrams or photometric pointby-
point diagrams on a twenty-foot grid showing that the
proposed installation conforms to the lighting level standards
of this chapter, together with statistical summaries
documenting the average illuminance, maximum illuminance,
minimum illuminance, average to minimum uniformity ratio,
and maximum to minimum uniformity ratio for each parking
area, drive, canopy, and vehicle sales or storage area; and
(e) Drawings of all relevant building elevations, showing the
fixtures, the portions of the walls to be illuminated, the
illuminance levels of the walls, and the aiming points for any
remote light fixtures.
(19) Archaeological or historical sites. Any proposed land use activity
involving structural development or soil disturbance on or adjacent
to sites listed on, or known by the City to be eligible to be listed on,
§ 230-1104 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-1104
173:857
§ 230-1105. Waiver of submission requirements.
The Planning Board, or in the case of a minor site plan the City Planner,
may waive any of the submission requirements of this article when it is
determined that the scale of the project is of such limited size or the project
is of such a nature as to make the information unnecessary.
§ 230-1106. Approval criteria.
The following criteria are to be used by the Planning Board, or in the case
of a minor site plan the City Planner, in judging applications for site plan
reviews and shall serve as minimum requirements for approval of the site
plan. The site plan must also comply with the specific design standards in
Articles VII and VIII of this chapter, as well as all other sections of this
chapter. The site plan shall be approved unless, in the judgment of the
Planning Board, or in the case of a minor site plan the City Planner, the
applicant is not able to reasonably meet one or more of these standards. In
all instances, the burden of proof shall be on the applicant.
the National Register of Historic Places shall be submitted by
the applicant to the Maine Historic Preservation Commission and
the Saco Historical Preservation Commission (as appropriate) for
review and comment prior to action being taken by the permitting
authority. The permitting authority shall consider comments
received from the Commissions prior to rendering a decision on the
application. [Amended 2-19-2002]
(20) A design analysis demonstrating how the project conforms to the
design standards of § 230-729, including any district-specific
additional requirements. This analysis must address each of the
applicable design standards and allow the Planning Board to
determine if each standard has been met. The analysis must
provide information about the proposed development and the
characteristics of neighboring properties and the adjacent
neighborhood and an analysis demonstrating how the proposed
development meets the standards. This analysis should include
plans, building elevations, visual simulations, and a narrative as
appropriate to document conformance with the standards.
[Amended 11-16-2011]
A. General. The proposed use will meet the specific requirements set forth
in this chapter, other local ordinances, and will be in compliance with
applicable state or federal laws.
B. Compatibility with neighboring buildings. The bulk, location, and height
of proposed buildings and structures shall be compatible with
neighboring properties.
C. Natural features. The building and other improvements shall be
oriented with respect to the natural features of the site, preserve the
natural landscape insofar as practical, and minimize grade changes.
§ 230-1104 SACO CITY CODE § 230-1106
173:858
D. Public safety. The proposed use will provide adequate access to the site,
and to the buildings on the site, for emergency vehicles at all times of
the year and will not create fire safety hazards or other safety hazards.
E. Lighting. The proposed exterior lighting will not create glare, or create
hazards to motorists traveling on adjacent public streets, is adequate
for the safety of occupants or users of the site, and will not damage the
value and diminish the usability of adjacent properties.
F. Landscaping. The provisions for buffers, screens and on-site
landscaping will minimize the impact of detrimental features of the
proposed use on neighboring property, shall define, soften, or screen
the appearance of parking areas from public rights-of-way and abutting
properties, and shall meet the specific requirements of §§ 230-708 and
230-807.
G. Off-site impacts. The proposed use will not have a significant
detrimental effect on the use and peaceful enjoyment of abutting
property as a result of noise, vibrations, fumes, odors, dust, or other
cause and shall meet the standards of this chapter and other City
ordinances regulating these impacts.
H. Vehicle circulation and pedestrian access. The provisions for vehicular
loading and unloading and parking and for vehicular and pedestrian
circulation on the site and onto adjacent public streets will not create
hazardous and unsafe conditions and are designed in accordance with
the standards of Article VII of this chapter.
I. Flood hazards. The design of the site will be in conformance with
applicable flood hazard protection requirements.
J. Wastewater. Adequate provision has been made for disposal of
wastewater.
K. Solid waste. Adequate provision has been made for the disposal of solid
waste as required by state law and local ordinance, including provisions
for recycling.
L. Erosion controls. Adequate provision has been made to control erosion
or sedimentation, and the standards of § 230-806 shall be followed.
M. Drainage. Adequate provision has been made to manage stormwater
runoff and other drainage problems on the site, and the plan conforms
with § 230-805. If the post-development runoff rate exceeds the
predevelopment runoff rate, on-site mitigation measures, such as
detention basins or flow restrictors, shall be required, unless it is
demonstrated that the increase has no adverse impact to the
downstream conditions. Adequate provision has been made for
maintenance of drainage facilities.
§ 230-1106 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-1106
173:859
N. Water supply. The proposed water supply will meet the demands of the
proposed use and the demands for fire protection purposes and will not
cause a degradation of service in the area.
O. Hazardous materials. Adequate provision has been made for the
transportation, storage and disposal of hazardous substances and
materials, as defined by state and federal law and City ordinance.
P. Wildlife, scenery, and unique and critical areas. The proposed use will
not have an adverse impact on significant scenic vistas or on significant
wildlife habitats or identified unique and critical natural areas that
could be avoided by reasonable modification of the plan.
Q. Traffic conditions. The use will not cause unreasonable safety hazards
on public roads and will not result in a decrease in level of service
below LOS D at intersections. The Board may consider a lower level of
service at unsignalized intersections, provided further physical
improvements cannot be made to improve the level of service, and
provided that warrants for a traffic signal are not met, or signal
installation is not desirable, and the Board finds that adequate
provisions for safety can be attained through imposing conditions of
approval such as restrictions including one-way driveways and/or
prohibiting certain turning movements, construction of turning lanes,
sidewalks, bicycle paths, or other improvements, payment of a traffic
mitigation fee, or through a program of transportation demand
management measures. [Amended 4-30-2007]
R. Water quality.
(1) Surface water. The proposed development will conform to the
following standards:
(a) The project will not discharge any water pollutants which
affect the state classification of any water body (38 M.R.S.A.
§ 363 et seq.116).
(b) The project will conform to the stormwater quality standards of
§ 230-805B.
(c) The project will not change water temperatures more than
permitted by DEP Regulations 582-1 through 582-8.
(2) Groundwater. The proposed development will not increase any
contaminant concentration in groundwater to more than 1/2 of the
primary drinking water standards, nor shall it increase any
contaminant concentration in groundwater to more than the
secondary drinking water standards.
S. Utilities. The development shall not impose an unreasonable burden on
sewers and storm drains, water lines or other public utilities.
116. Editor's Note: 38 M.R.S.A. § 363 was repealed by Laws 1985, c. 698, § 4.
§ 230-1106 SACO CITY CODE § 230-1106
173:860
§ 230-1107. Conditions of approval.
The Planning Board, or in the case of a minor site plan the City Planner,
may attach such conditions, in addition to those required elsewhere in this
chapter, that it finds necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, specifications for:
T. Special features of development. Exposed storage areas, exposed
machinery installation, service areas, truck loading areas, utility
buildings and similar structures shall have sufficient setbacks and
screening to provide an audio/visual buffer sufficient to minimize their
adverse impact on other land uses within the development area and
surrounding properties.
U. Additional standards in shoreland areas. For applications in the RP, SR,
and SO Districts, the Planning Board shall find that the project:
(1) Will maintain safe and healthful conditions;
(2) Will not result in water pollution, erosion, or sedimentation to
surface waters;
(3) Will adequately provide for the disposal of all wastewater;
(4) Will not have an adverse impact on spawning grounds, fish, aquatic
life, bird or other wildlife habitat;
(5) Will conserve shore cover and visual, as well as actual, points of
access to inland and coastal waters;
(6) Will protect archaeological and historic resources as in accordance
with the Comprehensive Plan;
(7) Will not adversely affect existing commercial fishing or maritime
activities in a Marine Business and Residential District;
(8) Will avoid problems associated with floodplain development and
use;
(9) Is in conformance with the provisions of § 230-7A03, Land use
standards; and
(10) If located in a structure, the structure is located in an approved
subdivision and will not violate any other local ordinance or
regulation or any state law which Saco is responsible for enforcing.
[Amended 4-3-2002]
V. Master planned developments in the MU-3 and MU-4 Districts. When
the application for site plan review involves a project that is located in a
master planned development for which a master plan has been
approved by the Planning Board, the Planning Board must find that the
project is consistent with the approved master plan and its development
standards. [Amended 7-1-2013]
§ 230-1106 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-1107
173:861
type of vegetation, specified sewage disposal and water supply facilities,
landscaping and planting screens, period of operation, operational controls,
professional inspection and maintenance, sureties, deed restrictions,
phasing of construction, restrictive covenants, type of construction, or any
other reasonable conditions necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter.
§ 230-1108. Endorsement of plan.
At the time of final approval of a site plan, the applicant shall submit one
reproducible clear film copy and three paper copies of the plan for the
Planning Board's signature, to be maintained in City records.
§ 230-1109. Changes in plan. [Amended 6-6-2016]
Any proposed significant change to a major site plan must be reviewed and
approved by the Planning Board at public hearing, and no action may be
taken without all parties having notice and opportunity to present evidence
and argument. Any proposed minor change to a major site plan, and any
proposed changes of any nature in minor site plans, and any other decisions
expressly delegated to the City Planner as part of a plan approval, may be
reviewed and approved by the City Planner without further public hearing,
but notice of decisions by the City Planner shall be sent within 30 days to
all previously noticed parties, including abuttors, to assure appeal rights
under § 230-1114 below. Examples of minor changes include, but are not
limited to: changes in the record owner, altering phases of development, the
addition or alteration of minor site features, such as lighting, signs or other
similar amenities, and the timing or scheduling of building or site work if
necessitated by cold weather. The decision as to what constitutes a minor
change shall be made by the City Planner, and the decision is presumed
to be reasonable until established otherwise. Construction not performed
according to the approved plan or in violation of any approved conditions
placed on a plan shall be a violation of this chapter.
§ 230-1110. Financial guarantees. [Amended 3-16-2009]
The Planning Board, or in the case of a minor site plan the City Planner,
may require the posting with the City, prior to the start of site work or
issuance of a building permit, of either an escrow account established with
the City, or a certified letter of credit, or a passbook account established at
a state or federally chartered bank or credit union that names the City as
either account holder or co-holder. The consent of the City shall be required
for any withdrawal. Said account or letter of credit shall be found suitable
by the City so as to ensure the completion of all site improvements. The
financial guarantee shall include date of completion for the project. The City
shall have access to the site at all times to review the progress of the work
and shall have the right, upon default, to enter onto the site and perform
the work necessary to remedy the default.
§ 230-1111. Time limits on site plan approvals.
§ 230-1107 SACO CITY CODE § 230-1111
173:862
§ 230-1112. As-built plans. [Amended 11-07-2005; 3-16-2009]
A. If substantial construction is not commenced within 12 months of the
Planning Board's approval of a site plan, the site plan approval shall be
null and void. "Substantial construction" shall mean the completion of a
foundation, addition, or other evidence satisfactory to the Planning
Department. The deadline may be extended for two additional twelvemonth
periods by the City Planner upon the written request of the
applicant. The written request for an extension must be submitted
before the date of expiration of the site plan approval. After the site
plan approval has expired or an extension denied by the City Planner,
the applicant may reapply for site plan review at any time without
prejudice. [Amended 7-16-2012]
B. The City Planner shall approve the request for an extension unless one
of the following occurs:
(1) Additional information that indicates that the plan does not meet
the standards of this chapter;
(2) Failure to meet a condition of approval;
(3) An amendment in this chapter that prohibits or alters the proposed
site plan.
C. For site plans approved before the adoption of this section (formerly
Section 1107) on September 19, 1989, if substantial construction is not
commenced one year after the adoption of this amendment on March 2,
1992, the site plan approval shall be null and void.
A. As-built plans shall be prepared by an engineer, architect, landscape
architect, or land surveyor registered in Maine. Prior to the release of
the letter of credit and inspection fee account, the developer shall
submit to the Planning Office a digital copy of the final site plan
approved by the Planning Board, including all approved amendments to
the plan during construction. The digital data shall be a single
composite AutoCAD (up to Release 2007) drawing file as well as a .pdf
file and may be submitted on CD-ROM, via e-mail, or other format
acceptable to the City Planner. The following standards shall be
followed:
(1) Plan units: decimal feet, NAD83, Maine State Plane West, vertical
datum NAVD1988.
(2) Georeferencing: drawing features should be tied into state plane
coordinates.
(3) Rotation of grid north maintained. Plan data should not be
"rotated" in any way which might compromise data coordinate
integrity. (Alternately, a "dview twist" or similar CAD display
operation will allow for convenient plotting/layout fitting while still
properly maintaining spatial reference.)
§ 230-1111 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-1112
173:863
§ 230-1113. Penalties.
In addition to any other penalty authorized under this chapter, the Planning
Board, after holding a public hearing on an alleged violation, may revoke a
site plan approval if it is determined that a violation has occurred.
§ 230-1114. Appeals. [Amended 2-19-2002; 6-6-2016]
The exclusive remedy from decisions of the Planning Board by the applicant
or abutter on site plans (both major and minor) is an appeal to the Superior
Court under Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, or any
successor rule or statute. Appeals of decisions by the City Planner as to
major or minor site plans by the applicant or abutter, including plan changes
proposed during construction pursuant to § 230-1109, shall be made to the
Planning Board within 30 days of the date of the decision. The review and
appeal from decisions of the City Planner shall be conducted as a de novo
matter, and the Board may hear and take new evidence and testimony.
Thereafter, any appeal by the applicant or abutter shall be to the Superior
Court.
(4) Coordinates shall be shown on at least four corners of the site plan.
Coordinates shall be referenced to the Maine State Coordinate
System.
(5) AutoCAD (up to Release 2007) drawing or equivalent.
(6) Any dependent external referenced (xref's) should be bound to the
drawing file(s).
(7) Drawing layers should be named in a logical fashion to allow
identification of features; preferably, all drawings should be
accompanied by a file that describes the layer structure.
(8) Significant proposed polygon features, i.e., building footprints,
parking areas, and driveways, should be closed 2-D polylines
(looped for closure).
B. As-built plans for the electrical system shall be submitted separately
and either prepared or approved in writing by a licensed electrician.
The electrical as-built plan shall include:
(1) Cross section every 50 feet.
(2) Cross section where a substantial change in a conduit run occurs.
(3) Length, size and use of all conduit and conductors.
§ 230-1112 SACO CITY CODE § 230-1114
173:864
ARTICLE XII
Enforcement
[Amended 1-17-2002; 10-24-2016]
§ 230-1201. Administrative official.
Unless otherwise specifically stated, this chapter shall be administered and
enforced by the City of Saco Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 230-1202. Duties.
§ 230-1203. Permits required.
A. Code Enforcement Officer.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce this
chapter and, in connection therewith, to investigate all complaints
brought to his attention of alleged violations of this chapter and
cases which, in his opinion, violate this chapter.
(2) Furthermore, it shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer
to enforce the City of Saco Subdivision Regulations and, in
connection therewith, to investigate complaints brought to his
attention of alleged violations of the Subdivision Regulations and
cases which, in his opinion, violate the Subdivision Regulations.
B. Other City officials. It shall be the duty of the Mayor and City Council
and of members of the Fire Department, Police Department, Electrical
Inspector, Local Plumbing Inspector, City Planner, Health Officer and
Tax Assessor to assist the Code Enforcement Officer by reporting to him
any new construction, reconstruction, or land use in apparent violation
of this chapter.
A. Building permit and certificate of occupancy.
(1) No new structure shall be occupied or used, nor shall the
occupancy of any commercial or industrial building change, prior
to the issuance of an occupancy permit by the Code Enforcement
Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer shall not issue an occupancy
permit unless the new structure or proposed use is in conformance
with this chapter.
(2) Notice. This subsection applies only in residential zoning districts,
the C-1 Zone, and the Shoreland Zoning Districts. The Code
Enforcement Officer will notify immediate abutting landowners by
mail that a building permit has been issued whenever a building
permit will lead to the construction of a new dwelling unit, will lead
to the creation or expansion of a commercial use, or will lead to the
creation or expansion of an accessory use with commercial aspects.
In addition, in the Shoreland Zoning Districts, the notice will be
issued for any exterior change requiring a building permit. These
§ 230-1201 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-1203
173:865
notices are not required if earlier approvals required for such a
permit have been the subject of a public hearing, such as those held
for conditional use, site plan review, subdivision, shoreland zoning,
a variance, or other similar permitting actions. The notice will be
mailed within one week of the issuance of the building permit and
shall describe briefly what the permit is for and describe briefly the
appeals process. Failure to receive the notice shall not invalidate
any action taken by the Code Enforcement Officer. [Amended
4-7-2003]
B. Building codes. Building permits and certificates of occupancy shall be
issued in conformance both with the this chapter and with Chapter 73
of the Code of the City of Saco. [Amended 6-21-1993]
C. Shoreland permits and approvals.
(1) Permits required. No person shall, without first obtaining a
shoreland zoning permit, engage in any activity or use of land or
structure requiring a permit in the district in which such activity or
use would occur; or expand, change, or replace an existing use or
structure; or renew a discontinued nonconforming use.
(2) Supplemental information. All required information in § 230-1104
of this chapter, Site plan review, shall be submitted with all
Shoreland Zone applications.
(3) Shoreland standards. Prior to approving an application for a
shoreland zoning permit or approving it with conditions, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall make a positive finding, based on the
information presented, that the proposed use:
(a) Will maintain safe and healthful conditions;
(b) Will not result in water pollution, erosion, or sedimentation to
surface waters;
(c) Will adequately provide for the disposal of all wastewater;
(d) Will not have an adverse impact on spawning grounds, fish,
aquatic life, bird or other wildlife habitats;
(e) Will conserve shore cover and visual, as well as actual, points
of access to inland and coastal waters;
(f) Will protect archaeological and historic resources as in
accordance with the Comprehensive Plan;
(g) Will not adversely affect existing commercial fishing or
maritime activities in a Marine Business and Residential
District;
(h) Will avoid problems associated with floodplain development
and use;
§ 230-1203 SACO CITY CODE § 230-1203
173:866
(i) Is in conformance with the provisions of § 230-7A03, Land use
standards; and
(j) If located in a structure, the structure is located in an approved
subdivision and will not violate any other local ordinance or
regulation or any state law which Saco is responsible for
enforcing.
(4) Limits on shoreland approvals.
(a) If substantial construction is not commenced within 12 months
of the Planning Board's or Code Enforcement Officer's written
approval of a shoreland permit, the shoreland permit shall be
null and void. "Substantial construction" shall mean
completion of 30% of a permitted structure or use measured as
a percentage of estimated total cost. The deadline may be
extended for one additional six-month period by the Code
Enforcement Officer upon the written request of the applicant.
The written request for an extension must be submitted before
the date of expiration of the shoreland permit. After the
shoreland permit has expired or an extension denied by the
Code Enforcement Officer, the applicant may reapply for a
Shoreland Zone approval at any time without prejudice.
(b) The Code Enforcement Officer shall approve the request for an
extension unless he/she has become aware of one of the
following:
[1] Additional information that indicates that the plan does
not meet the standards of the shoreland zoning provisions;
[2] Failure to meet a condition of approval;
[3] An amendment in this chapter that prohibits or alters the
proposed plan.
(5) Contractor certification. When an excavation contractor will
perform an activity that requires or results in more than one cubic
yard of soil disturbance, the person responsible for management of
erosion and sedimentation control practices at the site must be
certified in erosion control practices by the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection. This person must be present at the site
each day earthmoving activity occurs for a duration that is
sufficient to ensure that proper erosion and sedimentation control
practices are followed. This is required until erosion and
sedimentation control measures have been installed which will
either stay in place permanently or stay in place until the area is
sufficiently covered with vegetation necessary to prevent soil
erosion. The name and certification number of the person who will
oversee the activity causing or resulting in soil disturbance shall be
included on the permit application. This requirement does not
apply to: a person or firm engaged in agriculture or timber
§ 230-1203 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-1203
173:867
§ 230-1204. Enforcement of shoreland development provisions.
harvesting if best management practices for erosion and
sedimentation control are used; and municipal, state and federal
employees engaged in projects associated with that employment.
[Amended 10-24-2016]
D. Exemptions. No permit shall be required for the construction,
alteration, relocation, or replacement of any building or part thereof
having a total cost of construction of $500 or less, provided it conforms
with the provisions of this chapter.
E. Matter accompanying applications. The application for the permit shall
be in writing and shall be made on such form as the Code Enforcement
Officer shall prescribe and shall contain a scale drawing of the
proposed new, altered or relocated building, or the replacement
contemplated, including a plot plan (unless waived by the Code
Enforcement Officer). The application shall be filed with the office of
the Code Enforcement Officer.
F. Permit approval. The Code Enforcement Officer, after proper
examination of the application, shall either issue the requested permit
or transmit a notice of refusal within 10 calendar days. Notice of refusal
shall be in writing and shall state the reasons therefor. However, when
the Code Enforcement Officer has reason to believe that the proposed
construction would not be in compliance with other local regulations or
state laws, he shall not issue any building permit until all questions
have been resolved to his satisfaction. When a violation of subdivision
standards is believed to exist, the Planning Board shall be given an
opportunity to examine the proposal.
G. Record of permit applications. Each application for a building permit,
together with all plans, drawings, correspondence, and a copy of the
issued building permit, shall be made part of a permanent file, and such
file shall be kept in a locked cabinet in the City Building.
H. Installation of public utility service. No public utility, water district,
sanitary district or any utility company of any kind may install services
to any new structure located in the Shoreland Zone unless all permits
required under this chapter or any previous ordinance have been issued
by the appropriate municipal officials.
A. Nuisances. Any violation of the shoreland provisions, including the
performance standards of Article VIIA, shall be deemed to be a
nuisance.
B. Code Enforcement Officer.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the
provisions of Article VIIA. If the Code Enforcement Officer shall
find that any provision of Article VIIA is being violated, he or she
shall notify, in writing, the person(s) responsible for such violation,
§ 230-1203 SACO CITY CODE § 230-1204
173:868
indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action
necessary to correct it, including discontinuance of illegal use of
land, buildings or structures, or work being done, removal of illegal
buildings or structures, and abatement of nuisance conditions. A
copy of such notice shall be submitted to the municipal officers and
be maintained as a permanent record.
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer shall conduct on-site inspections to
ensure compliance with all applicable laws and conditions attached
to permit approvals. The Code Enforcement Officer shall also
investigate all complaints of alleged violations of Article VIIA.
(3) The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep a complete record of all
essential transactions of the office, including applications
submitted, permits granted or denied, variances granted or denied,
revocation actions, revocation of permits, appeals, court actions,
violations investigated, violations found, and fees collected.
[Amended 1-17-2002; 4-3-2002]
§ 230-1204 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-1204
173:869

ARTICLE XIII
Legal Provisions
[Amended 1-17-2002]
§ 230-1301. Conflict with other provisions.
Whenever the regulations of this chapter conflict with those of another
ordinance or regulations of Saco, the stricter regulations shall prevail.
§ 230-1302. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not be held to
invalidate any other section or provision of this chapter.
§ 230-1303. Violations and penalties.
§ 230-1304. Actions and proceedings.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to institute or cause
to be instituted by the City Solicitor in the name of the City of Saco any
and all actions that may be appropriate or necessary for the
enforcement of this chapter. This section shall not prevent any person
entitled to equitable relief from enjoining any act contrary to the
provisions of this chapter.
B. Furthermore, the Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to
institute or cause to be instituted by the City Solicitor in the name of the
City of Saco any and all actions that may be appropriate or necessary
for the enforcement of the Subdivision Regulations. This section shall
not prevent any person entitled to equitable relief from enjoining any
act contrary to the provisions of the Subdivision Regulations.
C. Any person, firm, corporation, or other business association, being the
owner or having control of any land, building, or other structures, or
any part thereof, which violates any of the provisions of this chapter,
shall be penalized in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452, with fines
of not less than $100 nor more than those amounts set forth in 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4452. Each day may constitute a separate offense. Fines
shall apply following issuance of a notice of violation signed by the Code
Enforcement Officer. Such notice shall be mailed by certified mail, with
return receipt requested, or served in person by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
A. When the actions in § 230-1204 do not result in the correction or
abatement of the violation or nuisance condition, the Code Enforcement
Officer is hereby authorized to institute any and all actions and
proceedings, either legal or equitable, including seeking injunctions of
violations and the imposition of fines, that may be appropriate or
necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter in the name of the
municipality. The municipal officers, or their authorized agent, are
hereby authorized to enter into administrative consent agreements for
§ 230-1301 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-1304
173:871
the purpose of eliminating violations of this chapter and recovering
fines without court action. Such agreements shall not allow an illegal
structure or use to continue unless there is clear and convincing
evidence that the illegal structure or use was constructed or conducted
as a direct result of erroneous advice given by an authorized municipal
official and there is no evidence that the owner acted in bad faith,
or unless the removal of the structure or use will result in a threat
or hazard to public health and safety or will result in substantial
environmental damage.
B. Any person, including, but not limited to, a landowner, a landowner's
agent or a contractor, who orders or conducts any activity in violation of
this chapter shall be penalized in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 4452, with fines of not less than $100 nor more than those amounts
set forth in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452. Each day may constitute a separate
offense. [Amended 1-17-2002]
§ 230-1304 SACO CITY CODE § 230-1304
173:872
ARTICLE XIV
Amendments
§ 230-1401. General procedure.
§ 230-1402. Amendments to shoreland development provisions.
[Amended 4-21-1992]
The shoreland development provisions in this chapter may be amended by
majority vote of the City Council, pursuant to the procedures in § 230-1401.
Copies of amendments, attested and signed by the City Clerk, shall be
submitted to the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental
Protection following adoption by the City Council. If the Commissioner fails
to act on any amendment within 45 days of the Commissioner's receipt of
the amendment, the amendment is automatically approved. Any application
for a permit received by the City within the forty-five-day period shall be
governed by the terms of the amendment, if such amendment is approved
by the Commissioner.
§ 230-1403. Petition requirements.
A. On petition, or on the recommendation of the Planning Board, or on its
own motion, the City Council may amend, supplement, or repeal the
regulations and provisions of this chapter.
B. The City Council shall refer all proposed amendments to the Planning
Board for a report thereon. The Planning Board shall hold a public
hearing for consideration of the proposed amendment at least 10 days
before the report is submitted to the City Council. Notice of the hearing
before the Planning Board shall be made public in at least one
newspaper of general circulation in the area at least seven days before
such hearing. This published notice shall include a small map of the
area to be affected.
A. An application for change or amendment of the text and/or map of this
chapter shall include the submittal of a written petition to the City Clerk
setting forth the proposed change and the reasons therefor, which shall
be promptly referred to the Planning Board for the setting of the
hearing date, in accordance with this chapter. In the case of a proposed
textual change, the petition shall clearly identify and describe that
section or portion of the text to be changed and shall identify the
proposed revision or amendment being requested.
B. In the case of a proposed map change, the petition shall include the
legal description of the parcels of land involved, a scaled drawing of the
parcel of land showing all boundary dimensions and the existing and
total area, and the proposed zoning classification(s) applying to the
parcel(s) of land.
C. The petitioner shall bear the cost of advertising (to notify the general
public) and/or postage (to notify abutters and neighborhood property
§ 230-1401 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-1403
173:873
§ 230-1404. Repetitive petitions.
A proposed change in this chapter which has been unfavorably acted upon
by the City Council on the merits of the petition shall not thereafter be
considered by the City Council for a period of two years, unless adoption
of the proposed change is recommended by the unanimous vote of the
Planning Board at a meeting where at least 2/3 of the full membership is
present.
§ 230-1405. Contract zoning.
owners) of the change or amendment. The petitioner shall also furnish
such additional information as may be necessary to enable the Planning
Board to properly evaluate the petition.
A. Purpose. Occasionally, competing and incompatible land uses conflict;
and traditional zoning methods and procedures, such as variances,
conditional use permits, and alterations to the zone boundaries, are
inadequate to promote desirable growth. In these special situations,
more flexible and adaptable zoning methods are needed to permit
differing land uses in both developed and undeveloped areas, and at the
same time recognize the effects of change. In consideration of a change
in zoning classification for a particular property or group of properties,
it may be determined that public necessity, convenience, or the general
welfare requires that provisions be made to impose certain limitations
or restrictions on the use or development of the property. Such
conditions are deemed necessary to protect the best interests of the
property owner, the surrounding property owners and the
neighborhood, all other property owners and citizens of the City, and to
secure appropriate development consistent with the City's
Comprehensive Plan.
B. Authorization. Pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4352, Subdivision 8,
contract zoning is hereby authorized for rezoning of property where, for
reasons such as the unusual nature or the unique location of the
property, the City Council finds its necessary or appropriate to impose,
by agreement with the property owner, certain conditions or
restrictions in order to ensure that the rezoning is consistent with the
City's Comprehensive Plan. Contract zoning shall be limited to property
for which a rezoning is requested by the owner or other person with
sufficient right, title and interest. Nothing in this section shall be
interpreted to permit an amendment that is not consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan. Areas rezoned under this provision shall be
consistent with, but not limited to, the existing and permitted (whether
permitted or conditional) uses within the original zones. Contract
zoning is permitted in all zones except RP. By "contract zoning," this
section means both contract and conditional zoning as enabled in 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4352, Subdivision 8. [Amended 6-3-2002]
§ 230-1403 SACO CITY CODE § 230-1405
173:874
C. Application contents. A request for a contract rezoning shall include a
written petition to the Planning Board requesting a rezoning, including
the following:
(1) Evidence of right, title or interest in the property;
(2) A plot plan showing the boundaries of the parcel and its
dimensions, as well as the existing and proposed buildings and
structures;
(3) A plan showing the location of existing streets and driveways
within 200 feet of the property;
(4) A detailed statement of the proposed use of the property and the
precise zoning change requested;
(5) A statement explaining how it is consistent with the Comprehensive
Plan and permitted and existing uses within the original zone;
(6) A description of the property's unusual nature or unique location;
(7) A statement setting forth the conditions or restrictions that the
applicant proposes. The Planning Board may propose additional
conditions or restrictions.
D. Hearing and notice.
(1) The Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing before
forwarding its recommendation to the City Council under this
provision.
(2) Notice of the hearing shall be posted in City Hall at least 14 days
before the public hearing.
(3) Notice shall also be published twice in a newspaper of general
circulation, the date of first publication to be at least seven days
before the hearing.
(4) Public hearing notices shall be mailed to the owner of the property
to be rezoned and all abutters to that property. Property owners in
the Conservation District, any industrial district, the Resource
Protection District, or the R-1, R-2, and R-4 Districts shall be
notified by mail if their property is within 600 feet of the applicant's
property. Property owners in the R-3 District, any business district
or the MU Districts shall be notified by mail when the applicant's
property is located within 200 feet. This notice shall be sent out at
least seven days prior to the public hearing. This notice must
contain a copy of the proposed conditions and restrictions with a
map indicating the property to be rezoned. [Amended 10-3-2011]
(5) Failure of any property owner to receive a notice shall not
necessitate another hearing or invalidate any action by the
Planning Board or City Council.
§ 230-1405 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-1405
173:875
E. Conditions and restrictions. Conditions and restrictions imposed under
this section shall relate only to the physical development and operation
of the property and may include, by way of example:
(1) Limitations on the number and types of uses permitted;
(2) Conditions on the scale and density of development, including the
height, lot coverage and other space and bulk provisions;
(3) Specifications for the design and layout of buildings and other
improvements;
(4) Schedules for commencement and completion of construction;
(5) Performance guarantees securing completion and maintenance of
improvements, and guarantees against defects;
(6) Preservation of open space and buffers, and protection of natural
areas and historic sites;
(7) Provision of municipal services required by the development;
(8) Provisions for enforcement and remedies for breach of any
condition or restriction, including the timing of the effective date of
the change and its repeal should conditions not be met;
(9) The dedication or conveyance of property for public purposes,
including, but not limited to, streets, easements, parks and utility
systems.
F. Recommendation. Before forwarding a recommendation on a contract
zoning amendment to the City Council, the Planning Board shall make a
finding on each of the four standards in this subsection. A favorable
recommendation to the Council requires a positive finding on all four
standards. If the Planning Board makes a negative finding on any of the
standards, its recommendation shall be negative. The Planning Board
shall base its recommendation on whether: [Amended 12-20-1993]
(1) The rezoning is for land with an unusual nature or location;
(2) The rezoning is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan;
(3) The rezoning is consistent with, but not limited to, the existing uses
and permitted uses within the original zone; and
(4) The conditions proposed are sufficient to meet the intent of this
section.
G. Final action. Before amending this chapter for contract zoning, the City
Council shall adopt the Planning Board's findings or other findings
indicating that the rezoning is consistent with all four standards of
§ 230-1405F. [Amended 12-20-1993]
§ 230-1405 SACO CITY CODE § 230-1405
173:876
H. Status of amendments. Amendments to the Zoning Map and this
chapter made under this section may be amended or repealed by the
City Council.
I. Other permits. All applications for contract zoning are subject to site
plan review. An applicant may seek other permits at the same time as he
or she is seeking the contract zoning as if the contract zoning were
already in effect, or may seek them after the City Council has approved
the zoning amendment. If the applicant seeks approval before final
Council action on the amendment, the Planning Board shall make its
approval of these other permits contingent on the City Council's
approval of the contract zoning amendment. [Amended 12-7-1992]
§ 230-1405 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-1405
173:877

ARTICLE XV
Effective Date
§ 230-1501. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon its adoption by the City Council. All
amendments hereafter enacted shall likewise take effect upon adoption by
the City Council.
§ 230-1501 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-1501
173:879

ARTICLE XVI
Impact Fees
[Amended 9-17-2002; 8-3-2015]
§ 230-1601. General provisions for impact fees.
A. Purpose. The purpose of these impact fee provisions is to ensure that
new development in Saco will be accomplished in a safe and healthful
manner and that such development will bear a proportional or
reasonably related share of the cost of new, expanded or modified
infrastructure necessary to service the development through:
(1) The payment of impact fees that shall be dedicated to paying for
the needed improvements; or
(2) The construction of appropriate improvements as provided for
herein.
B. Authority. These impact fee provisions are adopted by the City under
the authority of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4354 and its statutory and
constitutional home rule provisions.
C. Payment of impact fees. The impact fees provided for under this article
shall be paid to the City of Saco in care of the Code Enforcement
Department.
D. Impact fee accounts. All impact fees collected under the provisions of
this article shall be segregated and accounted for in separate impact
fee accounts designated for the particular improvements in question.
The impact fee accounts are as follows:
(1) Recreational facilities impact fee account.
(2) Open space facilities impact fee account.
(3) Fire Department/emergency medical service impact fee account.
E. Use of impact fees. Impact fees collected under the provisions of this
article shall be used only to pay for the capital cost of the infrastructure
improvements specifically associated with the fee as identified below.
No portion of the fee shall be used for routine maintenance or
operational activities.
(1) The following costs may be included in the capital cost of the
recreational facilities or open space facilities infrastructure
improvement:
(a) Acquisition of land or easements, including conservation
easements;
(b) Engineering, surveying and environmental assessment
services directly related to the design, construction and
oversight of the construction of the improvement;
§ 230-1601 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-1601
173:881
(c) The actual construction of the improvement, including, without
limitation, demolition costs, clearing and grading of the land,
and necessary capital equipment;
(d) Mitigation costs;
(e) Legal and administrative costs associated with construction of
the improvement, including any borrowing necessary to
finance the project;
(f) Debt service costs, including interest if the City borrows for
the construction of the improvement;
(g) Relocation costs; and
(h) Similar costs that are directly related to the project.
(2) Impact fees collected under the provisions of this article shall be
used only to pay for the capital cost of the equipment and facilities
specifically associated with the Fire Department/emergency
medical services (FD/EMS) as identified below:
(a) Vehicles utilized by public safety personnel for FD/EMS
purposes;
(b) Equipment utilized by public safety personnel for FD/EMS
purposes;
(c) Construction of capital improvements, including the expansion
or replacement of existing infrastructure facilities;
(d) Acquisition of land;
(e) Engineering, surveying and environmental assessment
services directly related to the design, construction and
oversight of the construction of the improvement;
(f) The actual construction of the improvement, including, without
limitation, demolition costs, clearing and grading of the land,
and necessary capital equipment;
(g) Mitigation costs;
(h) Legal and administrative costs associated with construction of
the improvement, including any borrowing necessary to
finance the project;
(i) Debt service costs, including interest if the City borrows for
the construction of the improvement.
F. Refund of impact fees. Impact fees shall be refunded in the following
cases:
(1) If a building permit is surrendered or if a subdivision or site plan
approval lapses without commencement of construction, the permit
§ 230-1601 SACO CITY CODE § 230-1601
173:882
§ 230-1602. Recreational facilities and open space impact fee.
holder or developer shall be entitled to a refund, without interest,
of any impact fee paid in conjunction with that project. A request
for a refund shall be made in writing to the City Planner and shall
occur within 90 days of the lapse of the approval or the expiration
of the permit.
(2) Any fees collected that are not spent or obligated by contract for
the specified improvements or acquisitions by the end of the
calendar quarter immediately following 10 years from the date the
fee was paid shall be returned to the current owner of the property
for which the fee was paid together with interest calculated at 3%
per year from the date of the payment of the fee.
G. Modification of impact fees. The City Council may, by formal vote
following a public hearing, reduce or eliminate the payment of a
required impact fee if it finds that:
(1) The developer or property owner who would otherwise be
responsible for the payment of the impact fee voluntarily agrees to
construct the improvement for which the impact fee would be
collected or an equivalent improvement approved by the City
Council; or
(2) The developer or property owner is required, as part of a
development approval by the City or a state or federal agency, to
make or to pay for infrastructure improvements that are of the
same nature as the improvement to be funded by the impact fee; or
(3) The project subject to the impact fee involves the construction of
affordable housing as defined by the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development or the Maine State Housing
Authority. If only part of the project is affordable housing, the
Council may waive only the portion of the fee attributable to the
affordable units; or
(4) The project involves the construction of an elder/disability housing
facility or other eldercare facilities.
H. Review and revision. The City Council shall periodically review each
impact fee established under this chapter. If the Council finds that the
anticipated cost of the improvement has changed or that the
identification of developments subject to the fee is no longer
appropriate, the Council may adopt changes in the impact fee.
A. Description of the improvements.
(1) This project involves the acquisition of land for and the
development of new community-wide recreational facilities and the
acquisition of land or conservation easements for use as
substantially undeveloped open space and the related development
§ 230-1601 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-1602
173:883
of these parcels to facilitate their role and use as open space. The
recreational facilities portion of this impact fee may be used for the
following improvements:
(a) The development of the City's former landfill on Foss Road into
a multipurpose community recreational complex;
(b) The development of a skating area at Pepperell Park or another
location;
(c) The construction of a baseball field at the Middle School
Recreational Area;
(d) The construction of pedestrian and bicycle trails, including the
City's share of the cost of the development of the Eastern Trail;
(e) The acquisition of land for the future development of
community recreation facilities; and/or
(f) The development of other community recreational facilities
that expand the City's supply of recreational areas or facilities.
(2) The open space facilities portion of this impact fee may be used for
the following improvements:
(a) The acquisition of land or conservation easements for use as
substantially undeveloped open space and the related
development of these parcels to facilitate their role and use as
open space.
B. Need for the improvements. The need for community recreation
facilities and open space is a function of the size of the community's
population. As the community grows, it needs more recreation land,
fields, playgrounds, natural areas, and open spaces. The City's adopted
Comprehensive Plan identifies the need to expand the supply of
recreational facilities and open space to serve a growing population.
The need for the specific improvements is set out in the City of Saco's
Recreational Facilities and Open Space Impact Fee Methodology.
C. Activities subject to the fee.
(1) Any construction or development that involves the creation of a
new dwelling unit, as defined by this chapter, including singlefamily
homes, apartment units, manufactured housing units, and
mobile homes, shall be subject to the payment of an impact fee for
this project, except as provided below:
(a) No impact fee shall be paid if the dwelling unit is located in a
subdivision that was approved by the Saco Planning Board
prior to the date of adoption of this article.
(b) No impact fee shall be paid if the dwelling unit is located in a
subdivision which is a complete application under review by
§ 230-1602 SACO CITY CODE § 230-1602
173:884
the Saco Planning Board prior to the date of adoption of this
article.
(c) The recreational facilities portion of the impact fee shall not be
paid if the unit is located in a residential subdivision or other
residential development that has provided recreational
facilities in accordance with the requirements of the City's
Subdivision Regulations.
(d) The open space portion of the impact fee shall not be paid if the
unit is located in a residential subdivision or other residential
development that has provided open space in accordance with
the requirements of the City's Subdivision Regulations.
(e) No impact fee shall be paid if the new dwelling unit is to be
constructed on a lot where a dwelling unit has been
demolished or permanently removed from use within the last
12 months. The fee shall be charged for any unit beyond the
number demolished or permanently removed from use.
(f) No impact fee shall be paid if the dwelling unit is moved from
one lot within the City to another lot within the City.
(g) Downsizing provisions for elderly homeowners. [Amended
7-2-2002]
(2) Persons building new single-family dwelling units which meet the
requirements of Subsection C(3)(a) through (d) of this section are
not required to pay the recreation and open space impact fee.
(3) However, the transfer of the property by any means during the five
years following the issuance of a building permit shall require that
the impact fee be paid. Likewise, the property shall not be leased or
rented during the five years after the issuance of a building permit
unless the impact fee is paid. An agreement outlining the
limitations on the waiver shall be recorded at the York County
Registry. Evidence of the recording shall be presented to the Code
Enforcement Officer before the building permit is issued.
(a) The person or persons proposing to build the new single-family
dwelling unit have previously owned and occupied an existing
permanent residence in Saco and paid property taxes on it
continuously for at least 20 years.
(b) The owner(s) is/are selling or transferring their existing
permanent residence in Saco and are planning to make the
new house their permanent residence.
(c) At least one owner of the proposed house is 62 years old or
older.
(d) The proposed house is a single-family dwelling unit with one or
two bedrooms.
§ 230-1602 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-1602
173:885
§ 230-1603. Fire Department/emergency medical services impact
fee.
D. Calculation of the fee. The recreational facilities and open space impact
fee is a per capita fee and is based upon the City's Impact Fee
Calculation Methodology. The per capita fee consists of a recreational
facilities component and an open space component. The amount of the
fee paid by a development project shall be determined by multiplying
the per capita fee by the number of people expected to reside in the
project. The following occupancy ratios shall be used in determining the
fee, unless the applicant provides verifiable written documentation
from an independent, objective source demonstrating other occupancy
levels:
Type
Ratio
(people per unit)
Single-family dwellings and mobile
homes
3.2
Dwelling unit in a 2-family or
multifamily dwelling with:
1 bedroom 1.2
2 bedrooms 2.0
3 or more bedrooms 3.0
Dwelling unit in elderly housing,
assisted living facility, or other
eldercare facility limited to
occupancy by households 65 years
of age or older
1.2
E. Impact fee. Fees shall be determined by Council after a public hearing.
F. Collection of the fee. The Code Enforcement Officer shall collect the
impact fee prior to the issuance of any building, plumbing or other
permit for residential construction that is subject to the fee. The
amount of the fee shall be based upon the procedure set out in
Subsection E above. The City Administrator may approve the payment
of impact fees over time in accordance with an approved payment
schedule, provided that appropriate arrangements are in place to
guarantee collection of the fees.
G. Effective dates. This impact fee shall be applicable to activities subject
to the impact fee 30 days after the date of adoption of this article.
A. Description of the improvements. The Fire Department/emergency
medical services impact fee will be used to ensure an adequately
capitalized and funded Fire Department in the provision of fire, rescue
and emergency medical services. The fee may be used for the following
purposes:
§ 230-1602 SACO CITY CODE § 230-1603
173:886
(1) Acquisition of vehicles utilized by Fire Department personnel for
fire, rescue and emergency medical services;
(2) Purchase of equipment utilized by Fire Department personnel for
fire, rescue and emergency medical services;
(3) Construction of capital improvements, including the expansion or
replacement of existing infrastructure facilities, or, if the
improvements were constructed at municipal expense prior to the
development, the fee must be reasonably related to the portion of
percentage of the infrastructure used by the development;
(4) Acquisition of land or easements necessary for or related to
existing and proposed Fire Department facilities;
(5) Legal and administrative costs associated with construction of
capital improvements, including any borrowing necessary to
finance the project.
B. Need for the improvements. The need for public safety equipment and
facilities is a function of the growth of the community's population. As
the community grows, increased capacity is required to meet the public
safety needs of greater numbers of residents. The City's adopted
Comprehensive Plan identifies the need to expand the ability of the Fire
Department and emergency medical services to serve a growing
population. The need for the specific improvements is set out in the City
of Saco's Fire Department/emergency medical services impact fee
methodology.
C. Activities subject to the fee. Any construction or development that
involves the creation of a new dwelling unit, as defined by this chapter,
including single-family homes, apartment units, manufactured housing
units, and mobile homes, shall be subject to the payment of a Fire
Department/emergency medical services impact fee, except as
provided below:
(1) No impact fee shall be paid if a new dwelling unit is to be
constructed on a lot where a dwelling unit has been demolished or
permanently removed from use within the last 12 months. The fee
shall be charged for any unit beyond the number demolished or
permanently removed from use.
(2) No impact fee shall be paid if a dwelling unit is moved from one lot
within the City to another lot within the City.
(3) No impact fee shall be paid if a proposed dwelling unit is created as
the result of a conveyance of a parcel to a family member.
(4) No impact fee shall be paid for the creation of an accessory
apartment in a single-family dwelling.
§ 230-1603 SEASONAL PROPERTY RENTAL § 230-1603
173:887
D. Calculation of the fee. The Fire Department/emergency medical
services impact fee is based upon the City's Impact Fee Calculation
Methodology.
E. Impact fee. Fees shall be determined by the Council after a public
hearing.
F. Collection of the fee. The Code Enforcement Officer shall collect the
impact fee prior to the issuance of any building, plumbing or other
permit for construction that is subject to the fee. The amount of the fee
shall be based upon the procedure set out in Subsection D above. The
City Administrator may approve the payment of impact fees over time in
accordance with an approved payment schedule, provided that
appropriate arrangements are in place to guarantee collection of the
fees.
G. Effective dates. This impact fee shall be applicable to activities subject
to the impact fee 30 days after the date of amendment of this article.
§ 230-1603 SACO CITY CODE § 230-1603
173:888

HISTORIC PRESERVATION SECTION, ARTICLE 19 OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE –
(SECOND & FINAL READING)
CLARIFICATION OF HISTORIC PRESERVATION ORDINANCE LOCATION (SECTION
230-413) APPROVED ON DECEMBER 16, 2019
On November 18, 2019, the City Council approved the Historic Preservation Ordinance as re-written through the
Zoning Ordinance Revision process. The Council approved the re-written ordinance to replace existing ordinance,
section 230-413. To clarify the record for codification purposes, Staff recommends the below motions. The purpose
of these motions is to:
1. Repeal existing HPC ordinance (section 230-413)
2. Replace existing HPC ordinance with the updated ordinance adopted on November 18, 2019, to be
recodified as section 230-413 of the City Code
This item commentary includes a copy of the updated ordinance language that was approved by the City Council,
presented at that time as Article 19 of the proposed zoning ordinance.
Councilor Johnston moved, Councilor Minthorn seconded “The City Council repeal section 230-413 of the City
Code, and replace it with the HPC ordinance that City Council adopted on November 18, 2019 referred to as Article
19 and hereby recodified as section 230-413 of the City’s Code.” The motion passed with seven (7) yeas.
§ 230-413 Historic Preservation Overlay District
A. Purpose and Intent
Protect Saco’s historic, architectural and cultural heritage. The economic well-being of the City
will be strengthened by preserving its architectural and historic setting, conserving property
values in unique areas, fostering civic beauty, and promoting the use of historic or
architecturally significant buildings for education and welfare of the public.
Assist property owners with maintaining the architectural integrity of the district.
Protect, preserve and enhance the outward appearance and architectural features of
structures.
Prevent the demolition or removal of significant historic buildings or structures within
designated districts or designated sites or landmarks.
Preserve, protect and enhance the essential character of designated districts by protecting
relationships of groups of buildings and structures.
Accept new buildings and structures which are designed and built in a manner which is
compatible with the character of the district.
Promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the people of the City.
CITY OF SACO, MAINE
 CITY COUNCIL APPROVED CODE SUPPLEMENT
 Approved on November 18, 2019 with an effective date on December 19, 2019
B. Historic Preservation Commission
Membership. The Commission’s membership shall be comprised of regular members, associate
members, and advisory members.
Appointment. Members of the Historic Preservation Commission (the Commission) shall be
appointed by the Mayor subject to approval by the City Council.
Qualifications. The Commission shall include five (5) regular members and up to five (5)
associate members. All members shall be residents of the City of Saco. Appointments shall be
made on the basis of demonstrated interest, knowledge, ability, experience and desire to
promote historic preservation in Saco. It is preferred that the members have architectural
design skills or experience related to historic preservation, such as history, architectural
history, landscape architecture, planning, engineering, law, archaeology and building
construction.
Length of term and vacancies. Regular and associate members shall serve terms beginning
July 1 and ending June 30. Commission members shall serve for terms of three (3) years,
except in those instances in which the appointment is made to fill a vacancy, in which case the
appointment shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term. The Mayor shall act within sixty
(60) days to fill a vacancy. Members may be reappointed.
Compensation. Regular and associate members shall serve without compensation.
Associate members. At least one associate member shall be a resident of the historic district.
Associate members shall participate in all hearings and discussions. They shall vote only if the
Chairman appoints an associate to act in place of the regular member who is absent, has
resigned, or has been disqualified because of a conflict of interest.
Advisory members. In addition to the regular and associate members, the City Council may
appoint other persons who shall serve on an advisory or consultant basis to assist the
members of the Commission in the performance of their functions. Advisory members are not
required to be residents. Advisory members shall not vote.
Removal. Any regular or associate member may be removed for cause by the City Council
upon receipt of written charges, followed by a public hearing.
Officers. The Commission shall elect annually a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from the
regular members.
Quorum. Four members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business before said
Commission.
The City Planning and Development Department shall be the authorized agent of the
Commission, to whom the Commission may delegate any duties.
Meetings. All meetings of the Commission shall be publicly announced, open to the public and
have a previously available agenda. Public notice shall be issued ten (10) days prior to
meetings of the Commission. 
Records. The City Planning and Development Department shall maintain a permanent record
of the activities of the Commission, including, but not limited to such items as the number and
type of cases reviewed and their disposition, new designations of historic sites, landmarks and
districts, resumes of Commission members, attendance records, appointments to the
Commission, correspondence and minutes of all meetings.
Rules of Procedure. The Commission may adopt and amend rules of procedure.
Applications. The Commission may adopt rules governing the requisite exhibits for
applications.
Gifts, grants, funding. The Commission may, subject to appropriations by the City Council or
others, employ clerical and technical assistants or consultants, and may apply for and accept
grants, money gifts, or gifts of services, and may hold or expend the same for all or any of the
purposes of historic preservation in the City of Saco. A non-lapsing fund for gifts and grants
shall be established by the City's Finance Department. Appropriations from the City Council
shall be managed in accord with City policies and shall lapse each year if unexpended.
C. Duties of the Commission
Advise, and inform City officials and owners of historic buildings, structures or sites, regarding
preservation, renovation, and rehabilitation.
Advise and inform owners regarding compliance with the requirements of this section.
Make recommendations for establishing historic districts, historic sites, or historic landmarks.
Review all proposed additions, reconstruction, alterations, construction, removal, or demolition
of properties that are subject to the commission’s jurisdiction.
Review all proposed National Register nominations in Saco, and proposals for eligibility.
Comment on (federal) Section 106 reviews.
Serve as an advisor to City officials regarding local historical and cultural resources and act as
a liaison between local government and those persons and organizations concerned with
historic preservation. Conduct or cause to be conducted a continuing survey of local historic
and cultural resources, in accordance with Maine Historic Preservation Commission
guidelines.
At the direction of the council, to prepare application for, and participate in, the "certified local
government" (CLG) program of the National Historic Preservation Act Amendments of 1980
and the Maine Historic Preservation Commission; and carry out any responsibilities delegated
to it under that program, including review and comment on any National Register nominations
submitted to the historic preservation board; upon request of the council, participate in any
review of federal actions or undertakings pursuant to Section 106 of the National Historic
Preservation Act; attend informational and educational programs sponsored by the Maine
Historic Preservation Commission; and prepare an annual report of the activities of the historic
preservation board.
Work to provide local citizens with continuing education on historic preservation issues.
Undertake other duties as deemed necessary or desirable by its members to advance the
purposes of this section.
Cooperate with federal, state and City officials in the pursuance of the objectives of historic
preservation.
Participate in land use planning efforts of the City, state and federal government.
D. Eligibility for Historic Designation
The historic districts, historic sites and historic landmarks established in accordance with this chapter
shall have one or more of the following characteristics:
History of Saco. Structures, buildings or sites at which events have occurred that contribute to
and are identified with or significantly represent or exemplify the broad cultural, political,
economic, military, social history of Saco or the nation, including sites or buildings at which
visitors may gain insight or see examples of particular items or of larger patterns in the North
American heritage.
Persons. Structures, buildings or sites associated with important historic persons.
Ideas. Structures, buildings or sites associated with important examples of a great idea or
ideal.
Architecture. Structures or structural remains and sites embodying examples of architectural
types or specimens valuable for study of a period, style or method of building construction, of
community organization and living; landscaping; a single notable structure; or a site
representing the work of a master builder, master designer, architect or landscape architect.
Visual continuity. Structures or buildings contributing to the visual continuity of the historic
district.
National Register. Those sites or areas listed on or eligible for listing on the National Register
of Historic Places or as a National Historic Landmark.
E. Establishment and Expansion of Historic Districts
Amendment Process. Any person seeking to add or expand historic districts, sites, or landmarks
shall request the amendment in writing to the Commission. Any proposal by the Council or
Planning Board shall be referred to the Commission for comment before Council action. After
receiving the Commission's recommendation concerning the request, the City Administrator
shall place the matter on the agenda of the City Council. Any applications or designation of
buildings, structures, sites and districts shall be in writing.
Application Requirements. Applications shall be in writing and shall include the following, as
appropriate:
(a) A concise description of the physical elements, qualities, architectural style, period and
historical significance represented by the building, structure or site, including a
consideration of scale, materials, workmanship and spatial qualities, as relevant.
(b) A concise statement of how the building, structure or site meets the review criteria of this
chapter.
(c) Exterior photographs of the building or structure, or and a site map, illustrating significant
details. In addition, the Commission may request photographs of interior features of
particular historic significance. These interior photographs may be provided by the
applicant on a voluntary basis and are not required submissions.
[1] A concise statement of the physical elements which justify making this area an historic
district and a description of building types and architectural styles and periods
represented.
[2] An explanation of the proposed boundaries of the district.
[3] Details on the structures that do not contribute to the significance of the district.
[4] A map showing the location of all district structures.
Studies & Recommendations. Before making its recommendation concerning the proposed
establishment or expansion of an historic district, historic site or historic landmark, the
Commission may conduct studies and research on the proposal. The Commission shall make
a report to the City Administrator on every request received within six months. Drafts of the
report shall also be mailed to the Maine Historic Preservation Commission for review.
Public Hearing. Prior to making a recommendation concerning the proposed establishment or
expansion of an historic district, historic site, or historic landmark, the Commission shall hold a
public hearing on the request, after due notice is provided at least seven days prior to the
hearing in a newspaper of general local circulation. Written notice of the proposal shall be
given to the applicant, owners of all property to be included within the proposed designation
and property within a two-hundred-foot radius of the property under consideration.
Final Report. Not later than thirty (30) days after the public hearing, the Commission shall
submit a final report to the City Council with the Commission’s recommendation.
Action by the City Council. After receipt of the Commission's recommendations, as provided
above, the City Council shall consider said proposed designation and approve or disapprove
the request. Within twenty (20) days after the designation of any historic district, historic site or
historic landmark, the owner of each property so designated shall be given written notice.
Applicability of this section. All land, buildings or structures within an historic district are
subject to the requirements of this chapter after a district has been designated by the City
Council. All historic sites and landmarks are subject to the requirements of this chapter after
they have been so designated by the City Council.
F. Designated Historic District
Saco’s Historic Preservation Overlay District (HP) is depicted in Figure 19-1. 
Figure 1-1 Map of Historic Preservation Districts
G. Designated Historic Sites and Historic Landmarks
Sites
Historic Landmarks: The Way Way Store at 97 Buxton Road, Tax Map 97, Lot 13.
H. Certificate of Appropriateness
In the Historic Preservation Overlay District (HPOD), a certificate of appropriateness issued by
the Commission shall be required for the following:
(a) New construction located in an historic district or upon an historic site.
(b) Demolition of an historic landmark or demolition of any building or portion of any building,
(including removal of architecture features) in an historic district.
(c) Moving an historic landmark or any building located in an historic district.
(d) Additions, alterations, or reconstruction, including porches and steps, where such addition
would be clearly visible from a public way.
(e) Signs placed in an historic district or an historic site or historic landmark.
(f) New construction of walls, fences and parking lots in an historic district and visible from a
public way.
(g) Installation of vinyl siding, skylights, or rooftop solar panels.
(h) Replacement of wooden window sash
(i) Sandblasting of brick or stone buildings.
(j) Repointing of historic masonry.
An affirmative vote of at least three members shall be required to issue a certificate of
appropriateness.
Building permits. In any historic district and with respect to any historic site or historic
landmark, no building permit shall be issued for any construction, reconstruction, alteration, or
demolition until a certificate of appropriateness, where required by this section, has been
issued by the Commission.
I. Application for a Certificate of Appropriateness
Application Forms & Fees. Application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be obtained from
the City Planning and Development Department.
Submittal. A completed application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be submitted to
the City Planning and Development Department. The department shall verify that the submittal
is complete. The application shall be dated by the Planning & Development Department and
transmitted to the Commission.
Response. The Commission shall consider each completed application within twenty-one (21)
days of the date of submittal of a complete application and, within fifteen (15) days following,
approve, approve the application with modifications, make recommendations for modifications
to the application, or deny the application. By mutual written consent of the Commission and 
the applicant, the review period may be extended. When the Commission acts on the
application, it shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer.
J. Application Contents
The application shall state the location, use and nature of the matter for which such application is
sought. The Commission may waive any application requirement if it determines that it is not necessary
to an application. The application shall contain at least the information or documentation listed below:
The applicant's name, address, and interest in the subject property. If not representing the
owner, the applicant shall provide evidence of right, title, or interest in the property.
The owner's name and address, if different from the applicant's, and the owner's signature.
The address and the tax map and lot number.
The present use and zoning classification of the subject property.
A brief description of the new construction, reconstruction, alteration, maintenance, demolition
or removal requiring the issuance of the certificate of appropriateness.
A scale drawing or drawings of the exterior architectural features indicating the design,
texture, and location of any proposed alteration, reconstruction, maintenance or new
construction for which the certificate is being applied. As used herein, drawings shall mean
plans or exterior elevations drawn to scale, with sufficient detail to show, as far as they relate,
exterior appearances, architectural design of building(s), including materials and textures,
including samples of exterior materials. Drawings shall be clear, complete and specific.
Photographs of the building(s) involved and of adjacent buildings.
A site plan that indicates improvements affecting appearance, such as walls, walks, terraces,
plantings, accessory buildings, signs, lights and other elements.
K. Review and Approval Procedure
Hearing. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on each application before it. A notice of
the hearing will be mailed to abutters and posted at City Hall at least five (5) days before the
public hearing. In the case of an application for a new building or an addition of over $1,000
estimated value, or in the case of the demolition of any building, a hearing notice shall be placed
in a newspaper of general circulation.
Approval. If the Commission determines that the proposed construction, reconstruction,
alteration, moving, or demolition meets the standards of this chapter, it shall approve a
certificate of appropriateness, and the City Planning and Development Department shall notify
the applicant and Code Enforcement Officer, in writing, of the determination and along with
any conditions of approval.
Disapproval. If the Commission determines that a certificate of appropriateness should not be
issued, it shall make findings describing how the application does not meet the standards of
this chapter. However, in order to prepare more detailed findings, the Commission may 
postpone the decision for up to two (2) weeks or allow itself up to an additional two weeks to
prepare and adopt more-detailed findings. The City Planner shall notify the applicant and the
Code Enforcement Officer within ten (10) days of the final determination.
Appeals. An appeal from the final decision of the Commission as to any matter over which it
has final authority may be taken by any party or person aggrieved within thirty (30) days from
the date of the decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Time limits on certificates of appropriateness. If substantial construction is not commenced
within one (1) year of the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness, the approval shall be
null and void. The deadline may be extended for one additional six (6) month period by the
Planning and Development Department upon written request of the applicant. The written
request for an extension must be submitted before the date of expiration of the approval. After
the approval has expired or an extension has been denied, the applicant may reapply at any
time without prejudice. The extension shall be approved by either the Planning and
Development Department or the Commission, as outlined above, unless there is:
(a) Additional information that indicates that the plan does not meet the standards of this
chapter;
(b) A failure to meet a condition of approval;
(c) An amendment in this chapter that prohibits or alters the proposed project.
L. Alternative Procedure for Certificate of Appropriateness for Minor Projects
Applications for the installation or alteration of any exterior sign, minor building alteration, or
temporary alteration are eligible for review as a minor project.
Applications for minor alterations shall be reviewed by the City Planning and Development
Department rather than the Commission. The City Planning and Development Department
may review the application to the standards cited in this chapter and approve the application,
approve it with modifications, or deny it within ten (10) working days of receiving a complete
plan.
Applicants proposing minor projects may elect for their application to be reviewed by the
Commission according to the procedures and standards required for a certificate of
appropriateness described in the above section.
No public hearings or abutter notices are required for applications reviewed under this section.
If the City Planning and Development Department has not acted within ten (10) working days,
the applicant may seek approval from the Commission, rather than the Department. Inaction
by the City Planning and Development Department does not constitute approval or
disapproval of the application.
If the applicant is not satisfied with the determination of the City Planning and Development
Department, the applicant shall be permitted to have the entire application reviewed by the
Commission. The City Planning and Development Department can, for any reason, forward 
any minor alteration to the Commission for review. The City Planning and Development
Department shall provide the Commission with written notice of any action.
M. Standards
The United States Secretary of the Interior's "Standards for Rehabilitation," as revised in 1990
(36 CFR Part 67, Historic Preservation Certifications), as well as the standards cited below,
shall be used in review of applications for certificates of appropriateness. The Commission will
also be guided in its deliberations by the City of Saco Historic District Design Guidelines (2010),
and the City of Portland’s “Standards - Review of Alterations.” The above referenced standards
and guidelines are advisory, but non-binding. Binding standards are as follows:
(a) Design consideration and structural factors related to maintaining historic structures in
good condition shall be the Commission's primary area of focus. Every reasonable effort
shall be made to provide a compatible appearance for new or renovated buildings,
structures, and yards in the Historic District, and to maintain the integrity of existing
buildings, structures or grounds, while giving due consideration to the economic feasibility
of maintaining such buildings, structures or grounds. The following standards shall apply:
[1] A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a new use that
requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the building and its site and
environment.
[2] The historic character of a property shall be retained and preserved. The removal of
historic materials or the alteration of features and spaces that characterize a property
shall be avoided.
[3] Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time, place, and use.
Changes that create a false sense of historical development, such as adding
conjectural features or architectural elements from other eras and architectural styles
shall not be undertaken.
[4] Changes to properties over time that have acquired historic significance in their own
right shall be retained and preserved.
[5] Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of
craftsmanship that characterize a property shall be preserved.
[6] Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than replaced. Where the
severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature
shall match the old in design, color, texture, and other visual qualities and, where
possible, materials. Replacement of missing features shall be substantiated by
documentary, physical, or pictorial evidence.
[7] Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause damage to historic
materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be
undertaken using the gentlest means possible.
[8] Significant archeological resources shall be protected and preserved. If such
resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures and documentation shall be
undertaken. 
[9] New additions, exterior alterations, or new construction shall not destroy historic
materials that characterize the property. The new work shall be differentiated from the
old and shall be compatible with the massing, size, scale, and architectural features to
protect the historic integrity of the property and its environment.
[10] New construction shall be undertaken in such a manner that, if removed in the future,
the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be
unimpaired.
[11] Installation of vinyl siding on buildings that are not sided with vinyl is prohibited.
[12] Every reasonable effort shall be made to preserve historic wooden window sash.
[13] The repointing of historic brick buildings shall adhere to the guidelines specified in
“Repointing Mortar Joints in Historic Masonry Buildings,” US National Park Service,
Preservation Brief #2.
N. Visual Compatibility Standards
Within historic districts and on historic sites, new construction, buildings, and structures which are
moved, reconstructed, materially altered, repaired or changed through new exterior surfaces shall be
visually related generally in terms of the following factors:
Height. In addition to complying with the height standards in the Zoning Ordinance, the height of
a proposed building or addition shall be visually compatible with surrounding structures when
viewed from a public street.
Width. The width of the building shall be compatible with buildings, structures and open
spaces to which it is visually related.
Windows and doors. The relationship of windows and doors in a building shall be compatible
with those windows and doors of buildings to which the building is visually related, particularly
to adjacent historic buildings of the same period.
Relation of solids to voids in front facades. The relationship of solids to voids in the front
facade of a building shall be compatible with that of buildings to which it is visibly related.
Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. The relationship of the building to the open space
between it and adjoining buildings shall be compatible with those of buildings to which it is
visually related.
Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projection. The relationship of entrance and porch
projections to sidewalks of a building shall be compatible with those buildings to which it is
visually related.
Relationship of materials and texture. The relationship of materials and texture shall be
compatible with that of predominant materials used in buildings to which it is visually related.
Roof shapes. The roof shape of a building shall be compatible with that of buildings to which it
is visually related. 
Scale of buildings. The size of a building, the building mass in relationship to open spaces, the
windows, door openings, porches and balconies shall be compatible with those characteristics
of buildings and spaces to which it is visually related.
Directional expression of front elevation. A building shall be compatible with the building,
squares and places to which it is visually related in its directional character, whether this be
vertical character, horizontal character, or nondirectional character.
New construction shall be generally of such design, form, proportion, mass, configuration,
building material, texture, and location on a lot as will be compatible with other buildings in the
historic district and with streets and open spaces to which it is visually related and in keeping
with area.
O. Signs
General. Signs shall be governed by Article IX and this section. If there is any conflict, the
stricter standards shall apply. All signs, either new or upon alteration, require a certificate of
appropriateness.
Signs shall be consistent with the architectural style of a building, respectful of neighboring
buildings, and carefully designed to fit the facade in the case of attached signs. The design
shall take into account the scale, character and design of the building, the traditional location
of signage on area buildings, the location of existing sign boards, lower cornices, lintels, and
other architectural elements, and the opportunity to use signage as an element to enhance the
appearance of building entrances. Materials and workmanship shall convey a sense of
permanence and durability.
Location. Wall signs generally shall be located no higher than the windowsill line of the second
story. The use of a continuous sign-band extending over adjacent shops within the same
building is encouraged as a unifying element. Where signage is proposed on street-level
windows, such signage should not substantially obscure visibility through the window.
Scale. The size of signs and letters shall be at an appropriate scale for pedestrians and slowmoving traffic.
Design. Typefaces which are simple, easy to read, and scaled appropriately for both the sign
and building shall be used. Pictographs (such as a projecting sign in the shape of a key for a
lock shop) can be an appropriate feature if consistent with the standards of this chapter.
Illumination. Generally, signs, if illuminated, shall be illuminated from a shielded, exterior
source. The light source should be concealed from direct view. However, the Commission (but
not the Planning Department) may approve certain special illuminated signs. Special
situations, such as marquees, or special uses, such as cultural events or public activities, may
be appropriate exceptions where sensitively designed.
Awnings, canopies and marquees. The shape and size of these devices shall correspond to
the shape, character and size of the opening over which they will be installed and fully fill the
width of the individual window or door opening. In addition to the sign standards of this 
chapter, these sign types and all advertising signs must comply with all other design
standards in this chapter.
Painted wall signs. Painted wall signs, such as business names, may be appropriate if
designed in conformance with this chapter.
Outdoor murals. Painted walls, such as murals and trompe l'oeil (suggestive of architectural or
other three-dimensional objects) scenes, shall be used only to enhance the streetscape, not
for advertising purposes.
P. Demolition or Removal
Scope. The following provisions apply to any proposal involving the demolition, moving, or
removal of any historic landmark, or any building or structure, or any appurtenance thereto, in
an historic district. The purpose of this subsection is to further the purposes of the section by
preserving historic buildings which are important to the education, culture, traditions, and the
economic value of the City, and to afford the City, interested persons, historic societies or
organizations the opportunity to acquire or to arrange for the preservation of such buildings.
Furthermore, the purpose of this section is to afford the City, the Commission, other
preservation organizations, and others interested in preservation the opportunity to acquire or
arrange for the preservation of historic buildings and structures, or important portions and
features thereof, or proper removal of historic artifacts, or the proper recordation of the building,
structure and/or site.
Procedure. Any person proposing any activity falling within the scope of this subsection shall file
an application for a certificate and submit evidence from a structural engineer, an architectural
historian, an appraiser, or other qualified expert that demonstrates that the standards of this
section are met.
Stay. At the hearing on an application to relocate or demolish a contributing building in an
historic district, or an historic landmark, or an historic site, the Commission may, in the interest
of exploring reasonable alternatives, delay issuance of a permit for up to one hundred and
twenty (120) days from the date of the hearing. If, ten (10) days prior to the expiration of the
delay period, the Commission finds that there are still reasonable alternatives to explore, the
Commission may continue the delay for an additional period of up to sixty (60) days. The
purpose of the delay is to find alternatives to demolition, such as:
(a) Assisting in securing funding to preserve in place the building, structure, or important
portions and features thereof; or
(b) Finding other ways to preserve the building or structure, such as outright purchase of the
property, when feasible, or relocation; or
(c) Proper recordation of buildings, structures and sites, including photography and narrative
report; or
(d) Preservation of historic artifacts.
Standards of approval. In order to approve an application for the relocation or demolition of a
contributing building in an historic preservation district, or of an historic landmark or an historic 
site, the Commission must find that the proposal meets one of the following standards of
approval:
(a) The building is not a contributing structure in the historic district nor an historic landmark or
site. The determination of what is a contributing structure shall be based on the Saco
Historic Resources Inventory (1999).
(b) The Commission determines that the building or structure is not of historical significance.
(c) The building or structure, or predominant portions thereof, has been determined by the
Code Enforcement Officer to represent an immediate hazard to the public health or safety
because of severe structural deficiencies, which hazard cannot be abated by reasonable
measures.
(d) No prudent and feasible alternative exists.
(e) The property is deteriorated beyond repair.
Conditions of approval. In approving an application for the demolition of a contributing building
in an historic preservation district, or an historic landmark or historic site, the Commission may
impose the following conditions:
(a) Photographic, video, or drawn recordation of the property to be demolished; and/or
(b) Reasonable salvage and curation of significant elements; and/or
(c) Other reasonable mitigation measures.
Hazard buildings. No provision in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the alteration,
demolition, or relocation of a building when the Code Enforcement Officer certifies that such
action is required for the public safety.
Q. Maintenance & Safety
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any
exterior architectural feature in an historic district or of any historic landmark which does not
involve a change in the design, material, or outward appearance thereof. Paint color and the
preparation of a wooden building for painting, and the construction of legally required ramps for
access by the handicapped, are specifically excluded from the scope of this section.
Nothing in this section shall prevent the construction, reconstruction, restoration, or demolition
of any feature which the Code Enforcement Officer shall determine is a required condition
because of concerns about the safety of the building and its occupants.
R. Hardship & Appeals
An appeal from the final decision of the Commission may be taken by any party or person aggrieved to
the Zoning Board of Appeals within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision.
S. Conflict with Other Ordinances
This section shall not repeal, annul, or in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with
any other ordinance, law, regulation or bylaw. Where this section imposes a higher and/or stricter
standard, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. 
T. Amendments
The City Council, the Planning Board, or the Commission may initiate action to amend this section.
Requests to amend shall be referred to the Commission for a report within ninety (90) days thereon.
The Commission shall hold a public hearing before the report is made to the City Council. Notice of the
hearing shall be made public by notice in a newspaper of general local circulation at least seven days
before the public hearing. The Planning Board shall also make a recommendation to the City Council.
U. Definitions
Notwithstanding the definitions of Article XXI, for the purposes of this chapter, the following terms have
the following meanings, unless the context indicates otherwise:
ALTERED
Includes rebuilt, reconstructed, rehabilitated, restored, removed, and demolished. For the purpose
of this definition, any change, except minor repair, in siding materials, roofing materials, gutters,
door and window sash and integral decorative elements, such as, but not limited to, cornices,
brackets, window architraves, doorway pediments, railing, balusters, columns, cupolas and
cresting and roof decorations.
APPROPRIATE
Shall refer to those changes in historic properties, landmarks, buildings, structures or sites, which
are not incongruous with what is historically and architecturally significant as determined by the
Commission.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS
The permit indicating compliance with this chapter.
COMMISSION
The Saco Historic Preservation Commission.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
Shall be construed to mean direct or indirect pecuniary benefit to any person, including members
of the person's immediate family, employer or the employer of any member of the person's
immediate family; or interest sufficient to tempt the member to serve his own personal interest to
the prejudice of the public interests.
CONTRIBUTING STRUCTURE
A structure located within a designated historic district and identified as contributing to the
historical or architectural significance of said district.
DEMOLITION
The razing of a building or a structure or the removal of any exterior architectural feature or
structure or object.
DISTRICT
Historic District.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE
The architectural style and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or structure,
including, but not limited to: the kind, type, and texture of the building materials; the type and style
of all windows, doors, lights, dormers, roofs, gable cornices, porches, decorative trim; the design
of any sign; and the arrangement of fencing. 
HISTORIC DISTRICT
A geographically definable area possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of
sites, buildings, structures or landmarks united by events or aesthetically by plan or by physical
development and designated in accordance with the requirements of this chapter as appropriate
for historic preservation. These district(s) were established pursuant to Section 2005 herein.
HISTORIC LANDMARK
Any improvement, building or structures of particular historic or architectural significance to the
City relating to its heritage, cultural, social, economic or political history, or which exemplifies
historic personages or important events in local, state or national history, as may be designated in
accordance with this section.
HISTORIC SIGNIFICANCE
A building, structure or site possesses historic significance if it embodies one or more of the
qualities outlined in Section 2004. Buildings classified as noncontributing are not considered to
possess historical significance.
HISTORIC SITE
Any parcel of land of special significance in the history of Saco, and its inhabitants, or upon which
an historic event has occurred, including prehistoric and archeological sites, and which has been
designated as such in accordance with this section.
MINOR ALTERATIONS
Are incidental changes or additions to a building or site which will neither result in substantial
changes to any significant historic features nor obscure such features. In no event shall any
change be deemed minor when, in the determination of the Planning Department, such change
shall alter the historic character of the building or site.
RHYTHM
Characterized by the regular recurrence of strong and weak elements.
STRUCTURE
Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a fixed location on or in the ground, or
an attachment to something having a fixed location on the ground, including buildings, billboards,
signs, carports, porches, and other building features.
TEMPORARY
For purposes of this chapter only, "temporary" is defined as either a one-time occurrence. 

AMENDMENTS TO ZONING ORDINANCE, ZONING MAP, SITE PLAN REVIEW
ORDINANCE, SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE – (FINAL READING) – (Video recording
37:16 minute mark)
Councilor Johnston moved, Councilor Purdy seconded to “A. to repeal the existing Zoning Ordinance,
Subdivision Regulations and Zoning Map; B. to replace these by the enactment of the Zoning Ordinance,
Site Plan Ordinance, and Subdivision Ordinance and Zoning Map, all dated December 2, 2020, as
recommended by the Planning Board and as first read in this Council on December 14, 2020 as in Exhibits
1, 2, 3 and 4, and heard at public hearing on January 4, 2021, without the proposed amendments to said
Ordinances and Zoning Map as described in Exhibits 7, 8 and 9 to: 1) reinstate the R5MU District, to be
consistent with theComprehensive Plan; 2) reinstate Master Planned Development in the Route 1 Corridor,
to be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan; and 3) change LDR zoned parcels to Industrial, to allow
access to Industrial zoned parcels.
Amendment – Councilor MacPhail moved, Councilor Purdy seconded to amend the motion to
include, “and establish the effective date of the new Zoning Ordinance, Site Plan Ordinance, and
Subdivision Ordinance, and Zoning Map to 90 days from enactment, pursuant to City Charter
Section 2.09 C”. The motion passed with seven (7) yeas.
Amendment –Councilor Archer moved, Councilor Purdy seconded to amend the main motion to refer these
proposed amendments to the Planning Board for public hearing and report pursuant to Section 230-1401 B.
of the Saco Code of Ordinances. This is to be added after “Industrial Zone Parcels”. The motion passed
with six (6) yeas and one (1) nay – Councilor Johnston.
Mayor Doyle called for a vote on the main motion as amended. The motion passed with seven (7)
yeas.
CITY OF SACO, MAINE
 CITY COUNCIL APPROVED CODE SUPPLEMENT
 Approved on January 11, 2021 with an effective date on April 11, 2021
City of Saco, Maine
City Code Chapter 230
ZONING ORDINANCE
Final
December 2, 2020
Adopted [DATE]
CHAPTER 230 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE ii
Chapter 230 Zoning Ordinance
Table of Contents
Purpose....................................................................................................................... 7
Authority ................................................................................................................... 7
Purpose.................................................................................................................... 7
Title............................................................................................................................. 8
Title .......................................................................................................................... 8
District Regulations ................................................................................................. 9
Official Zoning Map................................................................................................... 9
District Boundaries.................................................................................................... 9
Zoning Districts........................................................................................................10
District Purpose and Summary ................................................................................11
Coordination of Permitting and Reviews within the Saco River Corridor ..................32
Prohibited Industrial Uses........................................................................................32
Table of Permitted and Conditional Uses.................................................................33
Dimensional Standards ..........................................................................................41
Requirements ..........................................................................................................41
Dimensional Requirements......................................................................................43
Multiple Dwellings or Uses on One Lot ....................................................................47
Special Provisions for the Downtown District ...........................................................47
Special Provisions for the General Business District................................................47
Sheds ......................................................................................................................48
Nonconformance .....................................................................................................49
Purpose...................................................................................................................49
General....................................................................................................................49
Nonconforming Lots.................................................................................................49
Nonconforming Uses ...............................................................................................50
Nonconforming Structures .......................................................................................51
Further Limitations in Shoreland Zones. ..................................................................52
Reconstruction in Floodplains..................................................................................56
Good Neighbor Performance Standards...............................................................57
Applicability..............................................................................................................57
Dust, Fumes, Vapors, and Gasses ..........................................................................57
Explosive Materials..................................................................................................57
Exterior Lighting.......................................................................................................57
CHAPTER 230 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE iii
Noise .......................................................................................................................59
Odors.......................................................................................................................60
Screening ................................................................................................................60
Sanitary Waste Disposal..........................................................................................61
Storage and Handling of Chemicals and Similar Materials.......................................61
Water Quality...........................................................................................................62
Performance Standards.........................................................................................63
Accessory Dwelling Units (ADU)..............................................................................63
Adult Businesses .....................................................................................................63
Agriculture ...............................................................................................................64
Campgrounds..........................................................................................................66
Earth Removal.........................................................................................................67
Essential Services ...................................................................................................71
High-Voltage Transmission Lines ............................................................................71
Home-Based Retail in Residential Districts..............................................................71
Home Occupation....................................................................................................72
Manufactured Housing Units - Siting Requirements.................................................73
Marinas....................................................................................................................74
Medical Marijuana....................................................................................................76
Mobile Home Parks .................................................................................................77
Offices in Residential Districts .................................................................................79
Outdoor Merchandise Sales ....................................................................................79
Outdoor Storage ......................................................................................................79
Master Planned Developments................................................................................80
Seasonal Rental of Dwelling Units ...........................................................................86
Small Wind Energy System .....................................................................................86
Soil Suitability for Land Uses and Roads .................................................................88
Commercial Solar Energy Systems .........................................................................88
Swimming Pools ......................................................................................................91
Traffic and Highway Access.....................................................................................91
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities - Towers and Antennas .............................93
Performance Standards for Shoreland Zoning Overlay Districts......................97
Purpose...................................................................................................................97
Applicability..............................................................................................................97
Land Use Standards................................................................................................99
CHAPTER 230 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE iv
Piers, Docks, Wharves, and Other Marine Structures Extending Over or Below the
Normal High-Water Line of a Water Body............................................................................103
Campgrounds........................................................................................................106
Parking ..................................................................................................................106
Roads, Driveways, and Drainage Systems ............................................................106
Mineral Exploration and Extraction ........................................................................108
Agriculture .............................................................................................................109
Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities other than Timber Harvesting......110
Hazard Trees, Storm-Damaged Trees, and Dead Tree Removal...........................112
Exemptions to Clearing and Vegetation Removal Requirements ...........................113
Revegetation Requirements ..................................................................................114
Erosion and Sedimentation Control .......................................................................116
Septic Waste Disposal...........................................................................................117
Soils ......................................................................................................................117
Water Quality.........................................................................................................117
Archaeological Sites ..............................................................................................117
Variances and Appeals – See Article XIV. .............................................................118
Definitions Pertaining to Shoreland Zoning ............................................................118
Signs......................................................................................................................130
Purpose.................................................................................................................130
Permit Required.....................................................................................................130
Exemptions............................................................................................................130
Dimensional Requirements and Signage Standards ..............................................130
Prohibited Signs ....................................................................................................135
Generally Acceptable Signs...................................................................................135
Illumination ............................................................................................................135
LED Signs .............................................................................................................136
Nonconforming Signs ............................................................................................136
Discontinuance ......................................................................................................136
Appeals .................................................................................................................136
Parking ...................................................................................................................137
Off-Street Parking..................................................................................................137
Parking Design ......................................................................................................138
Private Roads........................................................................................................141
General Provisions ................................................................................................141
CHAPTER 230 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE v
Application.............................................................................................................143
Design Standards ..................................................................................................143
Stormwater and Erosion Control ........................................................................144
General Stormwater Runoff Provisions ..................................................................144
Stormwater Runoff Management ...........................................................................144
Stormwater Quantity and Quality Control...............................................................145
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan .................................................146
Drainage Plan........................................................................................................149
Standards for Drainage Easements and Rights-of-Way.........................................150
General Erosion and Sediment Control Provisions ................................................151
General Provisions for Impact Fees ..................................................................155
Authority ................................................................................................................155
Purpose.................................................................................................................155
Standard................................................................................................................155
Recreational Facilities and Open Space Impact Fees............................................157
Fire Department / Emergency Medical Services (FD/EMS) Impact Fee.................159
Traffic Mitigation and Bicycle & Pedestrian Infrastructure Fee ...............................161
Other Impact Fees.................................................................................................161
Conditional Uses ................................................................................................162
Applicability............................................................................................................162
Review and Approval Authority..............................................................................162
Procedures ............................................................................................................162
Application Submission Requirements...................................................................163
Minor conditional uses ...........................................................................................165
Standards ..............................................................................................................166
Limits and Expiration .............................................................................................168
Reapplication.........................................................................................................168
Nonconformance ...................................................................................................168
Enforcement ........................................................................................................169
Administrative Official ............................................................................................169
Permits Required...................................................................................................169
Enforcement of Shoreland Zoning Overlay District Provisions ...............................172
Violations and Penalties ........................................................................................172
Actions and Proceedings .......................................................................................173
Zoning Board of Appeals ...................................................................................174
CHAPTER 230 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE vi
Organization ..........................................................................................................174
Terms of Office, and Vacancies.............................................................................174
Powers and Duties.................................................................................................175
Variances ..............................................................................................................176
Procedures ............................................................................................................179
Reconsideration.....................................................................................................181
Appeals .................................................................................................................182
Amendments......................................................................................................183
Administration and Enforcement............................................................................183
Amendments to Shoreland Zoning Overlay Districts ..............................................183
Petitions.................................................................................................................183
Repetitive Petitions................................................................................................184
Contract Zoning .....................................................................................................184
Legal Provisions...............................................................................................187
Conflict with Other Provisions ................................................................................187
Severability............................................................................................................187
Effective Date ........................................................................................................187
Special Preservation Standards in the Downtown District..............................188
Applicability............................................................................................................188
Demolition. ............................................................................................................188
Certificate for Demolition in the Downtown District.................................................188
Definitions............................................................................................................190
Interpretation .........................................................................................................190
Shoreland Zoning Definitions.................................................................................190
Definitions..............................................................................................................190
APPENDIX ................................................................................................................................. i
Appendix 1 Official Zoning Map..........................................................................................i
CHAPTER 230 § I1 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 7
Purpose
Authority
This chapter was first enacted in 1985 pursuant to authority set forth in 30 M.R.S. §4953,
and was subsequently amended from time to time pursuant to that authority set forth in the
following statutes, 30-A M.R.S. §3001 (Home Rule), 30-A M.R.S. §3003 (Adoption of Codes
by Reference), 30-A M.R.S. §4352 (Zoning Ordinances), 30-A M.R.S. §4301 et seq.
(Planning and Land Use Regulation), and 30-A M.R.S. §4401 et seq. (Subdivision
Regulations).
Purpose
This chapter is intended to encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the City;
to promote traffic safety; to provide safety from fire and other hazards; to provide adequate
light and air; to prevent overcrowding; to promote a wholesome home environment; to
conserve natural resources; and to provide for adequate public services.
CHAPTER 230 § II1 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 8
Title
Title
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of Saco,
Maine," and will be referred to herein simply as "this chapter."
CHAPTER 230 § III1 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 9
District Regulations
Official Zoning Map
Adoption. A map entitled "City of Saco, Zoning Map" and dated [insert date 2020] is
hereby adopted as part of this chapter and hereafter shall be referred to as the "Official
Zoning Map."
Exceptions. The Official Zoning Map shall be the final authority as to the boundaries of
zoning districts, except in regard to the Shoreland Zoning Overlay Districts, which are
more particularly described in Article VIII herein.
Copies of the Zoning Map. Representative maps which may be appended to this chapter
are for reference only and shall not be construed to be the Official Zoning Map.
District Boundaries
Uncertainty of boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown
on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
Boundaries depicted as approximately following the center lines of streets,
highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines.
Boundaries depicted as approximately following well-established lot lines shall be
construed as following such lot lines.
Boundaries depicted as approximately following municipal limits shall be construed
as following municipal limits.
Boundaries depicted as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such
shorelines, and in the event of natural change in the shoreline shall be construed
as moving with the actual shoreline.
Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streams, rivers,
canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center
lines.
Boundaries depicted as following or measured from natural features such as the
upland limit of wetlands or the limit of floodplains shall be construed to follow or be
measured from the actual limit of the natural resource as located on the face of the
Earth even if such location is at variance with the location shown on the Official
Zoning Map.
Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with
those shown on the Official Zoning Map, except as provided in Subsection A(1)
through (6) above, or in circumstances where the items covered by Subsection A(1)
through (6) above are not clear, the Board of Appeals shall interpret the district
boundaries. 
CHAPTER 230 § III3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 10
The district boundaries located on the Zoning Map represent the City of Saco's
ordinance. In addition, areas along the Saco River are also governed by the Saco River
Corridor Commission. Separate, and in some cases more-restrictive, regulations exist
for this area and must be consulted when development is contemplated.
Division of lots by district boundaries. Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot,
the regulations applicable to either lot may be extended up to one hundred (100) feet
into the other lot.
Zoning Districts
The City is divided into the districts stated and described in this chapter and as shown by the
district boundary lines on the Official Zoning Map. The district classifications are shown in
Tables 3-1 and 3-2:
Table 3-1 Conventional Zoning Districts
Type Current District Name Former District Namea
Residential
Districts
RC Rural Conservation District C-1
LDR Low Density Residential District R-1a
SR Seaside Residential District R-1c
WR West Residential District R-1d
MDR Medium Density Residential
District
R-2, R-4, R-1b, MU-4
HDR High Density Residential
District
R-3
D Downtown District B-3, MU-1, R-3
Business and
Mixed-Use
Districts
GB General Business District B-1
MB Main and Beach District B-7
HB Highway Business District B-2c & B-2d
SI Saco Island District B-4
CE Camp Ellis District B-5
PR Portland Road District MU-3, B-2a, B-2b, B-6,
B-8
BI Business-Industrial District B-8, I-2
Industrial Districts I Industrial District I-1, I-3
CHAPTER 230 § III4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 11
Table 3-2 Zoning Overlay Districts
Type Current District Name Former District
Namea
Shoreland Zoning
Overlay Districts
RPOD Resource Protection Overlay District RPOD
SLOD Shoreland Overlay District SO
CDOD Coastal Development Overlay District CDOD
Mobile Home Park
Overlay District
MHPOD Mobile Home Park Overlay District MHPOD
Historic
Preservation
Overlay District
HPOD Historic Preservation Overlay District Historic District
a. Name of zoning district prior to adoption of amended Zoning Ordinance on [DATE of
Adoption].
District Purpose and Summary
The following pages contain the purpose statement, general description of the location, and an
overview of dimensional standards for each district and overlay district.
CHAPTER 230 § III4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 12
CHAPTER 230 § III4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 13
CHAPTER 230 § III4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 14
CHAPTER 230 § III4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 15
CHAPTER 230 § III4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 16
CHAPTER 230 § III4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 17
CHAPTER 230 § III4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 18
CHAPTER 230 § III4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 19
CHAPTER 230 § III4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 20
CHAPTER 230 § III4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 21
CHAPTER 230 § III4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 22
CHAPTER 230 § III4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 23
CHAPTER 230 § III4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 24
CHAPTER 230 § III4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 25
CHAPTER 230 § III4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 26
CHAPTER 230 § III4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 27
CHAPTER 230 § III4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 28
CHAPTER 230 § III4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 29
CHAPTER 230 § III4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 30
CHAPTER 230 § III4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 31
CHAPTER 230 § III5 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 32
Coordination of Permitting and Reviews within the Saco River Corridor
Saco River Corridor: The Saco River Corridor Commission has been established by the
Maine Legislature to regulate development within in the Saco River Corridor. The Saco
River Corridor includes all lands adjacent to the Saco River to a distance of 500 feet, as
measured on a horizontal plane, from the mean high-water line of the river or to the edge
of the one-hundred-year floodplain if the floodplain extends beyond 500 feet, up to a
maximum of 1,000 feet.
Activities within the Saco River Corridor are subject to the jurisdiction of both the City of
Saco and the Saco River Corridor Commission (SRCC). Construction, development, and
some other activities require approval from both the City and the Corridor Commission.
Refer to Title 38 M.R.S. §951 thru 969 for Saco River Corridor Act, and contact the Saco
River Corridor Commission for applicable performance standards.
Activities within the Saco River Corridor must conform to the applicable City regulations
as well as to the Commission's regulations.
To coordinate the review and permitting process, applicants or potential applicants
should first determine if the proposed activity is allowed under the City's regulations. The
applicant should then obtain a permit for the activity from the Saco River Corridor
Commission. Once the SRCC permit has been obtained, the applicant should apply for
City permits or approvals needed for the project. Obtaining a permit from the SRCC
does not absolve the applicant of the requirement to obtain City permits and approvals.
Prohibited Industrial Uses
The following uses and similar uses are not included under the definition of "heavy industry" or
any other use in this chapter and are excluded from all districts because they have strong
potential to be injurious, noxious, or offensive to a neighborhood by reason of the emission of
odor, fumes, dust, smoke, vibration, radioactivity, noise or other by-products and are deemed to
be unacceptable for one or more of the above causes:
Blast furnace, metal or ore reduction or smelting.
Coke manufacturing.
Petroleum refining.
Animal rendering plants.
Nuclear power production facilities.
Industries with high-level radiation hazards.
Nuclear waste disposal.
Petroleum and petroleum product tank farms. 
CHAPTER 230 § III7 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 33
Ammonia, chlorine manufacturing, or the refining of hydrochloric, nitric, picric, sulfuric,
sulphurous or similar acid manufacturing.
Table of Permitted and Conditional Uses
Permitted and conditional uses in residential, business, mixed use, and industrial
districts are listed in Table 3-3.
Permitted and conditional uses in the Resource Protection Overlay District are included
in Table 3-4.
Refer to Articles IV and VI for general standards for all uses. Additional performance
standards for specific uses are found in Article VII, as well as the Site Plan Review
Ordinance. Standards for uses in Shoreland Zoning Overlay Districts can be found in
Article VIII.
CHAPTER 230 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 34
TABLE 3-3 PERMITTED & CONDITIONAL USES (PAGE 1 OF 4)
RC LDR SR WR MDR HDR D GB MB HB SI CE PR BI I
AGRICULTURE RELATED
Agriculture P P P
Agriculture, excluding livestock P P P P P P P
Agriculture related business C C C
Commercial greenhouse & nursery P C C C C P
BUSINESS
Accessory retail sales of goods manufactured
on the premise P P P
Art studio P P P P P P P
Automobile dealer C
Automotive, repair & fuel services C C C
Bed & breakfast Inn C
CHPD C P P P P P P
Business/Professional Office C C P P P P P P
Commercial fisheries, wholesale fish &
seafood sales C P
Contractor or tradesperson C P P P
Convenience store C C
Drive-through window service P P
Fast Food Restaurant C C
Food and drink P P P P P P P
Financial institution P P C P P P P
Financial institution – drive-thru window serv. C C C P P P P
Home occupation C C C C C C C P P P P
Home-based retail use C C C
Hotel or motel P P P P P P
Medical marijuana caregiver P P
Neighborhood convenience store C C C C C C C C
Outdoor sales associated with principal use P P P
Personal services P P P P P
Registered dispensary C C C C
Repair services P P P P
Research & development P P P P P P
CHAPTER 230 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 35
Retail P P C P P P
Self-service storage facility C C
P=PERMITTED, P*=PERMITTED AS PART OF MASTER PLANNED DEVELOPMENT REVIEW, C=CONDITIONAL, NP=NOT PERMITTED, BLANK=NOT PERMITTED
CHAPTER 230 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 36
TABLE 3-3 PERMITTED & CONDITIONAL USES (PAGE 2 OF 4)
RC LDR SR WR MDR HDR D GB MB HB SI CE PR BI I
COMMUNITY
Cemetery P C C C C P
Funeral home C C P P C P P P
Municipal uses P P P P P P P P P P P P P P C
Places of public assembly C P P
Places of worship P P P P P P P P P P P P
Public uses C C C C C C P P P P P P P
EDUCATION
Schools - Nursery C C C C C C P P P P P P
Schools - Public and Private P P P P P P P P
Small nonresidential facilities for educational,
scientific or natural interpretation C P
Schools - Commercial C P P P P
HEALTH & DAYCARE
Addiction treatment facility C C
Adult day-care center, Type 1 P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Adult day-care center, Type 2 C C C P P P P P P
Childcare center C C C C C C P P P P P P P
Childcare facility, small C C C C C C P P P P P P C P
Family childcare provider C C C C C C P P P P P P C
Hospital C C C P P P P
Outpatient clinic services C C P P P P
INDUSTRIAL
Boat building & repair facilities P P
Brewery, small C C C C C C C
Commercial processing of wood, including
cutting, sawing, splitting, chipping C C
Distillery, small C C C C C C C
Large commercial vehicle sales and service
(10 acre minimum lot size) P
Light industry P C P P
Recycling center P
Truck terminal C C
CHAPTER 230 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 37
Supply yard C P C
Warehouse and Distribution Facility C P P C
Waste composting center C P
P=PERMITTED, P*=PERMITTED AS PART OF MASTER PLANNED DEVELOPMENT REVIEW, C=CONDITIONAL, NP=NOT PERMITTED, BLANK=NOT PERMITTED
CHAPTER 230 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 38
TABLE 3-3 PERMITTED & CONDITIONAL USES (PAGE 3 OF 4)
RC LDR SR WR MDR HDR D GB MB HB SI CE PR BI I
MISCELLANEOUS
Accessory uses P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Adult Businesses P P
Any use permitted in the RPO District P
Parking lot, commercial C C
Earth Removal C
Junkyard C C
Kennel C C C C C C C
Master Planned Development P P
Passenger transportation terminal P C P P P
Pet Care P C P P P
Timber harvesting P
Veterinarian C P P C P P
RECREATION
Amusement Park C
Campground C
Commercial Recreation P P P
Enclosed sports facility C C C C C
Club (private) C C C C P P
Golf Course C C C
Health club P P P C P P
Marina C P P
Outdoor recreational facility C C C C C
Park & playground P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Recreation & amusement centers C C C C
Water recreation C C C C C C C C C C
P=PERMITTED, P*=PERMITTED AS PART OF MASTER PLANNED DEVELOPMENT REVIEW, C=CONDITIONAL, NP=NOT PERMITTED, BLANK=NOT PERMITTED
CHAPTER 230 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 39
TABLE 3-3 PERMITTED & CONDITIONAL USES (PAGE 4 OF 4)
RC LDR SR WR MDR HDR D GB MB HB SI CE PR BI I
RESIDENTIAL
Accessory dwelling unit (ADU) P P P P P P P P P P
Boardinghouse C C C C C P
Caretaker dwelling unit P P P P P P
Community living arrangement P P P P P P P P P P
Dwellings in mixed use building P P P P P C P
Elder/disability care facility C P P P C P C P
Elder/disability housing C C C C P P P P P C C
Elder non-congregate, detached housing P
Multi-family dwellings (3 to 8 units) C C P P C C C
Multi-family dwellings (more than 8 units) C P P C C
Multi-unit residential project C C
Single-family dwelling P P P P P P P P P P C
Two-family dwelling P P P P P P P P P P
P (NP
Rt 1)
UTILITIES
Commercial solar energy system C C
Essential services P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
High-voltage transmission lines C C C C C C C C C C C C C C P
Wireless telecommunication facility C C
P=PERMITTED, P*=PERMITTED AS PART OF MASTER PLANNED DEVELOPMENT REVIEW, C=CONDITIONAL, NP=NOT PERMITTED, BLANK=NOT PERMITTED
CHAPTER 230 § III7 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 40
TABLE 3-4 PERMITTED & CONDITIONAL USES IN THE RESOURCE PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT (RPOD)
PERMITTED USES CONDITIONAL USES
1. The harvesting of any wild crop, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild rice,
berries, tree fruits and tree seeds, but not including any extractive industry or
activity
2. Non-intensive recreational uses not requiring structures, such as hunting,
fishing and hiking
3. Wildlife management
4. Hiking trails, snowmobile trails, bridle paths and similar facilities
5. Parks and picnic areas of primarily undeveloped, natural character
6. Motorized vehicular traffic on existing roads.
7. Forest management activities, except for timber harvesting
8. Clearing of vegetation for approved construction and other allowed uses
9. Fire prevention activities
10. Soil and water conservation practices
11. Surveying and resource analysis
12. Emergency operations
13. Selective timber harvesting according to a plan approved by a forester
registered in the State of Maine on a noncommercial basisa
14. Structures accessory to allowed uses
15. Temporary piers, docks, wharfs, bridges and other structures and uses
extending over or below the normal high-water line or within a wetlanda
16. Private sewage disposal systems for allowed uses
17. Service drops for allowed uses
18. Filling and earthmoving of less than 10 cubic yardsa
19. Agricultureb
1. Small nonresidential facilities for educational, scientific or natural
interpretation purposes
2. Recreation uses involving minimal structural development, such as
golf courses, tennis courts, playing fields and similar uses, where
water quality would not be adversely affected and potential for flood
damage could be minimal
3. Small nonresidential structures accessory to permitted or
conditional uses
4. Essential services
5. Water recreation facilities
6. Aquaculture
7. Permanent piers, docks, wharfs, bridges and other structures and
uses extending over or below the normal high-water line or within a
wetland
8. Parking facilities accessory to allowed uses
9. Filling and earthmoving of more than 10 cubic yards (subject to a
shoreland permit from the Planning Board)
10. High-voltage transmission lines
a. Subject to obtaining a shoreland permit from the Code Enforcement Officer.
b. Subject to obtaining a shoreland permit from the Code Enforcement Officer, to include submission of a management plan filed with either the Natural Resources Conservation
Service or the York County Soil and Water Conservation District.
CHAPTER 230 § IV1 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 41
Dimensional Standards
Requirements
No structure shall be erected, reconstructed or altered to exceed the height herein established for the districts in which such structure is
located, as except as provided herein. No lot area shall be so reduced or diminished that the yards or other open spaces shall be smaller
than prescribed by this ordinance.
Refer to Article VIII for additional standards for lots in Shoreland Zoning Overlay Districts.
CHAPTER 230 § IV1 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 42
TABLE 4-1 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR ALL ZONING DISTRICTS
Residential Districts Business and Mixed-Use Districts Industrial Districts
RC LDR SR WR MDR HDR D GB MB HB SI CE PR BI I
MINIMUM LOT AREA (SF)
SEWERED 40,000 20,000 7,500 15,000 7,500 6,000 2,000 7,500 6,000 7,500 20,000 7,500 20,000 10,000 40,000
UNSEWERED 80,000 40,000 40,000 30,000 20,000 n/a n/a n/a n/a 20,000 n/a n/a 20,000 10,000 80,000
MIN. LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT (SF)d
SEWERED 40,000 10,000 7,500 7,500 5,000 3,000 1,500 5,000 3,000 4,000 * 7,500 7,500 n/a n/a
UNSEWERED 80,000 20,000 20,000 15,000 17,500 n/a n/a n/a n/a 17,500 n/a n/a 30,000 n/a n/a
STREET FRONTAGE, MINIMUM (FT) 200 100 75 100 75 75 30 50 75 100 50 50 200/50b 50 150
FRONT SETBACK, MINIMUM (FT) 30 30 25 25 25 5 0 15 5 15 0 15 40/25c 20 50
FRONT SETBACK, MAXIMUM (FT) n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 15 10 30 25 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a
SIDE AND REAR SETBACKS, MINIMUM (FT) 25 20 15 15 10 10 10/0a 15/0a 10 10 10 10 20 25 25
LOT COVERAGE, MAXIMUM (%) 20 25 30 25 35 45 100 50 40 50 60 40 60 50 40
HEIGHT, MINIMUM (FT) n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 35 e n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a
HEIGHT, MAXIMUM (FT) 35 35 35 35 35 50 60 50 35 50 60 35 60 60 60
a. A 0-foot minimum side setback is permitted for party (shared) wall.
b. The minimum street frontage on Route 1 is 200 feet. For all other roads, the minimum street frontage is 50 feet.
c. The minimum front setback on Route 1, Cascade Road, and Flag Pond Road is 40 feet. For all other roads, the minimum front setback is 25 feet.
d. Density requirements are not intended to overrule state regulations.
e. Minimum height requirements do not apply to single-family and 2-family dwellings.
* Master Planned Development Standards apply: The lot area per dwelling unit requirement for dwelling units that are part of an approved master planned development in
accordance with site plan review/Subdivision requirements varies with the size of the unit. For dwelling units with not more than two bedrooms and less than 800 square feet of
total floor area, the requirement is 1,000 square feet of lot area per unit; and for dwelling units with more than two bedrooms or more than 800 square feet of total floor area,
regardless of the number of bedrooms, the requirement is 2,000 square feet of lot area per unit.
n/a Not applicable / no requirement.
CHAPTER 230 § IV2 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 43
Dimensional Requirements
Minimum lot and yard requirements. The minimum lot area, minimum lot area per
dwelling unit, minimum street frontage, minimum and maximum depth of front yard,
minimum width of side yard and rear yard, maximum lot coverage, and minimum and
maximum height for each district shall be as shown in Table 4-1.
Corner and double-frontage lots. Lots which abut public or private roads on more than a
single side shall provide a required minimum and maximum depth for a front yard along
at least two (2) of the abutting streets. Minimum rear yard depth shall be provided along
all other sides.
Net Commercial Acreage Requirement. The total gross available acreage less the areas
of the site which are not suitable for development because of topography, natural
drainage, or subsoil conditions. The net acreage shall be determined by subtracting
unsuitable areas from the gross acreage of the parcel. The following original land areas
shall be considered unsuitable and shall be deducted from the gross acreage of the
parcel:
Areas that are, because of existing land uses or lack of access, isolated and
unavailable for building purposes or for use in common with the remainder of the
parcel.
Areas within Zone V or VE, coastal flood with velocity hazard, a floodway or a onehundred-year flood hazard area, as shown on the Federal Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map or Federal Flood Insurance Rate Map.
Wetlands of special significance as defined by the Department of Environmental
Protection.
Stream channels, as measured from the top of banks, and other surface water
bodies, as measured from the high-water mark.
Areas with sustained slope of 33% or more. Slope areas of 20% to 33% shall also
be deducted unless the developer can demonstrate to the Planning Board’s
satisfaction that the slopes will be used as part of the overall plan for the
development, that they are stable for structures, if so utilized, and that any slope
development will minimize soil erosion and comply with the Maine State Plumbing
Code.
Net Residential Acreage Requirement. The total available gross acreage less the areas
of the site which are not suitable for development because of topography, natural
drainage, or subsoil conditions. The net residential acreage shall be determined by
subtracting unsuitable areas in site plan and subdivision projects from the gross acreage
of the parcel. The following original land areas shall be considered unsuitable and shall
be deducted from the gross acreage of the parcel: 
CHAPTER 230 § IV2 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 44
Areas that are, because of existing land uses or lack of access, isolated and
unavailable for building purposes or for use in common with the remainder of the
parcel.
Areas within Zone V or VE, coastal flood with velocity hazard, a floodway or a onehundred-year flood hazard area, as shown on the Federal Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map or Federal Flood Insurance Rate Map.
Wetlands
Stream channels, as measured from the top of banks, and other surface water
bodies, as measured from the high-water mark.
Areas with a sustained slope of 33% or more. Slope areas of 20% to 33% shall also
be deducted unless the developer can demonstrate to the Planning Board’s
satisfaction that the slopes will be used as part of the overall plan for the
development, that they are stable for structures, if so utilized, and that any slope
development will minimize soil erosion and comply with the Maine State Plumbing
Code.
Maintenance of minimum and maximum yard setback requirements.
All structures, whether attached to principal structures or not, and whether open or
enclosed, including porches, carports, balconies or platforms above normal grade level,
shall not project into or otherwise lessen the required minimum front, rear or side yards.
Driveways and parking spaces may be considered as part of side or rear yard setback
requirements, provided that no vehicle is parked closer than five (5) feet from the lot line or
as required in Table 4-1, whichever is greater.
Exceptions to minimum lot and yard setback requirements.
1. As of ________, 1985, unenclosed, roofed structures (such as porches and
carports) that are lawfully existing shall be permitted to be enclosed, provided that
the new walls will not extend closer to the lot line than the existing roof and that they
shall be not less than five (5) feet from any lot lines.
2. Along existing residential streets which were developed prior to 1985, a single-family
detached dwelling, a two-family dwelling, or an addition to either, other than a
detached garage or carport, may be permitted to be built with a front setback equal
to the average front setbacks of the existing houses on the immediately adjacent
lots. However, new construction shall not be closer than 15 feet from the front lot
line without a variance.
Exceptions to maximum height requirements. A height in excess of the height limit
specified in Table 4-1 for the applicable zoning district may be permitted for certain
structures, provided they do not constitute a hazard to an established airport or
neighboring properties. Structures excepted from height limits in Table 4-1 include:
Church spires, belfries, monuments, tanks, water and fire towers, stage towers and
scenery lofts, amusement park rides, silos, cooling towers, ornamental towers, 
CHAPTER 230 § IV2 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 45
spires, chimneys, elevator bulkheads, smokestacks, conveyors, flagpoles, pools,
windmills.
HVAC, and similar structures and utilities that does not exceed ten (10) feet in
height, and is set back at least ten (10) feet from the edge of the structure’s roof,
and does not exceed thirty percent of the total roof area.
Radio and television transmission towers, microwave transmission towers,
common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and
similar structures. Also includes small wind energy system towers.
Conversions of dwellings or structures to multi-family use. Notwithstanding provisions of
Article V of this chapter, dwellings or structures converted to a multi-family use shall
comply with the minimum lot area and minimum lot area per dwelling unit requirements
in Table 4-1, regardless of whether the existing structure meets the district’s dimensional
requirements. If a building which is nonconforming with respect to any other standards of
Table 4-1 is proposed for conversion to multifamily in any district where multifamily is
permitted or conditional, the conversion shall be considered a conditional use, subject to
the conditional use standards of Article XIV and subject to a finding by the Planning
Board that this nonconformance does not cause the use to violate any of the conditional
use standards or special standards of Article XIV for certain conditional uses.
Back lots. One new back lot may be created from any lot of record that existed on July
17, 1989 and conforms to the lot requirements of Table 4-1 except for the lot frontage
requirement, provided that:
Each will be limited to one (1) single or one (1) two-family dwelling.
The back lot and front lot will conform to the minimum lot area and minimum lot
area per dwelling unit required in the district.
The back lot is at least as wide at the site of the proposed dwelling as the frontage
measurement required in the district.
The back lot has a deeded access to a publicly accepted street. This access may
be obtained by:
A right-of-way that is a minimum of twenty (20) feet wide across the front lot
that is deeded to the owner of the back lot; or
Extension of the back lot to the public street so that the back lot has at least
twenty-five (25) feet of frontage on the street. The creation of the back lot shall
not make the front lot more nonconforming in street frontage or make the front
lot nonconforming with respect to street frontage if it is conforming.
The back lot and the front lot shall share the same driveway entrance if access to
the back lot is obtained through a right-of-way or the street frontage of the front lot
is located on a road functionally classified as an arterial or collector, except in
cases where it is not possible because of the location of the existing structure on
the lot or because of difficult terrain. 
CHAPTER 230 § IV2 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 46
Each dwelling unit on the back lot is served by a residential sprinkler system
meeting the requirements of NFPA and approved by the Saco Fire Department or
each dwelling unit is less than five hundred (500) feet from a public road or less
than one thousand (1,000) feet from a hydrant approved by the Fire Department.
These measurements shall be made along the driveway and roadway, not crosscountry.
The back lot is accessed by a minimum of a twelve (12) foot wide driveway. If the
road is curved additional width may be required by the Fire Department to allow for
the safe passage of emergency vehicles.
A turnaround area approved by the Fire Department shall be provided for public
safety vehicles.
Street numbering shall be approved by the City's emergency departments and the
Assessor. A sign or mailbox clearly stating the street number shall be posted at the
street before occupancy.
If a public sewer line passes in the street in front of the lot from which the back lot
will be created, the back lot shall be required to connect to the sewer when the
house is built.
If a public water line passes in the street in front of the lot from which the back lot
will be created, the back lot shall be required to connect to the public water when
the house is built.
Lot standards. The following apply to new lots created after April 18, 2001:
1. Lots in which a narrow strip(s) of land, with a width of less than twenty-five (25)
percent of the required minimum street frontage for the zoning district in which the
lot is located, is used to join other portions of the lot in order to meet the minimum lot
area, minimum lot area per dwelling unit, or minimum street frontage requirements
are prohibited.
2. Narrow strips of land along a street with a depth of less than the minimum front yard
requirement for the zoning district in which the lot is located shall not be counted in
meeting the minimum street frontage requirement.
3. Prior to issuance of a building permit, the Code Enforcement Officer may request
that a wetlands delineation be submitted to verify that a portion of a proposed
building lot adequate for building construction and septic system installation consists
of upland. If an area of wetlands equal to or greater than Maine Department of
Environmental Protection Natural Resource Protection Act thresholds for
development review is proposed for alteration, a copy of the NRPA permit shall be
submitted prior to issuance of a building permit.
Existing interior lots of record without any road frontage as of January 2, 1985, shall be
eligible for a building permit, notwithstanding the absence of street frontage.
CHAPTER 230 § IV3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 47
If a single point of access (curb cut) to Route 1 is shared between two or more parcels,
frontage may be reduced to 150 feet for each parcel in the Portland Road District.
Elder/disability housing density bonus. Notwithstanding the minimum lot area per
dwelling unit requirements of the Dimensional Standards table:
1. For elder/disability housing uses and elder/disability care facility uses connected to
city sewer and public water in the LDR, MDR, GB, MB, HB, SI, and PR, a modified
per dwelling unit density shall be available, as follows, provided that the average
number of bedrooms per dwelling unit remains at or below 1.5, as follows:
5,000 square feet per dwelling unit in the LDR;
1,000 square feet per dwelling unit in the MDR; GB; MB; HB; SI; and PR.
Multiple Dwellings or Uses on One Lot
Except as permitted under Subsection B below, no more than one (1) single-family or
two (2) family dwelling may be located on a lot, except in the case of multi-unit
residential projects that meet all other applicable sections of this chapter. Commercial
buildings may be permitted on the same lot as single-family and two (2) family dwellings
in business districts, provided that the buildings are in the same ownership, remain in the
same ownership, and meet the minimum lot size standard in Table 4-1.
A second single-family dwelling, or two (2) family dwelling in the same ownership as the
first, may be located on a lot only if the street frontage requirement is met, and the
placement of the buildings would allow division of the lot in conformance with the
minimum lot and setbacks specified in Table 4-1. An accessory dwelling unit (ADU)
permitted under Section VII1 shall not be considered a single-family residence for
purposes of this section.
Special Provisions for the Downtown District
Within new commercial or mixed-use structures, each retail occupancy is limited to four
thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet.
Within structures constructed prior to 2020, a single new retail use is limited to four
thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet.
The first floor of buildings along Main Street in the Downtown District shall be comprised
of commercial/retail space that maintains downtown New England character.
Special Provisions for the General Business District
The first floor of buildings along Elm Street in the General Business District shall be
comprised of commercial/retail space that maintains or enhances downtown New England
character. 
CHAPTER 230 § IV6 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 48
Sheds
In residential districts, if the shed is under one hundred twenty (120) square feet and is not
served by electricity, the shed is only required to meet a five (5) foot side or rear yard
setback requirement. No dimension (length, width, height) of the building shall exceed
twelve (12) feet. Only one shed per lot shall be permitted to meet this five (5) foot setback
standard. Sheds shall be erected no closer to the front lot line than the extension of the line
created by the front wall of the principal structure on the lot. Any other sheds or outbuildings
shall meet the standards herein. No variance of the minimum five (5) foot setback
requirement shall be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
CHAPTER 230 § V1 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 49
Nonconformance
Purpose
The purpose of this article is to regulate nonconforming lots, uses, and structures, such that
they can be reasonably developed, maintained, repaired, or changed to other less
nonconforming or conforming uses. It is the intent of this article to promote land use
conformities, except that nonconforming conditions that existed before the effective date of
this chapter or amendments thereto shall be allowed to continue, subject to the
requirements set forth in this article. When nonconforming uses fall into disuse, the intent of
this article is not to allow them to be reestablished after a twelve-month period of dormancy.
General
Continuance. The use of any land or structures, lawful at the time of adoption or
amendment of this chapter, which is made nonconforming by adoption or amendment of
this chapter, may continue, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
Ownership of lots, structures and uses which remain lawful but became nonconforming
by the adoption or amendment of this chapter may be transferred, and the new owner
may continue the nonconforming use or continue to use the nonconforming structure or
lot, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
Nonconforming Lots
A single vacant nonconforming lot of record may be built upon, provided that such lot
shall be in separate ownership and not contiguous with any other lot in the same
ownership, except as provided in Subsection B or C below.
If two or more vacant, contiguous lots or parcels are in common ownership of record at
the time of adoption or amendment of this chapter, and if any of these lots does not
individually meet the dimensional requirements of this chapter or subsequent
amendment, the lots shall be combined to the extent necessary to meet the dimensional
standards of this chapter, except that this shall not apply to contiguous lots with frontage
on different streets or to lots legally created and recorded as part of an approved
subdivision after March 22, 1972, the date of adoption of the City of Saco's subdivision
standards.
If two contiguous lots or parcels are in common ownership of record at the time of the
adoption of this chapter, January 3, 1985, and either lot does not individually meet the
dimensional requirements of this chapter, and provided that one lot is vacant or contains
no principal structure and the other lot has a principal structure, the lots shall be
combined into one lot of record. This shall apply to lots or parcels within all zoning
districts in the City of Saco. This shall not apply to contiguous lots with frontage on
different streets, or to lots legally created and recorded as part of an approved
subdivision after March 22, 1972, the date of adoption of Saco's subdivision standards.
CHAPTER 230 § V4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 50
If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in common ownership of record at the time
of adoption or amendment of this chapter, if all or part of the lots do not meet the
dimensional requirements of this chapter, and if a principal use or structure exists on
each lot, the nonconforming lots may be conveyed separately or together, provided all
State law and other local ordinance requirements are complied with.
In the Shoreland Zone, two or more contiguous lots, at least one of which is
nonconforming, owned by the same person or persons on or before the effective date of
the shoreland provisions in this chapter shall be considered one lot.
Nonconforming Uses
At the time a subject property or structure is being reviewed for issues related to
continuation of or a change in a nonconforming use, abutting property owners shall be
notified by the Code Enforcement Office. Notification will include property owners’ rights
to appeal a decision.
Discontinuance. A nonconforming use of a structure or land which is discontinued for a
period of twelve (12) consecutive months may not be resumed. The use of the land or
structure shall thereafter conform to the provisions of this chapter.
Superseded by Conforming Use. Whenever a nonconforming use is superseded by a
permitted use of a structure or land, or of a structure and land in combination, such use
of the structure, land, or combination of land and structure shall thereafter conform to the
provisions of this chapter, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
This provision shall not apply to the resumption of a use of a residential structure,
provided that the structure has been used or maintained for residential purposes during
the preceding five-year period.
Expansion of Use. A nonconforming use, including a nonconforming outdoor use of land,
shall not be extended or expanded in area or function; provided, however that a
nonconforming use may be extended throughout any part of a structure that was lawfully
and manifestly designed or arranged for such use as of the effective date of this chapter
or amendments thereto.
Change of nonconforming use. With the approval of the Planning Board, an existing
nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use, provided that the
proposed use is equally or more conforming within the zoning district in which the
nonconforming use is located. The Planning Board shall make this determination after
making a finding that the proposed use will have no greater adverse impact upon
neighboring uses, land and structures than the prior use based on the conditional use
standards in §XIV5 [conditional use standards], and for change of nonconforming uses
in the shoreland zone, also based on these additional standards:
1. Change of Use of a Nonconforming Structure. The use of a nonconforming structure
located in a shoreland zone may not be changed to another use unless the Planning
Board, after receiving a written application, determines that the new use will have no 
CHAPTER 230 § V5 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 51
greater adverse impact on the water body, tributary stream, or wetland, or on the
subject or adjacent properties and resources than the existing use.
2. In determining that “no greater adverse impact” will occur under § V.E.1 above, the
Planning Board shall require written documentation from the applicant, regarding the
probable effects on public health and safety, erosion and sedimentation, water
quality, fish and wildlife habitat, vegetative cover, visual and actual points of public
access to waters, natural beauty, floodplain management, archaeological and
historic resources, and commercial fishing and maritime activities, and other
functionally water-dependent uses.
Nonconforming Structures
Maintenance and Enlargement. A structure in existence as of the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this chapter and located on a lot which does not meet the lot
and yard setback requirements in Section IV [Dimensional Standards] may be repaired,
maintained, and improved. It may be enlarged and/or accessory structures may be
added to the site without a variance, provided that the enlargement or accessory
structure itself meets the setback and height requirements of the district in which it is
located and that the enlargement or accessory structure in combination with the existing
structure does not exceed the prescribed maximum lot coverage. Vertical enlargements
of single-family or two-family dwellings, including porches and decks with a roof, that are
lawfully nonconforming with regard to setbacks, may be permitted if each all of the
following are met:
1. The proposed use of the enlarged space is habitable residential space. No
enlargements are permitted to expand space for a use that is nonconforming in the
district.
2. The closest point of the new construction shall be no nearer to the property line
than the closest point on the existing building upon which the vertical enlargement
is proposed.
3. Enlargements constructed under these provisions shall not increase the height of
the vertical face of the building more than ten (10) feet vertically within the setback.
The height of the new eaves within the setback shall not exceed (twenty-two) 22
feet, when measured from original grade to the new eaves. Mansard and gambrel
roofs, or similar roofs, and full dormers, or roof pitches greater than 12/12 are not
permitted above the new eaves. Two single-window dormers above the new eaves
are permitted, but each may not exceed four feet in width.
4. The nonconforming portion of the existing structure on which the addition is built is
no closer than five (5) feet from the side or rear property line upon which it
encroaches. If the building code requires the new construction to be fire-rated, the
existing first-floor construction in the setback shall be reconstructed to the same
fire-rated standard.
CHAPTER 230 § V6 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 52
5. Unless a variance is granted, an existing structure that does not meet the
standards of §V5A(4) above may only be enlarged by an addition that meets the
dimensional standards of this chapter.
6. All other relevant standards of this chapter not related to setbacks are met.
The following activities shall not constitute an enlargement or creation of a
nonconforming structure, and may encroach into front, side or rear yard setbacks, if any
of the following conditions are present:
1. The addition of an open patio with no structure elevated above ground level, where
the addition is outside of the Shoreland Zone;
2. The addition of steps from the first floor to the ground level;
3. The placing of a foundation below a nonconforming structure.
Reconstruction or restoration of a nonconforming structure that is destroyed or damaged
by casualty, including but not limited to fire, explosion, flood, or other accidental cause,
is permitted, provided that:
1. The reconstruction or restoration is of a destroyed or damaged structure which is
nonconforming only as to land area, setbacks, or other dimensional requirements;
2. The reconstructed or restored structure is no more nonconforming than the
destroyed or damaged structure, and covers no greater land area than the footprint
of, and has no greater amount of floor area and no greater volume than, the
destroyed or damaged structure, unless enlargement or expansion of said structure
complies with the dimensional standards of this Chapter; and
3. The reconstruction or restoration of the destroyed or damaged structure is
substantially completed within 12 months of the date of destruction or damage to the
structure; the Planning Board may extend this deadline for up to 12 additional
months for good cause, including but not limited to evidence of delayed insurance
processing despite timely claims submission.
Reconstruction or replacement of a nonconforming structure that is voluntary and has an
estimated cost exceeding fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before
such reconstruction or replacement, is permitted, provided that such reconstruction or
replacement is in conformity with the dimensional standards of the zoning district in
which it is located and neither the floor area nor the volume of any building setback
encroachment is increased, all as determined by the Planning Board. In no case shall a
structure be reconstructed or replaced so as to increase its nonconformity.
Further Limitations in Shoreland Zones.
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Chapter, new principal and accessory structures
in the shoreland zone and expansion, reconstruction and relocation of nonconforming
structures in the shoreland zone are subject to the following additional limitations and
requirements:
CHAPTER 230 § V6 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 53
New Principal and Accessory Structures in Shoreland Zone. All new principal and
accessory structures to be built or installed in the shoreland zone, excluding functionally
water-dependent uses, must meet the required water body, tributary stream, or wetland
setbacks in § VIII__ A. (Shoreland Zoning, Dimensional Standards).
Expansions of Nonconforming Structures in Shoreland Zone. A nonconforming structure
located in the shoreland zone may be added to or expanded after obtaining a permit
from the same permitting authority as that for a new structure, if such addition or
expansion does not increase the non-conformity of the structure and is in accordance
with subparagraphs (1), (2), (3) and (4) below.
Expansion of any portion of a structure located in the shoreland zone and within
twenty-five (25) feet of the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream,
or upland edge of a wetland is prohibited, even if the expansion will not increase
nonconformity with the water body, tributary stream, or wetland setback
requirement. Expansion of an accessory structure that is located closer to the
normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a
wetland than the principal structure is prohibited, even if the expansion will not
increase nonconformity with the water body, tributary stream, or wetland setback
requirement.
Notwithstanding paragraph B (1), above, if a legally existing nonconforming
principal structure located in the shoreland zone is entirely located less than
twenty-five (25) feet from the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary
stream, or upland edge of a wetland, that structure may be expanded as follows, as
long as all other applicable municipal land use standards are met.
The maximum total footprint for the principal structure may not be expanded to
a size greater than 800 square feet or thirty (30) percent larger than the
footprint that existed on January 1, 1989, whichever is greater. The maximum
height of the principal structure may not be made greater than fifteen (15) feet
or the height of the existing structure, whichever is greater.
All other legally existing nonconforming principal and accessory structures located
in the shoreland zone that do not meet the water body, tributary stream, or wetland
setback requirements may be expanded or altered as follows, as long as other
applicable municipal land use standards are met, and the expansion is not
prohibited by subparagraph A above.
For structures located less than seventy-five (75) feet from the normal highwater line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland, the
maximum combined total footprint for all structures may not be expanded to a
size greater than one thousand (1,000) square feet or thirty (30) percent larger
than the footprint that existed on January 1, 1989, whichever is greater. The
maximum height of any structure may not be made greater than twenty (20)
feet or the height of the existing structure, whichever is greater. 
CHAPTER 230 § V6 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 54
For structures located less than one hundred (100) feet from the normal highwater line of a great pond classified as GPA or a river flowing to a great pond
classified as GPA, the maximum combined total footprint for all structures may
not be expanded to a size greater than one thousand five hundred (1,500)
square feet or thirty (30) percent larger than the footprint that existed on
January 1, 1989, whichever is greater. The maximum height of any structure
may not be made greater than twenty-five (25) feet or the height of the existing
structure, whichever is greater. Any portion of those structures located less
than seventy-five (75) feet from the normal high-water line of a water body,
tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland must meet the footprint and
height limits referenced in (1) above.
In addition to the limitations in subparagraphs (a) and (b), for structures that
are legally nonconforming due to their location within the Resource Protection
Overlay District when located at less than two hundred fifty (250) feet from the
normal high-water line of a water body or the upland edge of a wetland, the
maximum combined total footprint for all structures may not be expanded to a
size greater than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet or thirty (30)
percent larger than the footprint that existed at the time the Resource
Protection District was established on the lot, whichever is greater. The
maximum height of any structure may not be made greater than twenty-five
(25) feet or the height of the existing structure, whichever is greater, except
that any portion of those structures located less than seventy-five (75) feet
from the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland
edge of a wetland must meet the footprint and height limits referenced in (1)
above.
An approved plan for expansion of a nonconforming structure located in the
shoreland zone must be recorded by the applicant with the registry of deeds, within
ninety (90) days of approval. The recorded plan must show the existing and
proposed footprint of the nonconforming structure, the existing and proposed
structure height, the footprint of any other structures on the parcel, the shoreland
zone boundary and evidence of approval by the municipal review authority.
Reconstruction in Shoreland Zone
1. Any nonconforming structure located in the shoreland zone which is removed,
damaged, or destroyed, regardless of the cause, by more than fifty (50) percent of
the market value of the structure before such damage, destruction, or removal, may
be reconstructed or replaced, provided that a permit is obtained within twelve (12)
months of the date of said damage, destruction, or removal, and provided that such
reconstruction or replacement is in compliance with the water body, tributary
stream or wetland setback requirement to the greatest practical extent as
determined by the Planning Board in accordance with the purposes of this chapter.
In no case shall a structure be reconstructed or replaced so as to increase its
nonconformity.
CHAPTER 230 § V6 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 55
2. If the reconstructed or replacement structure located in the shoreland zone is less
than the required setback, it shall not be any larger than the original structure,
except as allowed pursuant to Subsection A above, as determined by the
nonconforming floor area and volume of the reconstructed or replaced structure at
its new location. If the total floor area and volume of the original structure can be
relocated or reconstructed beyond the required setback area, no portion of the
relocated or reconstructed structure shall be replaced or constructed at less than
the setback requirement for a new structure. When it is necessary to remove
vegetation in order to replace or reconstruct a structure, vegetation shall be
replanted in accordance with subparagraph D (2) below.
3. Any nonconforming structure located in the shoreland zone which is located less
than the required setback from a water body, tributary stream, or wetland and
which is removed by fifty (50) percent or less of the market value, or damaged or
destroyed by fifty (50) percent or less of the market value of the structure, excluding
normal maintenance and repair, may be reconstructed in place if a permit is
obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer within one (1) year of such damage,
destruction or removal.
4. In determining whether the structure reconstruction or replacement meets the water
body, tributary stream or wetland setback to the greatest practical extent, the
Planning Board shall consider, in addition to the criteria in (D)(2) below, the
physical condition and type of foundation present, if any.
Relocation in Shoreland Zone
1. A nonconforming structure located in the shoreland zone may be relocated within
the boundaries of the parcel on which the structure is located, provided that the site
of relocation conforms to the water body, tributary stream or wetland setback
requirement to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Planning Board,
and provided that the applicant demonstrates that the present subsurface sewage
disposal system meets the requirements of State law and the State of Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules (Rules), or that a new system can be
installed in compliance with the law and said Rules. In no case shall a structure be
relocated in a manner that causes the structure to be more nonconforming.
2. In determining whether the building relocation meets the water body, tributary
stream or wetland setback requirement to the greatest practical extent, the
Planning Board shall consider the size of the lot, the slope of the land, the potential
for soil erosion, the location of other structures on the property and on adjacent
properties, the location of the septic system and other on-site soils suitable for
septic systems, and the type and amount of vegetation to be removed to
accomplish the relocation. When it is necessary to remove vegetation within the
water or wetland setback area in order to relocate a structure, the Planning Board
shall require replanting of native vegetation to compensate for the destroyed
vegetation. In addition, the area from which the relocated structure was removed
must be replanted with vegetation. Replanting shall be required as follows:
CHAPTER 230 § V7 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 56
a) Trees removed in order to relocate a structure must be replanted with at least
one native tree, three feet in height, for every tree removed. If more than five
trees are planted, no one species of tree shall make up more than fifty (50)
percent of the number of trees planted. Replaced trees must be planted no
further from the water or wetland than the trees that were removed.
b) Other woody and herbaceous vegetation, and ground cover, that are removed
or destroyed in order to relocate a structure must be reestablished. An area at
least the same size as the area where vegetation and/or ground cover was
disturbed, damaged, or removed must be reestablished within the setback
area. The vegetation and/or ground cover must consist of similar native
vegetation and/or ground cover that was disturbed, destroyed, or removed.
c) Where feasible, when a structure is relocated on a parcel, the original location
of the structure shall be replanted with vegetation which may consist of
grasses, shrubs, trees, or a combination thereof.
Reconstruction in Floodplains
Reconstruction in floodplains. Any building in existence prior to January 1, 2012, which
is located in an area of special flood hazard and which is thereafter substantially
improved, as defined in Chapter 106 of the Saco City Code, may be elevated pursuant
to the standards of Chapter 106, and may be allowed to exceed the height limits of this
chapter without need for a variance from the Board of Appeals, as long as all of the
following standards are met:
The overall height of the reconstructed building may exceed the required height in
the zone in which it is located without the need for a variance, but by no more than
the distance that the lowest floor (including basement) is raised above its original
elevation during reconstruction.
Any reconstructed building shall meet all of the requirements of the Department of
Environmental Protection Sand Dune Act and Chapter 355 Regulations, if it is
located in a designated dune area.
CHAPTER 230 § VI1 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 57
Good Neighbor Performance Standards
Applicability
The standards set forth in this article apply to all uses in all zoning districts, unless otherwise
stated.
Dust, Fumes, Vapors, and Gasses
Emission of dust, fly ash, fumes, vapors, or gases which could damage human health,
animals, vegetation, or property, or which could soil or stain persons or property, as
discernable at any point beyond the lot line of the commercial or industrial establishment
creating that emission shall be prohibited. All such emissions shall be compliant with
applicable federal and state regulations.
Explosive Materials
No highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids, or gases shall be stored in bulk above
ground, unless they are located in anchored tanks at least seventy-five (75) feet from lot
lines and roadways. Underground tanks shall be set back forty (40) feet from lot lines. All
applicable federal, state, and local regulations shall be observed.
Propane gas tanks are exempt from the subsection above. Aboveground propane tanks
are governed by the applicable NFPA standard as adopted by the State of Maine,
subject to the following exceptions:
1. Freestanding propane tank installations shall be fully fenced or screened with
vegetation.
Exterior Lighting
New, modified or replacement lighting shall be designed to provide the minimum
illumination necessary to ensure adequate vision, safety, and comfort. Glare shall not
extend beyond the limits of the property boundaries.
New, modified, or replacement lighting serving nonresidential uses and multi-family
housing shall conform to the following standards:
1. Lighting fixtures mounted on masts or poles shall be cutoff fixtures (Figure 6-1).
Floodlighting or other directional lighting may be used for supplemental illumination
of vehicle sales or storage areas or other exterior sales display areas, provided that
the floodlights are installed no higher than twelve (12) feet above ground level, are
aimed to avoid direct brightness being seen from adjacent streets or properties,
and utilize lamps with an initial lumen rating not exceeding thirty-nine thousand
(39,000) lumens. The City shall have the right to inspect the completed lighting
installation.
2. Except for ornamental lighting fixtures that utilize lamps with initial lumen ratings
not exceeding eight thousand five hundred (8,500) lumens, wall-mounted building 
CHAPTER 230 § VI4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 58
lights shall include full face shielding consisting of either a solid panel or full face
louvers. Exposed lamps, reflectors or refractors shall not be visible from any part of
the fixture except the bottom, light-emitting surface.
3. Light fixtures located on or within canopies shall be recessed into the ceiling of the
canopy so that the lamp, reflector, or lens is not visible from public streets and to
limit the direction of light as required for a cutoff fixture.
4. The maximum height for pole-mounted light fixtures is thirty (30) feet above grade.
5. The maximum light fixture height for building-mounted light fixtures shall be the
upper limit of the vertical building face.
6. Lamps in exterior light fixtures shall be Light Emitting Diode (LED) and/or a similar
technology of greater energy-saving ability.
7. The mounting height of period or historical fixtures shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet
above grade.
8. The illumination of access drives shall provide for a uniformity ratio of not more
than 4:1 (ratio of average to minimum illuminance). The illumination of parking lots
and vehicle sales areas shall provide for a uniformity ratio of not more than 20:1
(ratio of maximum to minimum illuminance).
9. The maximum illumination level within access drives, parking lots, and sales areas
shall be not more than 8.0 foot-candles measured at the ground surface.
10. The maximum illumination level at the property line of a nonresidential or multifamily housing use with abutting properties in a residential district or the Main and
Beach (MB) District shall be not exceed 0.1 foot-candle.
11. Areas directly under canopies shall be illuminated so that the uniformity ratio of
average to minimum illuminance shall be not greater than three to one (3:1) with an
average illumination level of not more than twenty (20) foot-candles. Areas of
access drives, parking lots, sales display areas, etc., which are adjacent to
canopies shall taper down in illumination level from the illumination level permitted
under the canopy to the maximum illumination level permitted for the access drive,
parking lot, or sales display area adjacent to the canopy within a horizontal distance
equivalent to the height of the canopy.
12. The maximum illumination levels and uniformity ratios for areas other than parking
lots, access drives, sales areas, and canopies shall be compatible with the overall
lighting of the project and are subject to approval by Planning and Development
Department staff and the Planning Board.
13. Exterior lighting shall be dark sky compliant, and consistent with guidelines
promulgated by the International Dark-Sky Association.
Outdoor sports and recreational fields and courts, and for multi-family housing uses
that are located outside the right-of-way of a public street are exempt from the
provisions of subsection B above.
CHAPTER 230 § VI5 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 59
Figure 6-1 Diagram of a cutoff fixture
Noise
Maximum permissible sound-pressure levels.
1. Excessive noise shall be muffled so as not to be a nuisance due to intermittence,
heat frequency, shrillness, or volume.
2. The maximum permissible sound-pressure level of any continuous, regular, or
frequent source of sound shall not exceed the following limits at the lot line of
adjoining properties.
Table 6-1. Sound-pressure level limits measure in A-weighted decibels (dB(A))
Sound-Pressure Level Limits Measured in dB(A)
District Day Night
Industrial districts 65 dBA 60 dBA
Commercial districts 60 dBA 50 dBA
Residential and conservation districts 55 dBA 45dBA
3. Where the emitting and receiving premises are in different zones, the limits
governing the stricter zone shall apply to any regulated noise entering that zone.
4. The levels specified may be exceeded by ten (10) dBA for a single period, no
longer than fifteen (15) minutes, in any one (1) day.
5. No person shall engage in, cause, or permit any person to be engaged in loud
construction activities on a site abutting any residential use from 9 PM to 7 AM. 
CHAPTER 230 § VI6 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 60
Exempt activities. The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the soundpressure level regulations:
1. Home maintenance activities.
2. Noise created by chainsaws, construction, and maintenance activities other than
home maintenance, between 7 AM and 9 PM, Monday through Saturday, and
between 10 AM and 7 PM on Sunday.
3. The noises of safety signals, warning devices, and emergency pressure relief
valves and other emergency activity.
4. Traffic noise.
5. Noise created by refuse and solid waste collection, provided that the activity is
conducted between 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
6. Emergency construction or repair work by public utilities, at any hour.
7. Noise created by recreational activities which are permitted by law and for which a
license or permit has been granted by the City, including, but not limited to,
parades, sporting events, concerts, and fireworks displays.
Nonconformance of existing industrial sources. Existing industrial noise sources that are
in operation at the time of enactment of this chapter shall be provided a permanent ten
(10) dB(A) noise level allowance over noise levels otherwise required herein.
Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Saco Police Department to enforce this section.
Odors
No land use or establishment shall produce offensive or harmful odors that are perceptible
beyond lot lines.
Screening
Storage areas, machinery installations, sand and gravel extraction operations, and areas
used for the storage or collection of discarded automobiles, auto parts, metal, or other
articles of salvage or refuse shall have sufficient setbacks and screening to provide a
visual buffer, sufficient to minimize adverse impacts on nearby properties.
1. At a minimum, the screening shall include a dense evergreen hedge at a height of
six (6) feet above grade. Such plantings shall be maintained as a visual screen.
Native, deer-resistant, and salt tolerant species are encouraged. Plants that die
shall be replaced within one growing season.
2. Where a potential safety hazard to children would be likely to arise, physical
screening sufficient to deter small children from entering the premises shall be
provided and shall be maintained in good condition.
Nonresidential uses abutting residential districts. 
CHAPTER 230 § VI8 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 61
1. The side and rear yard of a nonresidential use which abuts a residential,
conservation, or Resource Protection Overlay District shall be maintained in a
natural state to provide a visual screen between districts.
a) Where natural buffering does not exist, all side and rear yards shall be
landscaped to provide a visual screen between districts.
b) A buffer screen no less than six (6) feet in width and four (4) feet in height shall
be established, consisting of tree plantings, hedges, fencing, earth berms,
stone walls, or combinations thereof.
Sanitary Waste Disposal
All plumbing shall be connected to public collection and treatment facilities where such
facilities are available. When public facilities are not available, wastewater disposal
facilities shall be installed in compliance with the regulations of the Maine Department of
Health and Human Services and the Maine Department of Environmental Protection.
A subsurface wastewater disposal system or other underground system for on-site
sewage disposal shall not be used for any individual residential use, or combination of
residential uses, that has a design sewage flow of more than two thousand (2,000)
gallons per day, and is located over a mapped sand and gravel aquifer as shown on the
most recent Significant Sand and Gravel Aquifers map(s) published by the Maine
Geological Survey.
A subsurface waste disposal system or other underground system for on-site sewage
disposal shall not be used for nonresidential use that has a design sewage flow of more
than two thousand (2,000) gallons per day.
Storage and Handling of Chemicals and Similar Materials
All outdoor storage facilities for liquid fuels, chemicals, industrial wastes, and potentially
harmful materials shall be located on impervious pavement or other impervious surface
approved by the Director of Public Works or their designee, and shall be completely
enclosed by an impervious dike which shall be high enough to contain the total volume
of liquid kept within the storage area, plus the rain falling into this storage area during a
one hundred (100) year, twenty-four (24) hour storm, so that such liquid shall not be able
to seep into the ground surrounding the paved storage area. Storage tanks for home
heating oil and vehicle fuel, not exceeding two (2) five hundred fifty (550) gallon tanks,
may be exempted from this requirement in situations where neither a high seasonal
water table is within fifteen (15) inches of the surface, nor rapidly permeable sandy soils
are involved.
New or expanded nonresidential uses shall conform to the following additional
standards:
CHAPTER 230 § VI10 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 62
1. Facilities shall be designed and operated so that all stored, spilled, or leaked liquid
fuels, chemicals, wastes, or other potentially harmful materials cannot infiltrate into
the ground.
2. Areas for the loading, unloading, and transfer of fuel, chemicals, and similar
materials shall be designed to prevent discharge to the groundwater.
3. Uncovered storage areas shall have stormwater drainage facilities that provide for
the disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner that will not adversely affect
groundwater quality.
4. The discharge of fluids from motor vehicles or equipment onto the ground shall not
be permitted. Service to vehicles or equipment shall be conducted on an
impervious surface that is designed to prevent discharge to the groundwater.
Damaged or junked vehicles, including but not limited to unregistered vehicles,
uninspected vehicles, unserviceable vehicles, junk vehicles, insurance wrecks, and
other vehicles likely to leak fluids shall be stored on an impervious surface that is
designed to prevent discharge to the groundwater, unless the Planning Board finds
that other municipal or state regulations are adequate to prevent the discharge of
fluids onto the ground.
5. The discharge from interior floor drains shall not be directed to a stream, storm
drain, dry well, or subsurface wastewater disposal system.
Water Quality
No activity shall deposit on or into the ground or discharge to the waters of the state any
pollutant that, by itself or in combination with other activities or substances, will impair
designated uses or the water classification of the water body.
CHAPTER 230 § VII1 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 63
Performance Standards
Accessory Dwelling Units (ADU)
ADUs are intended to serve as affordable independent living quarters accessory to a
single-family home. ADUs are permitted for any single-family home, limited to one ADU
for each individual lot. All such housing units shall meet the standards specified in Table
7-1 below.
For the purposes of calculating the required minimum lot area per dwelling unit, an ADU
shall not be considered a second dwelling unit.
All ADUs shall be constructed on permanent foundations that meet applicable building
codes, placed to the side or rear of the front wall of the principal residence.
A detached ADU shall share the existing access drive of the primary residential dwelling
unit.
If the lot is served by public sewer, both the single-family home and the ADU must be
connected to public sewer.
If the lot is served by public water, both the single-family home and the ADU must be
connected to public water.
Any newly created ADU shall be protected by a fire sprinkler system approved by the
State Fire Marshal’s Office and the Saco Fire Department. The existing residence does
not need to be protected by a fire sprinkler system.
Table 7-1 Standards for Attached and Detached ADUs
Standard Attached ADU Detached ADU
Shares the lot with a single-family dwelling Required Required
Relationship to the single-family dwelling Attached, or situated
within accessory building
Detached
Maximum gross floor area* 800 sf 800 sf
One unit occupied by owner Required Required
Exterior design in harmony with
neighborhood
Required Required
Position on lot in relation to the singlefamily dwelling
n/a Side or rear
May be rented out on less than a monthly
basis
Prohibited Prohibited
Separate entrance on front of primary
dwelling facing the street
Prohibited N/A
Adult Businesses
Location. Adult businesses shall not be located:
CHAPTER 230 § VII3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 64
1. In locations where the customer entrance to the adult business would be closer
than five hundred (500) feet, measured in a straight line, to the nearest point on the
boundary of any property that is:
a) Occupied by a church, playground, amusement park, public facility, dwelling,
school, or park; or
b) Located in a residential zone.
2. In any location where the customer entrance would be closer than one thousand
(1,000) feet to the nearest point on the boundary of any property which is occupied
by another "adult" business.
B. Displays. There shall be no outside displays, window displays, or interior displays visible
from the outside of the building, of any materials, text or devices displaying, exhibiting or
describing specified sexual activities, sexual materials, or paraphernalia.
C. Time of operation. No adult business shall be open for business from 11 PM to 7 AM.
D. Review authority. Proposals for adult businesses are subject to Site Plan Review.
E. Operating standards. No adult business shall be permitted to operate viewing booths or
viewing facilities.
Agriculture
Animal Breeding or Care. The keeping or raising of animals, including fowl, for any
agricultural purposes is subject to the following standards:
1. All pens, stables, barns, coops, or other building shelters for animals shall be set
back no less than one hundred fifty (150) feet from lot lines.
2. Animal breeding or care is permitted only on lots of five (5) acres or greater. The
area of water bodies and wetlands may be included in calculating lot size.
3. No manure shall be stored within three hundred (300) feet of the normal high-water
line of any water body, watercourse, wetland, or wells used to supply water for
human consumption.
4. The landowner shall fence in areas on the lot in which the animals are allowed to
roam with a fence of a type and height adequate to contain livestock.
5. Kennels and runs shall be constructed of masonry or a similar material to provide
for cleanliness, ease of maintenance, and noise control.
Noncommercial Keeping of Chickens
The keeping of a small number of female domestic chickens shall be allowed on a
noncommercial basis. The intent of this section is to prevent noise, odor, unsanitary
animal living conditions, unsanitary waste storage and removal, the attraction of
predators, rodents, insects, or parasites, loose animals leaving the owner's 
CHAPTER 230 § VII3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 65
property, and to ensure that domestic chickens do not adversely impact the
neighborhood.
a) A maximum of six (6) chickens per lot are permitted.
b) Chickens must be kept in a clean, dry, and odor-free enclosure at all times.
Chickens shall be secured within a henhouse during non-daylight hours but
may be allowed in a securely fenced yard or chicken pen during daylight hours,
provided they do not disturb the use or enjoyment of neighboring lots due to
noise, odor or other adverse impact.
c) Henhouses, chicken pens, and fences in yards for chickens shall only be
located in rear yards and subject to a twenty-five (25) foot setback from all
property lines. For a corner lot or other property where no rear yard exists, a
side yard may be used as long as the twenty-five (25) foot setback is met.
d) Provision must be made for the storage and removal of chicken manure to the
satisfaction of the Animal Control Officer. All stored manure shall be covered
by a fully enclosed structure with a roof or lid over the entire structure. No more
than three (3) cubic feet of manure shall be stored at one time. In addition, the
henhouse, chicken pen, and surrounding area must be kept free from trash
and accumulated droppings.
e) Odors from chickens or chicken manure shall not be perceptible at the property
boundaries.
Prohibited activities
No person shall sell eggs or engage in chicken breeding or fertilizer production
for commercial purposes.
The slaughtering of chickens for commercial purposes is prohibited.
Permits required
A permit is required from the Code Enforcement Office for the keeping of
domesticated chickens. The permit is specific to the permittee and may not be
assigned. In the event that the keeping of chickens is discontinued for longer
than six (6) months, the permit shall become void.
A building permit is required for the construction of a henhouse and chicken
pen, or conversion of any existing structure or portion of structure
Farm Stands. Roadside stands for the sale of agricultural products shall be considered
an accessory use and permitted in districts where retail sales otherwise are not allowed.
These stands shall adhere to the following standards:
The farm stand meets the setback requirements of the district it is located in and is
setback a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet.
The farm stand has a gross floor area, inclusive of outside sales area adjacent to
the structure, of not more than two thousand (2,000) square feet,
CHAPTER 230 § VII4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 66
Parking spaces are provided off the road right-of-way.
The farm stand is accessory to the principal use, i.e. a commercial agricultural
business.
Products sold at the farm stand are limited to the following:
a) Agricultural products produced as part of the commercial agricultural use on
site.
b) Foodstuffs from products produced as part of the commercial agricultural use.
c) Other locally or regionally produced foodstuffs, including processed food
products such as jams, jellies, pickles, sauces, or baked goods.
d) Locally or regionally produced handicrafts, whether produced on or off the
premises.
e) Produce grown on nearby residential properties.
The sales area devoted to the sale of foodstuffs and handicrafts not produced by
the commercial agricultural use shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total sales
area.
Campgrounds
Campground Design
A campground must be constructed on at least ten (10) acres of land, and all
camping units or structures shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from
any residence not owned or used by the campground owners.
Each area proposed for a tent site or parking space for a travel trailer, pickup
camper, motorized camper, tent trailer, or similar temporary structure must be at
least two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet in area. The sites shall be
roughly rectangular, with no dimension less than thirty (30) feet.
No rigid enclosed addition shall be affixed to a recreational vehicle other than a
recreational vehicle accessory enclosure.
A vegetative buffer strip is required in areas visible from neighboring properties.
No new campsites shall be created within one hundred (100) feet of the exterior lot
lines of a campground.
Park Operations
Parks shall be open only between April 15 and October 31.
From November 1 to April 14 of the following year, no person shall occupy any
site, the water services to all sites shall be turned off or disconnected, and the
electrical service to all sites shall be turned off or disconnected. Storage of
unoccupied recreational vehicles is permitted when the park is closed.
CHAPTER 230 § VII5 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 67
The normal maintenance of open space areas, roads, and utilities in a campground
shall be the responsibility of the campground’s management. Normal maintenance
activities do not require a permit, and include:
a) Installation of bark mulch, wood chips, compost, and loam for landscaping and
play surfaces purposes.
b) Repair and maintenance of roadways and parking areas, provided facility
dimensions are not expanded beyond existing conditions and existing
stormwater volumes and drainage patterns are not altered.
c) Addition of no more than four (4) inches of crushed stone and/or gravel to
existing driveways, parking areas, drainage facilities, and play areas.
Permitted Accessory Uses are primarily for the use of registered occupants of the
campground:
1. Administrative and maintenance facilities.
2. Active and passive outdoor recreational facilities, including, but not limited to,
ballfields, shuffleboard courts, swimming pools, playgrounds, and trails.
3. Indoor assembly and recreational facilities.
4. Restrooms, washrooms, and shower facilities.
5. Self-service and coin-operated laundry facilities.
6. Convenience stores and retail located at least one hundred (100) feet from a public
street and not open to members of the public who are not registered occupants or
guests of registered occupants of the campground.
7. Freestanding decks, sheds, and recreational vehicle accessory enclosures.
8. Dumping stations for the discharge of liquid septic and gray water wastes from a
recreational vehicle or trailer holding tank. All dumping stations shall be connected
to a public sewer, or sealed holding tanks. Dumping stations are for the use of
registered occupants of the campground only.
Prohibited Uses. No trailer, recreational vehicle, or mobile homes which contains more
than four hundred (400) square feet shall be located anywhere within the campground.
Shoreland areas. Campgrounds in shoreland areas are subject to the standards in
Article VIII.
Earth Removal
Applicability. This section governs the removal of fifty (50) or more cubic yards (in any
one calendar year) of material, including without limitation, topsoil, rock, sand, gravel,
clay, peat, or other similar material from its natural location. Blasting activities are
regulated by Chapter 71 of the City of Saco Code. Earth removal use and activities 
CHAPTER 230 § VII5 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 68
conducted within a Shoreland Zoning Overly District may also require review and
approval as “Mineral Extraction” under Article VIII8.
Permit and approval required. Earth removal requires the following permits and
approvals:
1. Site Plan Review by the Planning Board
2. Conditional Use Permit by the Planning Board
3. Special Permit by the CEO
Expansion of Operations. The removal of earth may not be extended as a
nonconforming use beyond the setback lines required of the specific lot or parcel of land
upon which such removal operations are in progress at the time at which such use has
become nonconforming without securing a variance from the Board of Appeals. Adjacent
parcels in the same or different ownerships shall not be eligible for exemption under the
nonconforming use provisions unless earth removal operations have been in progress
on those adjacent parcels prior to the enactment of these provisions.
Standards. Earth removal operations must meet the following standards:
1. Permit Required. No existing rock, gravel or sandpit will be extended or expanded
until the owner has complied with the provisions of this chapter and obtained a
permit therefor.
2. No operation shall create any disturbances of water sources. Fill shall not restrict a
floodway, channel, or natural drainageway.
3. No operation shall result in the discharge of contaminants to any surface water or
groundwater resource.
4. The operation, when terminated, shall not detract from the appearance or value of
nearby property.
5. The operation shall not abuse or destroy the ecological balance of the area.
6. The edge of working operations shall be set back a minimum of one hundred fifty
(150) feet from property lines.
7. No excavation shall be extended below the grade of adjacent streets unless the
excavation is situated at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from the street line.
8. The operation shall be shielded from nearby property with adequate screening,
consisting of a vegetated buffer at least fifteen (15) feet wide, planted with the
following:
a) Shade trees that are a minimum of two (2) and one half (2.5) inches to three
(3) inches caliper, planted at least every thirty-five (35) feet along the road
frontage, and along common property lines.
b) Dense medium-height shrubs that are greater than three (3) feet in height on
maturity. The Planning Board may allow the use of earth berms, stone walls 
CHAPTER 230 § VII5 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 69
and other permanent landscape features to substitute for some of the shrub
requirements.
9. Soil shall not be left in a disturbed, unreclaimed state any longer than necessary,
and shall be treated in accordance with an approved soil erosion and sediment
control plan that demonstrates that hazards from excessive slopes or standing
water are avoided.
10. Where an embankment must be left upon the completion of operations, it shall be
at a slope not steeper than one (1) foot vertical to four (4) feet horizontal.
Embankments around any pond or water body also shall be a slope not steeper
than one (1) foot vertical to four (4) feet horizontal, and this gradient shall extend at
least six (6) feet from the edge of said water body toward its center. These
dimensional standards shall also apply to the creation of new farm ponds, and the
recontouring of existing ponds when such recontouring is proposed by the
applicant.
11. Topsoil and subsoil suitable for purposes of revegetation shall, to the extent
required for restoration, be stripped from the location of extraction and stockpiled
for use in restoring the location after extraction operations have ceased. Such
stockpiles shall be protected from erosion consistent with erosion prevention
standards in this chapter, and a soil erosion and sediment control plan approved by
the Planning Board.
12. All vehicles removing material from an earth removal operation shall be covered to
prevent materials from falling from the vehicle. It shall be the responsibility of the
owner of the earth removal operation to ensure compliance.
13. All access/egress roads leading from the excavation site to public ways shall be
treated with approved materials, such as bituminous pavement, crushed stone, or
concrete, to reduce dust and mud for a distance of at least one hundred (100) feet
from such public ways. Public ways giving access to the site shall be kept free of
clay, gravel, mud or other materials from the earth removal operation.
14. No earth removal activity shall utilize a substandard public road for primary access.
15. Excavation of peat deposits shall, where permitted, be conducted in accordance
with all Natural Resources Conservation Service best management practices.
Where ponds or standing water will be created or enlarged by the excavations, the
resulting depth shall be controlled in order to avoid creating pools of stagnant water
or other conditions unsuitable for fish and waterfowl (after reclamation). After
consulting with technical experts, the Planning Board may require the creation of
islands or an irregular-shaped shoreline in order to create favorable waterfowl
nesting habitat conditions. Discharges into adjacent water bodies or watercourses
shall minimize increases in turbidity, sedimentation, pH levels, or fiber pollution
which would be likely to affect fisheries.
16. The hours of operation of the extraction site shall be limited to 7 AM to 8 PM,
unless otherwise specified by the Planning Board. 
CHAPTER 230 § VII5 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 70
17. A reclamation plan, in conformance with the standards in the “Maine Erosion
Sediment Control Handbook for Construction: Best Management Practices” by the
Cumberland County Soil and Water Conservation District and the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection, latest revision, shall be submitted, to be
reviewed and found acceptable by the Planning Board. No permit shall be issued
without a financial guarantee to ensure compliance with the reclamation plan. The
financial guarantee shall be in an amount recommended by the CEO and approved
by the Planning Board sufficient to guarantee implementation of the approved
reclamation plan.
18. No permit shall be issued for a period to exceed three (3) years, although such
permit may be renewed, prior to expiration, for additional periods in the same
manner. At the point of renewal, the Planning Board may require conformance with
new provisions of the rules and regulations governing the permitted operations and
may recalculate the surety guarantee accordingly.
Conditions. The Planning Board may impose other reasonable conditions to safeguard
the health, safety, and welfare of the community, including those that relate to:
1. Type and location of temporary structures
2. Routes for transporting material
3. Provision of temporary or permanent drainage
4. Disposition of stumps, brush and boulders
5. Cleaning, repair, and/or resurfacing of streets used in removal activity
6. Approval from the Department of Environmental Protection for all extraction
activities
7. Restrictions on times of hauling material to avoid conflicts with periods of heavy
pedestrian or school traffic.
Insurance. Every property owner, before commencing removal of earth material, shall
file with the Code Enforcement Department a certificate of insurance, in an amount not
less than $1,000,000, against liability arising from production or activities or operations
incident thereto conducted or carried out under or by virtue of any law or ordinance
imposed by the Planning Board, and such insurance shall be kept in full force and effect
during the period of operation and for 12 months thereafter. No existing rock, gravel or
sandpit will be extended or expanded until the owner has complied with the provisions of
this chapter and obtained a permit therefor.
Exemptions. The following earthmoving activities shall be exempt from these standards:
1. The removal or transfer of less than fifty (50) cubic yards of material from or onto
any lot in any twelve (12) month period.
2. The removal or transfer of material incidental to construction, alteration, or repair of
a building or in the grading and landscaping incidental thereto. 
CHAPTER 230 § VII6 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 71
3. The removal or transfer of material incidental to construction, alteration, or repair of
a public or private way or essential services.
4. Gravel pit with a valid, local approval prior to January 2, 1985.
Essential Services
Special dimensional standards for essential services and structures that are necessary for
the furnishing of essential services:
Structures under four hundred (400) square feet are exempt from the minimum lot and
yard requirements of Table 4-1.
City sewer pump stations may be up to nine-hundred fifty (950) square feet and retain
their exemption from this chapter’s dimensional requirements if they are in a business or
industrial zone and at least fifty (50) feet from a dwelling unit.
High-Voltage Transmission Lines
A. Findings. High-voltage transmission lines have the appearance of large-scale industrial
facilities and are frequently incompatible with nearby residential areas. The City intends
to limit or mitigate, where possible, such adverse impacts.
B. Burial. All high-voltage transmission lines shall be buried where they pass within two
hundred (200) feet of any residence, school building, school playground, publicly owned
recreational facility, field or park, or any occupied place of employment, but otherwise
they may be placed aboveground. When installed underground, they shall be installed in
locations and in sections of sufficient length so that unsightly transition structures shall
be minimized.
Home-Based Retail in Residential Districts
A home-based retail use must meet the following standards:
A. In order to retain the essential residential character of the neighborhood, sales, storage,
and display of merchandise shall occur within a building. In residential districts, homebased retail uses shall be located only within residential structures or accessory
structures that existed as of the date of adoption of this chapter, 2020.
B. Existing buildings are not required to conform to setbacks.
C. All outside lighting shall be shielded to avoid glare and light trespass.
D. Exterior alterations shall be minimized.
E. Outdoor storage is prohibited.
F. The floor area used for the business shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet,
or fifty (50) percent of the existing building floor space, whichever is greater. 
CHAPTER 230 § VII9 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 72
G. No food or beverages are sold by the business.
H. Parking for home-based retail uses shall be located to the side or rear of buildings.
I. New parking spaces and new access drives shall be (ten) 10 feet from side and rear lot
lines.
J. For both new and existing parking areas, the Planning Board may impose conditions of
approval, including plantings, fences, earth berms, and other screens as buffers, to
ensure adequate protection for neighbors.
K. Hours of operation shall be limited to 8 AM to 6 PM, unless otherwise approved by the
Planning Board.
Home Occupation
A. Permitted uses. A home occupation shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Art studio or other crafts studio.
2. Tailor or seamstress.
3. Personal services salons, limited to no more than two clients at one time.
4. Pet care, limited to no more than two clients at one time.
5. Teaching or tutoring facility.
6. Primarily online businesses, where activity occurs primarily off-premises.
7. Office of a lawyer, engineer, architect, accountant, planner, software or website
developer, realtor, insurance agent, medical/dental professional, or other similar
professional.
B. Prohibited home occupations. A home occupation shall not be interpreted to include the
following:
1. Facility for the repair of motor vehicles.
2. The retailing of any item not produced on the premises.
3. Medical marijuana caregivers.
C. Standards. A home occupation must meet the following standards:
1. The occupation or profession shall be carried on wholly within the principal building
or within a building or other structure accessory thereto.
2. Not more than two (2) employees, other than family members, shall be employed in
the home occupation.
3. There shall be no exterior display, no exterior sign except as permitted by this
chapter, no exterior storage of materials, and no other indication of the home
occupation, or variation from the residential character of the building. 
CHAPTER 230 § VII10 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 73
4. No nuisance, adverse noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare, or electrical
disturbance shall be generated.
5. No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in such volumes that it will
create hazardous conditions in the neighborhood.
6. The home occupation shall not occupy more than the equivalent of twenty-five (25)
percent of the total floor area of the dwelling unit.
7. Home occupations in residential districts are reviewed by the Planning Board as
conditional uses, or by staff as minor conditional uses.
Manufactured Housing Units - Siting Requirements
A. Manufactured housing units that are placed on lots outside of mobile home parks shall
comply with the following standards:
1. Be constructed in accordance with applicable state and federal standards.
2. Have a pitched roof with a minimum pitch of two (2) inches vertical for each twelve
(12) inches of horizontal run and be covered by wood, asphalt, or fiberglass
composition shingles.
3. Have exterior wall surfaces covered with materials similar to conventional
construction, such as, but not limited to, cedar shakes, wood, vinyl, or metal
clapboards, boards, and batten siding, etc., but not including flat, ridged, or
corrugated metal or plastic panels.
4. Be placed on a permanent foundation such as a concrete pad over gravel base,
with skirting around the bottom of the structure, or a concrete frost wall, or a full
basement, consistent with 30-A M.R.S. §4358.
5. Be sited such that a minimum horizontal dimension of fourteen (14) feet faces the
street.
B. Requirements specific to elder non-congregate detached housing. Notwithstanding
subsection A above and the City’s Subdivision Ordinance, manufactured housing and
on-site built homes and the lots upon which they are located in an elder non-congregate
detached housing development are not subject to §TBD of the Subdivision Ordinance,
but shall meet the following standards:
1. Meet the same building standards specified in subsection A above.
2. Be sited on lots not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in size, which lot
shall not have less than fifty (50) feet of frontage on any public or private way.
3. There may only be one dwelling on a lot. The minimum footprint for any one (1)
dwelling shall comply with HUD code minimum size requirements.
4. No structure built or placed on such lots shall have less than fifteen (15) feet of
front yard setback, ten (10) feet of side yard setback, and a fifteen-foot rear
setback. 
CHAPTER 230 § VII11 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 74
5. Structures built on such lots shall not exceed forty-five (45) percent coverage of the
lot area and shall not exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet.
6. Such lots shall be serviced by public sewer and water, although the infrastructure
within the development may be privately owned and maintained. Individual wells or
septic systems are not permitted.
7. Electrical, telephone, and cable service shall be installed underground throughout
the property.
8. Exterior street lighting for the project shall be provided to sufficiently illuminate
internal roads.
9. Landscaping, including trees, shall be provided throughout the property and on
each individual lot.
10. Adequate provisions for vehicular and pedestrian circulation shall be provided.
11. To the extent a standard set out herein conflicts with a standard in the City's site
plan standards, the standards set out herein shall control.
Marinas
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish minimum requirements for the siting,
design, construction, and operation of marinas to serve the needs of boaters, to protect
natural resources, and to protect the public’s health, safety, and welfare.
Applicability. This section applies to:
1. A marina that is proposed as a new use, or a proposed expansion of an existing
marina, and that includes five (5) or more slips or moorings, or provides berthing for
commercial vessels that can accommodate more than twenty (20) people.
2. A vessel maintenance or repair yard that is on or adjacent to the water.
3. Boat ramps.
Standards. A marina use shall meet the following standards:
1. Marinas shall only be located in areas which offer safe and convenient access to
waters of navigable depth. Safe and convenient access shall be determined by
factors such as existing water depths, the size and draft of vessels for which the
marina is proposed, and tidal and wave action.
2. Marinas shall be designed to minimize adverse impacts on the existing use and
enjoyment of nearby waters.
3. Marinas shall be sited and designed to afford adequate protection against wakes
caused by vessel traffic, to the maximum extent practicable.
4. Adequate restroom facilities for the use of marina patrons shall be provided to
encourage the use of shoreside facilities, to discourage the overboard discharge of 
CHAPTER 230 § VII11 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 75
untreated or inadequately treated sewage from vessels, and to protect water
quality.
5. Vessel maintenance areas shall be sited as far from the water as is practicable and
shall be designed so that all maintenance activities that are potential sources of air
or waterborne contaminants shall be accomplished over dry land or indoors. A
management plan for the control and disposal of hazardous materials, by-products,
debris, residues, spills, and stormwater runoff from maintenance areas shall be
submitted. All drains from maintenance areas shall lead to a sump, holding tank, or
pump-out facility from which the wastes can be removed for treatment and/or
disposal.
6. Fuel storage and delivery facilities shall be in accordance with local and state fire
codes and NFPA 303, "Fire Protection Standards for Marinas and Boatyards." All
vessel fueling operations shall be undertaken at the fueling station or other
specifically designated remote location in accordance with NFPA 302, "Fire
Protection Standards for Pleasure and Commercial Motor Crafts."
7. Life safety equipment. Flotation devices shall be provided at regular intervals
throughout the marina to ensure the safety of marina users.
8. Lighting shall be in accordance with United States Coast Guard and United States
Army Corps of Engineers requirements and the provisions of this Chapter. In
general, lighting shall be designed to ensure public safety while minimizing visual
impacts.
9. The owner or operator of a proposed marina shall maintain, at a minimum,
insurance policies for comprehensive general liability, marina operators' legal
liability, pollution coverage/endorsement/riders, and any other policies as may be
mandated by state or federal agencies as part of permitting approval processes.
Verification of said policies shall be submitted to the City prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy by the CEO.
10. Marina structures in, on or over submerged lands shall be designed to comply with
applicable requirements of the State of Maine and with the following:
a) They shall be designed to minimize adverse impacts on navigation, public use
of waters, and natural resources.
b) They shall not significantly restrict water flows.
c) The width and length of all structures shall be limited to what is reasonable for
the intended use and shall minimize the shading of marine vegetation.
d) Barrier-free access for the handicapped that complies with the Americans with
Disabilities Act and the Architectural Barriers Act Accessibility Guidelines.
e) They shall have sufficient strength to resist all anticipated loading required of
buildings in Saco, including, but not limited to, dead, live, wind, earthquake,
snow, and impact loading.
f) They shall not be constructed using creosote-treated timber.
CHAPTER 230 § VII12 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 76
g) No structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height, as measured either
from the mean original grade at the downhill side of the structure or from the
surface of the water.
h) An applicant for a marina shall present evidence of application for a
submerged lands lease from the State of Maine, where required as part of
right, title and interest.
Medical Marijuana
Where permitted by this chapter, uses engaged in the provision of medical marijuana, including
caregiver, shall comply with the following standards:
Neither of the referenced uses shall be permitted to generate offensive or harmful odors
perceptible beyond their property lines, either at ground or habitable elevation.
Neither of the referenced uses shall be allowed in a location less than 500 feet,
measured in a straight line, to the nearest point on the boundary of any property which is
occupied by a public or private school, day-care center, or day-care home.
An enclosed outdoor area used for the cultivation of marijuana shall have a privacy
fence at least six feet high that obscures the view of the marijuana in order to discourage
theft and unauthorized intrusion.
There shall be no outside displays, window displays, or interior displays visible from the
outside of the building intended to attract attention to or generate interest in either of the
referenced uses.
Adequate measures for security of the facility, which may include a security system,
security fencing, security cameras and other measures, shall be demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Office prior to issuance of either a building permit
or a certificate of occupancy. The Code Officer shall consult with the Police Department
if the adequacy of proposed security measures is in question.
The owner(s) of a building intended for lease to a caregiver (growing) or a growing
facility shall apply for and receive a business license from the City Clerk's office. Each
lessee within said building shall apply for and receive a business license from the City
Clerk's office. Failure to secure a City of Saco business license shall disqualify either an
owner or a lessee from operating as a caregiver (growing) or a growing facility in Saco.
A caregiver (growing) or a growing facility shall receive an annual safety inspection by
the Fire Department, Code Office, and Electrical Inspector.
Both a caregiver (growing) and a growing facility shall identify all principal
officers/owners by name and address.
Evidence of compliance with all applicable state laws shall be submitted to the Code
Enforcement Office prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
CHAPTER 230 § VII13 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 77
Mobile Home Parks
Subdivision review. Proposed new mobile home parks and proposed expansions of
existing mobile home parks shall be subject to review as, and shall meet all the
requirements of, a residential subdivision and shall conform to all applicable state laws
and local ordinances and regulations. No development or subdivision approved as a
mobile home park may be converted to another use without the approval of the Planning
Board. The new use shall meet the appropriate space and bulk standards and other
requirements of this chapter, the Subdivision Regulations and other City ordinances.
Permits Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, maintain, operate or
alter any mobile home park within the limits of the City of Saco unless the owner holds a
valid permit issued annually by the Building Inspector in the name of such person or
persons or firm for the specific mobile home park.
Issuance of Permits. The Building Inspector shall annually renew such permit contingent
upon compliance with all regulations in this chapter. An inspection shall be performed by
the Building Inspector to assure such compliance.
Location. Mobile home parks shall be located only in the Mobile Home Park Overlay
District as shown of the official City of Saco Zoning Map.
Standards
1. Lot and yard requirements. Notwithstanding the dimensional requirements in Table
4-1 and the limitation on community septic systems in the Subdivision Regulations,
lots in a mobile home park shall meet the requirements below. If a smaller
residential lot site is permitted, then it prevails over the 6,500 square feet providing
the lot is sewered:
MINIMUM LOT AREA (SF)
SEWERED 6,500
UNSEWERED 20,000
WITH CENTRAL SYSTEM APPROVED BY MAINE DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES,
SACO PLUMBING INSPECTOR AND PLANNING BOARD* 12,000
MIN. SITE AREA PER DWELLING UNIT (SF)d
SEWERED 6,500
UNSEWERED 20,000
WITH CENTRAL SYSTEM APPROVED BY MAINE DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES,
SACO PLUMBING INSPECTOR AND PLANNING BOARD* 12,000
STREET FRONTAGE, MINIMUM (FT)
SEWERED 65
UNSEWERED 100
WITH CENTRAL SYSTEM APPROVED BY MAINE DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES,
SACO PLUMBING INSPECTOR AND PLANNING BOARD* 75
CHAPTER 230 § VII13 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 78
DEPTH OF FRONT YARD ON PRIVATE STREETS, MINIMUM (FT)
SITES SMALLER THAN 10,000 SF 10
SITES LARGER THAN 10,000 SF 15
DEPTH OF FRONT YARD ON PUBLIC STREETS, MINIMUM (FT) 20
WIDTH OF SIDE AND REAR YARDS, MINIMUM (FT)
SITES SMALLER THAN 10,000 SF 10
SITES LARGER THAN 10,000 SF 15
LOT COVERAGE, MAXIMUM 30%
HEIGHT, MAXIMUM (FT) 35
*The overall density of any park served by any subsurface wastewater disposal system shall
not exceed one dwelling unit per 20,000 square feet. Lots within any Shoreland Zoning
District shall meet the space and bulk standards for that district.
2. Construction Standards. Mobile homes shall be placed on a permanent foundation
that complies with the provisions of 30-A M.R.S. §4358. If a slab is used, tie-downs
shall be installed to manufacturer's specifications and skirting shall be installed
around the bottom of the structure.
3. Registration of owner. Mobile home park operators shall maintain a register of all
owners of mobile homes in the park. The register shall be available for inspection
by the Assessor, CEO, law enforcement officers, public health officials, and other
officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the
register. The register and records shall not be destroyed for a period of five years
following the date of registration. The register shall contain:
a) Name and address of each owner.
b) Mobile home license number and manufacturer's make.
c) Number of site to which it is assigned.
d) Date of arrival.
e) Date of departure.
4. No mobile home shall remain in a mobile home park unless a lot is available.
5. Alterations and additions must comply with the applicable City and state statutes,
codes and ordinances.
6. Maintenance. The owners of mobile home parks shall be responsible for ensuring
the maintenance of all park-owned structures and their sites.
7. Compliance. Park management shall conform to state laws. Compliance with this
chapter shall not exempt the park owner, developer, or manager from complying
with other applicable local, state, and federal codes and regulations.
8. Change of Use. No mobile home park may be converted to another use without the
approval of the Planning Board. 
CHAPTER 230 § VII14 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 79
Inspection. The CEO is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections to
determine the condition of mobile home parks located within Saco in order that the CEO
may perform the duty of safeguarding the health and safety of occupants of mobile home
parks and of the general public. The CEO shall have the power to enter at reasonable
times upon any property as permitted by 30-A M.R.S. §4452, Subdivision 1A.
Park administration. The owner or operator of a mobile home park shall be responsible
for ensuring the maintenance of all park-owned structures and their sites. Park
management shall conform to state laws. Compliance with this chapter shall not exempt
the park owner, developer, or manager from complying with other applicable local, state,
and federal codes and regulations.
Offices in Residential Districts
Standards. In residential districts where offices are permitted as conditional uses, offices
shall comply with the following standards, in addition to any other applicable review
standards:
In order to preserve neighborhood character, offices shall be located only within
converted residential structures, except as allowed in Subsection D below.
Parking for offices shall be located to the side or rear of the building.
All outdoor lighting shall be shielded to avoid glare and light trespass.
In special situations where a building is extremely dilapidated and structurally unsound
and where reuse is therefore not practicable or economically feasible or where a building
is not judged to be a significant component of the neighborhood's overall architectural
and historic character, the Planning Board may approve plans to replace an existing
residential building with a new office building whose scale and design would be
compatible with the neighborhood. The Board shall obtain the recommendation of the
Saco Historic Preservation Commission before granting permission to demolish. In the
Historic District, and on historic sites, the decision on demolition shall rest entirely with
the Historic Preservation Commission.
Outdoor storage is prohibited.
Outdoor Merchandise Sales
Adequate off-street parking shall be provided in such a manner that the visibility of drivers
along the public roads is not reduced. All display tables shall be cleared and removed to a
location not visible from the road at the end of each business day.
Outdoor Storage
Outdoor storage is prohibited within one hundred (100) feet of public ways, and is limited
to registered boats and registered recreational vehicles, including registered camp
trailers.
CHAPTER 230 § VII17 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 80
Cargo and shipping containers are prohibited in residential districts.
Outdoor storage is also prohibited within the side, rear, and front setbacks. Vehicle
registrations must be readily available for inspection.
Human habitation is not permitted in stored recreational vehicles, trailers, boats, and
cargo containers.
Outdoor storage of vehicles or other equipment awaiting repairs is prohibited. Vehicles
displayed for sale are not to be construed as outdoor storage.
Master Planned Developments
Master planned developments require site plan review and subdivision approval by the
Planning Board.
Master planned developments must be designed with dense environments that will
easily connect to existing transportation, sewer, and water.
Public Infrastructure Requirement. All master planned developments shall be served by
public water and city sewer.
Master Planned Development Application and Review.
Notice periods shall be per Site Plan and Subdivision Ordinance Standards.
Neighborhood meetings are required for master planned developments that trigger
requirements of site plan ordinance. If a neighborhood meeting is required, it shall
be held in conformance with site plan ordinance requirements for hosting
neighborhood meetings.
Public Hearing and Notice
Prior to taking final action on a Master Planned Development application, the
Planning Board shall hold a public hearing.
Notice of public hearing.
a.The hearing shall be advertised in a local newspaper at least seven (7) days
prior to the public hearing.
b.The City shall notify property owners by first-class mail. The notice shall be
postmarked at least seven (7) calendar days prior to a public hearing.
Ownership shall be assumed to be that indicated in the records of the
Assessor’s Department. Failure of any property owner to receive a notice
shall not necessitate another hearing or invalidate any action by the Planning
Board.
c. Property owners in the Saco Island (SI), Downtown (D) District, and
business districts shall be notified if their property is within two hundred (200)
feet of the applicant's property.
CHAPTER 230 § VII17 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 81
Approval of the Site Inventory and Analysis and of the Master Plan as detailed
below must occur prior to an application being submitted for site plan and
subdivision review.
Nothing in this subsection shall preclude a determination by the Planning Board
that additional information is needed before the application is treated as complete.
A determination of completeness by the Planning Board does not constitute
approval of any waiver requests, unless a specific finding to that effect is made by
the Planning Board.
Site inventory and analysis. Submission requirements for the site inventory and
analysis phase are as follows:
Evidence of right, title, or interest in the property, such as a deed, lease,
option, or purchase and sale agreement.
The boundaries of the property and all contiguous property under the control of
the owner or applicant based upon a standard boundary survey prepared by a
registered land surveyor and giving the bearings and distances of all property
lines. The Planning Board may waive the requirement for a boundary survey
when sufficient information is available to establish, on the ground, all property
boundaries.
Existing restrictions or easements on the site (if none, so state).
Site context or locus map – shall show location of development in city and
relationship to adjacent property, drawn at size adequate to show relationship
of proposed development to properties within 500 feet of site. Location map
shall show: existing subdivisions or other developments; approved but
undeveloped projects; locations and names of existing streets; boundaries and
zoning designations.
Site inventory plan – shall show existing natural features, resources and built
environment on and within 500 feet of site; drawn at an appropriate scale to
review these features. The plan shall show: proposed name of development,
north arrow, date and scale; owner’s and applicant’s name, address, and
names and addresses of consultants who prepared plan; evidence of right, title
and interest as defined in the site plan review standards; boundaries of
property and all contiguous property under control of owner or applicant;
zoning classifications existing site restrictions (easements, etc.); topography at
two-foot intervals; location, extent, value of natural and historic resources
located on and within 500 feet of site; on-site soils with a medium-intensity
soils survey. The Planning Board may require the submission of a highintensity soils survey if necessary to evaluate the appropriate use of the
property; vegetative cover conditions and identification of trees with diameter
of 24 inches at breast height; watershed and subwatershed boundaries;
groundwater hydrology beneath site; existing buildings, structures or other
improvements on site; location and size of existing utilities or improvements
servicing the site. 
CHAPTER 230 § VII17 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 82
Site analysis plan – Plan must enable the Planning Board and City Staff to
determine which portions of the site are: well suited for the proposed use; are
unsuitable or have significant limitations for development or use; have potential
conservation or open space value that should be addressed in the master plan;
may be subject to or create off-site conflicts or concerns.
Site analysis narrative – must describe existing conditions of the site,
constraints and opportunities for development, existing capacity of road and
traffic; any proposed mitigation measures.
Master plan. Submission requirements for the master plan review phase are as
follows:
Development narrative: must describe overall context of site, with provisions to
address constraints and limitations identified during site inventory and analysis
phase.
Conceptual site plan: must be an accurate, scaled plan, and show proposed
site layout. Plan submission requirements shall follow site plan submission
standards.
Preliminary infrastructure plan: must show layout and preliminary design of
various infrastructure components that will serve core infrastructure and
access to and out of the site
Neighborhood impact mitigation plan, if development abuts residential zone:
must describe impacts of proposed development on neighboring residential
areas, including but not limited to, traffic, noise, exterior lighting, and visual
considerations. The impact mitigation plan must specify the areas that will be
retained as buffers and how those areas will be treated and protected. The
plan must include any specific standards or requirements that will be imposed
on individual buildings or projects, such as increased setbacks, buffering or
landscaping, and similar measures.
Environmental assessment: must identify and evaluate importance of natural
resources and describe actions that will be taken to mitigate, protect and
develop while protecting historic and natural resources.
Streetscape, Parking & Design Standards in All Districts.
1. Streetscape.
Master plan proposals shall be developed to encourage the public to walk on
to the property, and shall be designed with open, inviting spaces that highlight
the streetscape and human-scaled environment.
2. Parking.
Parking lots shall be incorporated into the rear of parcels fronting the
streetscape and / or designed as underground parking. Parking lot visibility
from all public ways shall be screened through landscaping, fencing or both. 
CHAPTER 230 § VII17 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 83
The Planning Board may reduce overall parking requirements for a master
planned development by no more than thirty percent (30%), provided that the
applicant can demonstrate that the mix of uses will be utilizing shared parking
at staggered times of day.
Bicycle parking shall be included as part of the master plan proposal, at a rate
of one bike per twenty (20) vehicular parking spaces.
3. Master Plan Design Standards.
Building scale and heights shall be consistent across the street-facing façade,
with transition only toward the side and rear of the property.
Interior of master planned developments shall be visually appealing, with a
high-quality built environment.
Landscaping shall be provided that mitigates effects of impervious surface,
through breaking up parking lots of more than thirty (30) parking spaces.
Shade trees along vehicular and pedestrian entrances and along interior
spaces of pedestrian and vehicular circulation accessways shall be provided
every fifty (50) feet.
Master planned developments shall comply with the City’s design review
standards, found in the Site Plan Review Ordinance, Article V.
4. Transit-Oriented Development Requirements.
a) Master planned developments shall incorporate transit-oriented development
through bus stops and dedicated spaces to provide greater access to
transportation services that do not rely upon traditional vehicular methods,
such as passenger cars.
b) Applicants are required to coordinate proposed location of transportation
amenities, such as bus stops with local, applicable agencies and departments,
such as, but not limited to: Biddeford-Saco-Old Orchard Beach Transit, and
Maine Department of Transportation.
Master Planned Developments in the Saco Island (SI) District.
1. All properties within the Saco Island (SI) District are eligible to undergo master
planned development review, regardless of acreage, provided that an applicant can
demonstrate compliance with the below standards and applicable ordinances
standards.
2. Master plan proposals in the SI District shall provide a mix of uses, as follows:
a) Structures that front upon Main Street and will be visible from Main Street
require at least one hundred percent (100%) of the first floor to be dedicated to
commercial, office, non-profit, or some other non-residential use. 
CHAPTER 230 § VII17 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 84
b) Structures on the interior of roads developed to accommodate the master plan
proposal may be primarily residential but must incorporate non-residential
accessory uses at twenty percent (20%) of total development.
c) Together, each proposed master plan development in the Saco Island (SI)
District shall have a combined percentage of at least thirty (30%) of
development dedicated to non-residential uses.
d) The Master Plan must provide a walkable streetscape in a human-scale
environment, designed to increase pedestrian activity to this area and act as a
connection between Saco and Biddeford.
e) Permitted and conditional uses shall be as set forth in the Permitted &
Conditional Use Table of the Zoning Ordinance.
3. Design Standards in Saco Island (SI) District.
a) Compatibility with neighboring uses and buildings. The streetscape should be
a continuation of and seamlessly connect with existing, historic streetscape of
Main Street and Factory Island.
i. Proposed building materials shall be compatible with existing structures
but offer unique features that clearly differentiate them from existing
historic structures.
ii. The Planning Board has the option of requesting comments about the
proposed master plan design from the Historic Preservation Commission
(HPC).
b) The Saco River is one of Saco’s most valuable natural resources. Master plan
developments shall incorporate open public access to the Saco River and
extension of the Riverwalk into site design. No master planned development
proposal shall be approved for this area without public usability and pedestrian
connectivity to the Saco River.
Approval Criteria for site inventory and analysis and master plan.
The Planning Board may impose conditions on its approval of the master plan if it
finds that such conditions are necessary for the master plan to comply with the
approval criteria. The Planning Board shall approve the master plan only if the
Board finds that the plan complies with the following criteria:
a) The master plan is consistent with the site inventory and analysis and reflects
a reasonable utilization of the site given environmental and built-environment
considerations. Areas proposed for intense development are identified for
development in the site inventory and analysis. Areas that were identified as
being unsuitable for development in the site inventory and analysis are
protected, and adverse impacts of development mitigated. Areas that were
identified as having open space or conservation and natural resource value in
the site inventory and analysis have been addressed and the resource value 
CHAPTER 230 § VII17 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 85
maintained through utilization of the site, mitigation activities, and/or on- or offsite compensatory activities.
b) The master plan is consistent with the space and bulk standards, the
development standards, and other requirements for master planned
developments in the zoning district in which it is located.
c) The master plan demonstrates that infrastructure needed to serve the
development, including water supply, sewage disposal, power,
telecommunications, and other utilities, are available or can be reasonably
expected to be able to be provided and will not create an unreasonable burden
on the infrastructure systems.
d) The master plan demonstrates that the street system can accommodate traffic
that will be generated by the development or that improvements can be
reasonably made to accommodate the traffic.
e) The master plan demonstrates that runoff from the development will be
managed to maximize on-site infiltration and minimize discharge from the site
and that any runoff from the site can be accommodated by the City’s
stormwater system or that improvements can be reasonably made to
accommodate the runoff.
f) The master plan is consistent with any zoning district specific approval criteria
of Article III.
g) Overall layout, including street system, must provide a neighborhood where all
or most buildings and other activities are internally focused rather than focused
on the street.
h) Proposed street system should create interconnected network that allows
vehicles to move about the neighborhood without having to use existing
arterials or collectors. Internal streets shall be connected, and dead-end
streets shall not be permitted.
i) Overall character shall be urban rather than suburban.
j) Design of streets within neighborhood should be urban in character with
sidewalks, street trees, and lighting.
k) An interconnected green space to create a green network shall be provided
where feasible.
l) The master plan shall address opportunities for alternative transportation.
Additional approval criteria for master planned developments in the Saco Island
(SI) District. The Planning Board shall approve the master plan only if the Board
finds that the plan complies with the additional, following criteria:
a) Site design shall provide for public access and extension of the City’s
Riverwalk along the Saco River.
CHAPTER 230 § VII18 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 86
Seasonal Rental of Dwelling Units
A. Seasonal Dwellings shall comply with Chapter 173, Seasonal Property Rental
Ordinance.
B. Seasonal Dwellings shall be occupied by only one (1) family, and no portion shall be
sublet to another party.
C. Properties approved by the City as Seasonal Dwellings shall not include facilities and
accommodations that would serve to circumvent this chapter by creating independent or
semi-independent suites of rooms that might be rented separately. Such facilities and
accommodations might include, but are not limited to, kitchen facilities or partial kitchen
facilities; microwave ovens, hot plates, or other cooking devices, multiple laundry
facilities, additional cable television connections, or independently metered utilities,
additional sinks and other plumbing; additional entrances beyond those customary in a
dwelling unit; and entrances which are separate from common areas of the dwelling unit
and that allow a room or suite of rooms to be occupied separately from the unit as a
whole.
Small Wind Energy System
Purpose. To regulate the installation of Small Wind Energy Systems (SWES) in order to
promote the safe and efficient use, to reduce the on-site consumption of utility-supplied
electricity, and to minimize visual, environmental, and operational impacts.
Submission Requirements. The following shall be submitted to the CEO:
1. Specifications and drawings, detailing the power-generation capacity, hub and
blade, prepared by the manufacturer or a professional engineer.
2. Proposed height.
3. A line drawing, photograph or equivalent graphic representation of the wind turbine.
4. Structural drawings of the wind tower, base or foundation, prepared by the
manufacturer or a professional engineer. If attachment to an existing structure is
proposed, a description or drawing acceptable to the Code Enforcement Office
shall be submitted.
5. Documentation from the manufacturer that the SWES will produce noise levels in
compliance with the standards specified in this chapter.
6. Photographs of the proposed site.
7. If connection to the publicly regulated utility grid is proposed, a copy of the contract
between the applicant and the utility verifying that the proposed connection is
acceptable and other evidence making clear that the utility is aware of the proposed
connection and finds it acceptable. 
CHAPTER 230 § VII19 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 87
Height. SWES height shall be the distance measured from the ground level to the center
of the turbine. SWES installed on municipal property shall be exempt from all height
requirements. SWES located on all other non-municipal property are exempt from the
dimensional requirements of Table 4-1 but shall be limited to one hundred (100) feet.
Siting Restrictions. The CEO shall find that the following standards will be met prior to
issuance of a building permit for a SWES:
Illumination, signals, signs, and antennas are prohibited on SWES, except as
required by the Federal Communications Commission or the Federal Aviation
Administration.
All elements of a SWES shall be set back a distance equal to the length from the
ground to the center of the turbine from all boundaries of the applicant's property or
shall adhere to the side yard or rear yard setback, whichever is greater. If setback
less that equal to the length from the ground to the center of the turbine is proposed
from all boundaries, then the CEO shall require that the SWES and foundation
design be certified by a Maine licensed professional engineer.
If site layout is such that a structural failure of an SWES could reasonably be
anticipated to be a threat to abutting properties that would be harmed by such a
failure, then proof of insurance against failure shall be submitted to the City. Said
insurance shall be maintained provided the SWES remains in place.
More than one SWES shall be permitted per lot.
The SWES shall be designed with a monopole without guy wires support structure
Lattice towers are prohibited.
Noise Limits.
1. Both a manual and automatic braking, governing, or feathering system shall be
required to prevent uncontrolled rotation.
2. After approval and installation of the SWES, the CEO may require the applicant to
perform sound measurements at the closest property line to determine ambient and
operating decibel levels.
3. Sound shall not exceed the following limits (Table 7-2) at the lot lines of the
abutting properties:
Table 7-2 Sound-pressure level limits for SWES
Sound-Pressure Level Limits Measured in dB(A)
District Day Night
Industrial districts 65 dBA 60 dBA
Business and Mixed Use districts 60 dBA 50 dBA
Residential districts 55 dBA 45 dBA
Exemptions. The following are exempt from the provisions of this section:
CHAPTER 230 § VII20 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 88
1. SWES on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the City of Saco.
2. SWES with a rated capacity of less than five hundred (500) watts.
Soil Suitability for Land Uses and Roads
All development shall be situated on soils that are suitable to support the proposal, and
that do not cause adverse environmental impacts, including severe erosion, mass soil
movement, improper drainage, and water pollution.
Applicants for new roads shall prepare soil borings every one-hundred fifty (150) feet of
the road length for review by the Public Works Director or designee. Proposed public
and private roads will only be allowed when soil borings indicate that the subsoils are
adequate to sustain the proposal.
Commercial Solar Energy Systems
Purpose. The City of Saco finds that it is in the public interest to encourage the
development and use of commercial solar energy systems as a clean, renewable energy
source, and to help promote sustainable initiatives. The purpose of this section is to
facilitate the effective and efficient use of large scale, ground mounted, commercial solar
energy systems while protecting the public’s health, safety, and welfare.
Applicability.
The requirements of this ordinance shall apply to all commercial solar energy
systems.
All commercial solar energy systems shall be designed, erected and installed in
accordance with all applicable local, state, and federal codes, regulations, and
standards.
Commercial solar energy systems shall comply with all applicable building,
plumbing and electrical codes and with all applicable requirements of this chapter.
Any modification, upgrade, or structural change that materially alters the size,
placement or output of an existing commercial solar energy system shall comply
with this ordinance.
Scope of Review. Commercial solar energy systems, including any modifications,
upgrades, or structural changes, are subject to site plan review, and in addition shall
meet the following standards.
Utility Connections. Applicant shall make reasonable efforts to place all utility
connections underground, depending on appropriate soil conditions and
topography of the site, and any requirements of the utility provider. Electrical
transformers for utility interconnection may be above ground if required by the utility
provider.
CHAPTER 230 § VII21 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 89
Visual Impact. Applicant shall make reasonable efforts to minimize visual impacts
by preserving natural vegetation, screening abutting properties, and protecting
scenic resources.
Glare. Solar panel placement shall be prioritized to minimize or negate any solar
glare onto nearby properties, public gathering places or roadways without unduly
impacting the functionality or efficiency of the commercial solar energy system.
Natural Resources. Applicant shall make reasonable efforts to protect wetlands,
watersheds, working agricultural lands, surface waters, slopes greater than twenty
percent (20%), as well as Undeveloped Habitat Blocks, High Value Plant and
Animal Habitats and Focus Areas of Ecological Significance as mapped by the
Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife’s Beginning with Habitat
Program.
Location. Commercial solar energy systems are prohibited in Shoreland Zones,
within 75 feet of the normal high-water line of a stream, and within 250 feet of the
normal high-water line of any great pond or river and the upland edge of significant
coastal and freshwater wetlands, including all areas affected by tidal action.
Emergency Services. The owner or operator of a commercial solar energy system
shall provide a copy of the project summary, electrical schematic, and site plan to
the Fire Chief. Upon request the owner or operator shall cooperate with the Fire
Department in developing an emergency response plan. All means of shutting
down the system shall be clearly marked on the plan. The owner or operator shall
identify a responsible person for public inquiries throughout the life of the
installation.
Maintenance. The owner or operator of a commercial solar energy system shall
maintain the facility in good condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited
to, painting, structural repairs, and integrity of security measures. Site access shall
be maintained to a level acceptable to the Fire Chief. The owner or operator shall
be responsible for the cost of maintaining the access road(s).
Dimensional Requirements.
Lot Coverage. Outside of the Shoreland Zone, solar collectors are exempt from and
not subject to lot coverage requirements.
Height. Ground-mounted solar collectors shall not exceed 20 feet in height as
measured from the base of the support.
Setbacks. Commercial solar energy systems must comply with the setback
requirements of underlying districts, provided, however, that and all structures,
including solar panels, must be setback at least 100’ from any abutting residential
property.
Decommissioning. A commercial solar energy system that has reached the end of its
useful life, or has been abandoned, shall be removed. A commercial solar energy
system that has had its operation discontinued for one year or more is presumed 
CHAPTER 230 § VII21 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 90
abandoned. The owner shall remove the installation no more than one (1) year after the
date of discontinued operations. Removal shall consist of:
Physical removal of all commercial solar energy systems, structures, equipment,
security barriers and transmission lines from the site.
Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with local, state, and
federal waste disposal regulations.
Stabilization or re-vegetation of the site as necessary to minimize erosion. The
Code Enforcement Officer may allow the owner or operator to leave landscaping or
designated below-grade foundations in order to minimize erosion and disruption to
vegetation.
Financial Guarantee for Removal.
At the time of approval, the applicant for a new commercial solar energy system
shall submit to the City an evergreen financial guarantee, to be approved by the
City Attorney, in the amount of 150% of the estimated costs of the removal tasks
set out in E above, such estimated costs to be determined by the City Engineer or
other duly designated person, The owner or operator may apply to the City Planner
for release of that the financial guarantee at such time that it or its successors or
assigns complete the removal tasks set out in E above to the satisfaction of the City
Engineer.
If the owner or operator of the commercial solar energy system fails to remove the
commercial solar energy system in accordance with the requirements of E above,
the City retains the right, but not the obligation, to use the financial guarantee and
any other available means to cause the removal of the commercial solar energy
system in accordance with the requirements of E above.
Submission Requirements. In addition to the submission requirements in the Site Plan
ordinance, the City Planner and/or Planning Board may request additional items
necessary to demonstrate and document that all standards have been met. Additional
submission requirements include but are not limited to:
Information on any proposed connections to the grid including any proposed off-site
modifications to provide grid connections, access the installation, or to maintain the
proposed solar energy system and grid connections.
An Operations and Maintenance Plan prepared and stamped by a licensed
Professional Engineer or other licensed professional as appropriate.
Detailed Reclamation Plan explaining how out-of-service solar panels will be
removed and/or replaced, found acceptable to the Planning Board.
Decommissioning Plan explaining how the solar energy system will be removed
and the site will be stabilized upon discontinuance of the solar energy system’s
operation or its abandonment.
CHAPTER 230 § VII22 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 91
Swimming Pools
General. Swimming pools may be permitted in any district as an accessory use to a
dwelling for the private use of the owners or occupants and their families and guests.
Permit required. A building permit from the CEO is required.
C. Standards. To receive a building permit, a swimming pool application must meet the
following standards:
1. Setbacks.
a) No swimming pool shall be constructed closer than ten (10) feet from the side
or rear lot line, nor closer to the front line of any lot than would be permitted for
buildings or other structures. Mechanical equipment related to the
maintenance of a swimming pool shall not be located closer to a property line
than the minimum setback dimension of the zoning district.
b) All other water recreation and water storage facilities shall comply with the
setback requirements of the zoning districts in which they are located.
2. Fencing.
a) The swimming pool shall be entirely enclosed by a fence no less than four (4)
feet high to prevent uncontrolled access by small children. The fence shall
have no openings larger than four (4) inches. Gates in the fence shall be kept
securely locked at all times when the owner or occupant is not present.
b) Pools that are four (4) feet or more above ground may be exempt from the
fence requirement if all access ramps, stairways or ladders are removed or
equipped with locking gates for use when unattended.
3. If the water for such pool is supplied from a private well, there shall be no crossconnection with the public water supply system.
4. If the water for such pool is supplied by the public water supply system, the inlet
shall be above the overflow level of the pool.
5. Pools shall be chemically treated in a manner sufficient to maintain the bacteria
standards established by the provisions of the State Sanitary Code relating to
public swimming pools.
6. No loudspeaker device that can be heard beyond the property lines of the premises
on may be operated, nor may any lighting directly illuminating beyond the property
be installed.
Traffic and Highway Access
A. Curb cuts.
1. On collectors and arterials, no use or development on a single lot or on separate
but contiguous lots shall have more than one curb cut serving the use or 
CHAPTER 230 § VII23 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 92
development. In the course of site plan review under Chapter TBD [Site Plan], the
Planning Board may allow a second curb cut, provided no more than one (1) curb
cut shall be on the same public right-of-way, unless the curb cuts are designed to
operate as a one-way pair.
2. Curb cuts serving lots on Routes 1, 5 and 112 that provide access to one (1) or
more of said routes shall, for each lot, be separated by at least five hundred (500)
feet as measured along the street line. To the extent possible, new development
along these routes shall share common points of access. The Planning Board may
impose reasonable conditions to require joint access on both developed and
undeveloped lots adjoining the site. Entrances to developed commercial lots shall
be kept clear of parked cars to enable good access and to prevent cars from
stacking onto public roads.
3. Driveways, entrances, and approaches shall comply with the standards of Chapter
186.
B. Sight distance. Any exit driveway serving five (5) or more parking spaces shall be so
designed as to provide the following recommended exiting sight distance measured in
each direction. Sight distances shall be measured from the driver's seat of a vehicle, a
distance of ten (10) feet behind the edge of the traveled way from a height of eye at
three and one-half (3.5 feet) to an object three and one-half (3.5) feet above the
pavement. The Planning Board shall give preference to the recommended sight distance
rather than the minimum. However, where the driveway is moved to the optimum
position on the lot, and the Planning Board determines that an adequate level of traffic
safety has been attained, the Planning Board may permit less than the recommended
distance Table 7-3.
Table 7-3 Recommended and minimum required sight distance for parking area driveways
Allowable Speed
(miles per hour)
Recommended Distance
(feet)
Minimum Required
Distance (feet)
20 225 200
25 280 250
30 335 300
35 390 350
40 445 400
45 500 450
50 555 500
55 610 550
C. Review by Public Works Department. Any proposed new curb cut on a public way shall
be reviewed and approved by the Saco Public Works Department in accordance with the
above standards and such other standards relating to drainage and traffic safety as the
Department shall require.
D. Corner clearance for driveways. Corner clearance is the minimum distance, measured
parallel to a roadway, between the nearest curb, pavement, or shoulder line of an
intersecting public way and the nearest edge of a driveway entrance or exit, excluding its 
CHAPTER 230 § VII24 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 93
radii. The recommended corner clearance for entrances for unsignalized intersections is
one hundred (100) feet with a minimum of fifty (50) feet. The recommended corner
clearance for signalized intersections is one hundred (125) feet with a minimum of
seventy-five (75) feet.
E. Implementation of off-site traffic improvements. When improvements to roads or
intersections within the study area are required as part of a condition of approval of a
site plan, conditional use, or other permit, these improvements must be implemented
prior to occupancy of the development, except where the following occurs:
1. Maine Department of Transportation (DOT) impact fee is applied.
a) Impact fee payment. The applicant has paid or will pay an impact fee for future
improvements; and
b) Impact fee use. The impact fee will be used to make the required
improvements by Maine DOT; and
c) Improvement plan approval. The improvement plan has been reviewed and
approved for implementation by the City and Maine DOT; and
d) Schedule. The improvements are scheduled for implementation within three
years of the initial occupancy of the development; or
2. City of Saco traffic mitigation fee is applied.
The City may impose traffic mitigation fees on projects in addition to and/or in
lieu of actual improvements;
The City may impose traffic mitigation fees on the project for their impact on
substandard intersections or roadways; or
3. Where improvements are to be implemented by Maine DOT or the City of Saco.
The applicant demonstrates that the necessary traffic improvements have been
identified by the Maine DOT or the City of Saco as improvements which will be
implemented; or
4. Where monitoring will be performed by the applicant. The applicant will be
responsible for monitoring safety and/or traffic conditions. The approval conditions
may also make the applicant responsible for implementation of improvements if the
specified monitoring conditions are met.
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities - Towers and Antennas
Intent. The intent of these standards is:
1. To minimize the adverse impacts of new wireless telecommunications facilities,
including the tower, antennas, and accessory structures associated with such
facilities. Such impacts include but are not limited to visual, environmental, health
and safety, property value impacts, and impacts to historically significant areas. 
CHAPTER 230 § VII24 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 94
2. To require co-location of carriers where feasible, thereby minimizing the number of
facilities located within the City.
3. To encourage the utilization of alternative tower structures, thereby minimizing the
number of facilities located within the City.
4. To permit the construction of new facilities only where all other reasonable
opportunities have been exhausted.
5. To provide for the removal of facilities no longer in operation.
6. To ensure that provisions are made for the reservation of space on a proposed
facility that will enable the City of Saco’s public safety needs are met.
Standards. In addition to meeting the Conditional Use Standards of this Chapter and the
Site Plan Ordinance standards, proposed wireless telecommunications facilities shall
also meet the following standards:
1. Telecommunications structures are limited to one hundred ninety (190) feet in
height. Lesser heights shall be encouraged. The height of the proposed tower
shall not exceed that which is essential for its intended use, nor pose a threat to
public safety.
2. Illumination, signals, and signs are prohibited on telecommunications towers and
antennas, except as required by the Federal Communications Commission and
the Federal Aviation Administration.
3. A new or expanded telecommunications structure shall comply with setback
requirements for the zoning district in which it is proposed, or be set back one
hundred and five (105) percent of its height from all property lines, whichever is
greater. The latter requirement may be satisfied by including areas outside the
property boundaries if secured by an easement.
4. Towers, guys and accessory facilities shall meet the minimum zoning district
setback requirements.
5. The design of buildings and related structures shall use materials, colors,
textures, screenings, and landscaping that will allow the telecommunications
facility to blend with the natural setting and the built environment to the extent
possible.
6. A security fence or wall not less than eight (8) feet in height shall be installed
around the telecommunications facility and all accessory buildings. Access to the
tower shall be via a lockable gate.
7. Visual impacts on the community due to line of sight of the tower or facility from
historic structures, public or natural areas, or residential neighborhoods shall be
minimized and mitigated.
8. When possible, existing structures shall be used as an alternative to the
development of new towers, antennas, or other facilities. Shared use and colocation are mandatory, where feasible. 
CHAPTER 230 § VII24 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 95
Conditions. The Planning Board may establish reasonable conditions related to the
standards of this Section to ensure conformity with the purposes of this chapter and the
Comprehensive Plan.
Exemptions. The following are exempt from the provisions of this section:
1. Emergency wireless telecommunications facilities for emergency communications
by public officials.
2. Facilities on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the City of Saco for
the sole purpose of municipal use.
3. Amateur ham radio stations licensed by the Federal Communications Commission.
4. An antenna that is an accessory use to a residential dwelling unit.
Submission requirements.
1. A map and list of all existing wireless telecommunications facilities within the City of
Saco and all directly abutting communities, including specific locations, heights,
and types of tower.
2. A description of the proposed facility's area of service and how it relates to the
applicant's existing or proposed area of service in northern York and southern
Cumberland Counties.
3. A written statement detailing the carrying capacity of the proposed facility in terms
of the number and types of antennas it is designed to accommodate.
4. A written statement prepared by a qualified professional addressing why a new
facility is necessary. This statement shall provide details such as, but not limited to
existing and proposed service area maps; future expansion needs in the area; the
lack of existing facilities to service the area; the lack of space on existing facilities;
and/or why existing facilities may not be adequately engineered for co-location
purposes.
5. Certification by a structural engineer that the proposed facility will meet all federal,
state, and City of Saco code requirements.
6. A visual impact analysis that quantifies the level of visual impact on properties
located within five hundred (500) feet, within two thousand (2,000) feet and within
two (2) miles of the proposed structure. Said analysis shall include:
a) Photo simulations of the proposed structure taken from perspectives
determined by the City Planner. The photo simulations shall include the
proposed visual impact on historic structures, public areas and residential
neighborhoods. Each photo shall be labeled with the line of sight and elevation
and shall show the color of the proposed structure.
b) Elevation drawings of the proposed structure and accessory structures,
showing height above ground level. 
CHAPTER 230 § VII24 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 96
c) A landscaping plan indicating the placement of the structure on the proposed
site; location of existing structures, trees, and all other significant features of
the site; type and location of vegetation proposed to screen the base of the
structure and accessory buildings; placement and type of fencing that shall
enclose the entire telecommunications facility; color of the structure; and
proposed lighting.
Financial Guarantee. Upon approval and prior to issuance of a building permit, a
financial guarantee acceptable to the City Planner to ensure the timely removal of towers
and antennas that are abandoned shall be submitted. Financial guarantee requirements
are outlined in Article III, Section 3.01(g) of the City’s Site Plan Ordinance. A wireless
telecommunications facility that is not operated for a continuous twelve (12) month
period shall be considered abandoned. The financial guarantee shall include a
mechanism satisfactory to the City Planner for review of the cost of removal of the facility
every five (5) years, and a mechanism for increasing the amount of the guarantee
should the revised cost estimate increase. 
CHAPTER 230 § VIII1 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 97
Performance Standards for Shoreland
Zoning Overlay Districts
Purpose
The purposes of this article are to further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions;
to prevent and control water pollution; to protect fish spawning grounds, aquatic life, bird and
other wildlife habitats; to protect buildings and lands from flooding and accelerated erosion;
to protect archaeological and historic resources; to protect commercial fishing and maritime
industries; to protect freshwater and coastal wetlands; to manage building sites, placement
of structures and land uses; to conserve shore cover; and visual as well as actual points of
access to inland and coastal waters; to conserve natural beauty and open space; and to
anticipate and respond to the impacts of development in shoreland areas.
Applicability
The provisions of this article apply to the “Shoreland Zone” as used in this chapter which
includes the following:
All land areas within two hundred fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance, of the:
a) Normal high-water line of any great pond or river;
b) Upland edge of a coastal wetland, including all areas affected by tidal action;
c) Upland edge of a freshwater wetland;
All land areas within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal highwater line of a stream; The Shoreland Zoning Overlay Districts include the
following, all of which are more particularly described in Article III:
a) The Resource Protection Overlay District (RPOD);
b) Shoreland Overlay District (SLOD);
c) Coastal Development Overlay District (CDOD).
Districts & Shoreland Zoning Map
Resource Protection Overlay District: The Resource Protection Overlay District
(RPOD) shall include the areas shown as RPOD on the Official Zoning Map and
the following areas when they occur within the limits of the Shoreland Zone as
mandated by the State of Maine Mandatory Shoreland Zoning Act, 38 M.R.S. §435
et seq, except that areas which are currently developed need not be included within
the Resource Protection Overlay District:
a) Areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of salt marshes
and salt meadows that are rated “moderate” or “high” value by the Maine
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (MDIF&W) as of January 1, 1973;
and areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of freshwater
wetlands and wetlands associated with rivers which are rated “moderate” or 
CHAPTER 230 § VIII2 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 98
“high” value waterfowl and wading bird habitats, including nesting and feeding
areas, by the MDIF&W, that are depicted on a GIS data layer maintained by
either MDIF&W or the DEP as of December 31, 2008, and the area within 100
feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of the unrated mapped freshwater
wetlands along Stackpole Creek and the Nonesuch River.
b) Land areas within the one-hundred-year floodplains adjacent to tidal waters as
shown on FEMA’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary
Maps.
c) Areas of two or more contiguous acres with sustained slopes of 20% or greater
d) Areas of two or more contiguous acres with hydric soils and supporting wetland
vegetation that are not part of a fresh water or coastal wetland, as defined, and
that are not surficially connected to a water body during the period of normal
high water.
e) Land areas adjacent to tidal waters that are subject to severe erosion or mass
movement, such as steep coastal bluffs
f) All land areas within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line
of a stream
g) All land areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, from the following natural
features: Cascade Brook Falls; Nonesuch River Fault; Saco Heath
h) All land area known as Stratton Island, Bluff Island, Ram Island, and Eagle
Island
i) All land area currently being used as general public access to tidal beaches or
the Saco River
j) All land area within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of Philips Spring, Seal Rock
Spring, Heath Road Spring and Jenkins Road Spring
k) Areas designated by federal, state or municipal government as natural areas of
significance to be protected from development including: Ferry Beach State
Park; Rachel Carson Wildlife Preserve.
Shoreland Overlay District: The Shoreland Overlay District (SLOD) includes all
lands shown on the official zoning map as Shoreland Overlay District.
Coastal Development Overlay District: The Coastal Development Overlay District
(CDOD) includes all lands shown on the official zoning map as Coastal
Development Overlay District.
Effective date.
Effective date of article and article amendments. This article, which was amended
by the municipal legislative body on _________, shall not be effective unless
approved by the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection. A
certified copy of the article as amended, attested and signed by the Municipal
Clerk, shall be forwarded to the Commissioner for approval. If the Commissioner 
CHAPTER 230 § VIII3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 99
fails to act on this article amendment within forty-five (45) days of their receipt of
the amendment, it shall be automatically approved.
Any application for a permit submitted to the municipality within the forty-five (45)
day period shall be governed by the terms of this article as amended if the
amendment is approved by the Commissioner.
Land Use Standards
Activities within the districts subject to these requirements shall conform to the following
additional dimensional requirements:
Dimensional Standards
Dimensional standards for the Resource Protection Overlay, Shoreland Overlay
and Coastal Development Overlay are detailed in Article III with additional
requirements in Table 8-1:
The minimum width of any portion of any lot within one hundred (100) feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a water body or upland
edge of a wetland shall be equal to or greater than the shore frontage
requirement for a lot with the proposed use.
Table 8-1. Minimum Lot Standards
Minimum Lot
Area (sq. ft.)
Minimum Shore
Frontage (ft.)
Residential per dwelling unit
Within the
Shoreland Zone
Adjacent to Tidal
Areas
30,000 150
Within the
Shoreland Zone
Adjacent to NonTidal Areas
40,000 200
Governmental, Institutional, Commercial or
Industrial per principal structure
Within the Shoreland Zone Adjacent to Tidal
Areas, Exclusive of Those Areas Zoned for
Commercial Fisheries and Maritime Activities
40,000 200
Within the Shoreland Zone Adjacent to Tidal
Areas Zoned for Commercial Fisheries and
Maritime Activities
NONE NONE
Within the Shoreland Zone Adjacent to Nontidal Areas
60,000 300
Public and Private Recreational Facilities
Within the Shoreland Zone Adjacent to Tidal
and Non-Tidal Areas
40,000 200
Table 8-2. Dimensional Standards for Principal and Accessory Structures in Natural
Resource districts
CHAPTER 230 § VIII3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 100
Resource
Protection
Overlay
District
Shoreland
Overlay
District
Coastal
Development
Overlay
District
Minimum street frontage (ft)
Lots in RC or LDR districts 200 150 150
Lots in all other districts 200 100 100
Minimum setback to water
bodies:
? Normal High Water
Line of a Stream,
tributary stream, or
upland edge of a
wetland
75 75 75
? Normal High Water
Line of Great Pond
classified GPA or river
flowing to a great pond
classified GPA
100 100 100
Minimum setback to water
bodies for functionallydependent water uses:
0 0 0
Maximum height (ft)2 35 35 35
1. Protected water resources include normal high-water line of freshwater bodies, the maximum spring high tide level
(MHHW) of tidal waters, and the upland edge of a wetland
2. This provision shall not apply to structures such as transmission towers, windmills, antennas, and similar structures having
no floor area. Cupolas, domes, widow's walks or similar features shall be exempt.
If more than one (1) residential dwelling unit, principal governmental, institutional,
commercial, or industrial structure or use, or combination thereof, is constructed or
established on a single parcel, all dimensional requirements shall be met for each
additional dwelling unit, principal structure, or use.
Minimum lot width. Within one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland, the minimum
width of any portion of any lot shall be equal to or greater than the required shore
frontage for the proposed use.
The water body or wetland setback provision shall neither apply to structures which
require direct access to the water as an operational necessity, such as piers, docks
and retaining walls, nor to other functionally water-dependent uses.
The lowest floor elevation or openings of all buildings and structures including
basements shall be elevated at least one (1) foot above the elevation of the one
hundred (100) year flood, the flood of record, or, in the absence of these, the flood
as defined by soil types identified as recent floodplain soils. Accessory structures
may be placed in accordance with City Code Chapter 106, Floodplain
Management, and need not meet the elevation requirements of this subsection.
Lot Coverage 
CHAPTER 230 § VIII3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 101
a) Nonvegetated surfaces shall not exceed a total of twenty (20) percent of the
portion of the lot located within the Shoreland Zoning Overlay District, except in
the SI, CE, and Coastal Development Overlay Districts. This limitation does not
apply to public boat launching facilities, regardless of the district in which the
facility is located.
b) In the SI and CE Districts located adjacent to coastal wetlands, or rivers that do
not flow to great ponds, nonvegetated surfaces shall not exceed a total of
seventy (70) percent of the portion of the lot located within the Shoreland
Overlay District. The total nonvegetated surface shall not exceed forty (40)
percent of a lot or a portion thereof located within the Coastal Development
Overlay District.
c) For the purposes of calculating lot coverage, nonvegetated surfaces include,
but are not limited to, the following: structures, driveways, parking areas, and
other areas from which vegetation has been removed. Naturally occurring
ledge and rock outcroppings are not counted as nonvegetated surfaces when
calculating lot coverage for lots of record on March 24, 1990, and in continuous
existence since that date.
d) For the purposes of this article, a building is a structure designed for habitation,
shelter, storage, or as a gathering place that has a roof. For the purposes of
this rule, the foundation is part of the building. A porch with a roof, attached to
the exterior walls of a building, is considered part of the building.
Notwithstanding the requirements stated above, stairways or similar structures may be
allowed, with a permit from the CEO, to provide shoreline access in areas of steep
slopes or unstable soils, provided that the structure is limited to a maximum of four (4)
feet in width; that the structure does not extend below or over the normal high-water line
of a water body or upland edge of a wetland, unless permitted by the Department of
Environmental Protection pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act, 38 M.R.S.
§480-C; and that the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable access alternative
exists on the property.
For principal structures, water and wetland setback measurements shall be taken from
the top of a coastal bluff that has been identified on coastal bluff maps as being "highly
unstable" or "unstable" by the Maine Geological Survey pursuant to its "Classification of
Coastal Bluffs" and published on the most-recent Coastal Bluff Map. If applicants and
the permitting official(s) are in disagreement as to the specific location of a "highly
unstable" or "unstable" bluff, or where the top of the bluff is located, applicants may, at
their expense, employ a Maine registered professional engineer, a Maine certified soil
scientist, a Maine state geologist, or other qualified individual to make a determination. If
agreement is still not reached, the applicant may appeal the matter to the Board of
Appeals.
On a nonconforming lot of record on which only a residential structure exists, and on
which it is not possible to place an accessory structure meeting the required setbacks, 
CHAPTER 230 § VIII3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 102
whether from water body, tributary stream, or wetlands, the CEO may issue a permit to
place a single accessory structure not to exceed eighty (80) square feet in area nor eight
(8) feet in height, with no utilities, for the storage of yard tools and similar equipment.
The accessory structure shall be located as far from the shoreline or tributary stream or
wetland as practical and shall meet all other applicable standards, including lot coverage
and vegetation clearing standards. The accessory structure shall not be located closer to
the shoreline, tributary stream, or wetland than the principal structure.
Retaining walls that are not necessary for erosion control shall meet the structure
setback requirement, except for low retaining walls and associated fill, provided each of
the following conditions are met:
1. The site has been previously altered and an effective vegetated buffer does not
exist;
2. The wall is at least twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal highwater line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland;
3. The site where the retaining wall will be constructed is legally existing lawn or is a
site eroding from lack of naturally occurring vegetation, and which cannot be
stabilized with vegetative plantings;
4. The total height of the wall, in the aggregate, is not more than twenty-four (24)
inches;
5. The location is outside the one hundred (100)-year floodplain on rivers, streams,
coastal wetlands, and tributary streams, as designated on the Federal Emergency
Management Agency's (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard
Boundary Maps;
6. The area behind the wall is revegetated with grass, shrubs, trees, or a combination
thereof, and no further structural development will occur within the setback area,
including patios and decks; and
7. A vegetated buffer area is established within twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland
edge of a wetland when a natural buffer area does not exist. The buffer area must
meet the following characteristics:
a) The buffer must include shrubs and other woody and herbaceous vegetation.
Where natural ground cover is lacking, leaf or bark mulch or an equivalent
alternative acceptable to the CEO shall be utilized.
b) Plantings, native species only, shall be installed to retard erosion and provide
for effective infiltration of stormwater runoff.
c) A minimum buffer width of fifteen (15) feet, horizontal distance, is required,
measured perpendicular to the normal high-water line or upland edge of a
wetland. 
CHAPTER 230 § VIII4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 103
d) A footpath no greater than four (4) feet in width may traverse the buffer at a
right angle.
e) All permits required by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection
and/or other regional, state, or federal agencies shall have been issued prior to
the start of work.
Piers, Docks, Wharves, and Other Marine Structures Extending Over or Below
the Normal High-Water Line of a Water Body
Performance standards.
All applications for temporary piers, docks, wharves and other marine structures
shall be reviewed by the CEO, and all applications for permanent piers, docks,
wharves and other marine structures shall be reviewed by the Planning Board. All
such applications shall be reviewed for conformance with the following standards
listed below.
If the reviewing authority is unable to reach a decision using the criteria below due
to either inconclusive or conflicting information, the reviewing authority will require
the applicant to submit an environmental impact analysis assessing the proposal's
impact on natural areas, including impacts of the proposed structure in conjunction
with other adjacent or abutting structures.
The reviewing authority may also require that the proposal be modified to ensure
conformance with the standards set forth below. Mitigation measures may include,
but are not limited to, changes in the design and construction of the marine
structure, or changes in magnitude, duration, and location of activities carried out at
the marine structure.
An application shall be approved by the reviewing authority if there is a finding that:
No more than one pier, dock, wharf or similar structure extending or located
below the normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland is allowed
on a single lot; except that when a single lot contains at least twice the
minimum shore frontage as specified in this article, a second structure may be
allowed and may remain as long as the lot is not further divided.
Access from the shore shall be developed on soils appropriate for such use, as
determined through consultation with the local Soil and Water Conservation
District office. Whenever possible, access from the shore to the marine
structure shall be placed on bedrock. Measures shall be taken to minimize soil
erosion both during and after construction.
The proposed location of the marine structure shall not unreasonably interfere
with access to existing marine structures or points of public access, nor shall it
unreasonably interfere with existing developed or natural beach areas.
The marine structure shall be designed, sited, and constructed to mitigate
unreasonable adverse impacts on significant wildlife habitats or unique natural 
CHAPTER 230 § VIII4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 104
areas, including, but not limited to fin fish and shellfish fisheries, salt marshes,
eel grass beds, shorebird feeding and nesting habitats, critical fish spawning
and nursery areas, etc.
Unreasonable interference with the natural flow of any surface or subsurface
waters or impedance of the flow of the current of any river or channel shall be
minimized during construction and subsequent use of the marine structure.
The marine structure shall be designed, sited, and constructed so as not to
encroach upon federally designated navigation channels or mooring areas or
otherwise obstruct by any means whatsoever the free use of piers, docks, and
other common landing places.
The marine structure shall be no larger than necessary to accomplish the
purposes for which it is designed, notwithstanding the dimensional limits listed
below (Table 8-3). Its size and construction shall not change the intensity of
the adjoining land use, and by no means shall it exceed a total distance of
more than one third (1/3) the width of the water body, when proposed for
coastal or inland waterways. The applicant may request a variance from the
dimensional requirements due to the additional requirement of handicap
access or unusual wind or wave conditions.
Table 8-3 Maximum size of marine structures
Type Maximum Width
(feet)
Maximum Length
(feet)
Private piers 6 100a
Commercial piers 12 100a
Ramps 4 As appropriate
Docks, floats 200 square feet
a. Landward of the mean low-water line
Developers of new subdivisions who propose docks as part of the subdivision
shall provide a community dock. The applicant may request a variance for
additional community docks, provided a demonstrated need can be shown for
the additional facilities.
No new structure shall be built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock or other
structure extending beyond the normal high-water line of a water body or within
a wetland unless the structure requires direct access to the water as an
operational necessity.
No existing structures built on, over or abutting a pier, dock, wharf or other
structure extending beyond the normal high-water line of a water body or within
a wetland shall be converted to residential dwelling units in any district.
Except in business districts (including the CE District) and in residential
districts, structures built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock or other
structures extending beyond the normal high-water line of a water body or 
CHAPTER 230 § VIII4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 105
within a wetland shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height above the pier,
wharf, dock, or other structure.
New permanent piers and docks on nontidal waters shall not be permitted
unless it is clearly demonstrated to the Planning Board that a temporary pier or
dock is not feasible, and a permit has been obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act.
Vegetation may be removed in excess of the standards in §VIII10 of this
chapter in order to conduct shoreline stabilization of an eroding shoreline,
provided that a permit is obtained from the Planning Board. Construction
equipment must access the shoreline by barge when feasible, as determined
by the Planning Board.
i. When necessary, the removal of trees and other vegetation to allow for
construction equipment access to the stabilization site via land must be
limited to no more than twelve (12) feet in width. When the stabilization
project is complete, the construction equipment accessway must be
restored.
ii. Revegetation must occur in accordance with §VIII10.
iii. A permit pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act is required
from the Department of Environmental Protection for shoreline
stabilization activities.
A deck over a river may be exempted from shoreland setback requirements if it
is part of a downtown revitalization project that is defined in a project plan
approved by the legislative body of the municipality, and may include the
revitalization of structures formerly used as mills that do not meet the structure
setback requirements, if the deck meets the following requirements:
i. The total deck area attached to the structure does not exceed seven
hundred (700) square feet.
ii. The deck is cantilevered over a segment of a river that is located within
the boundaries of the downtown revitalization project.
iii. The deck is attached to or accessory to an allowed commercial use in a
structure that was constructed prior to 1971 and is located within the
downtown revitalization project.
iv. The construction of the deck complies with all other applicable standards,
except the shoreline setback requirements in §VIII3.
v. The construction of the deck complies with SRCC regulations and all
state and federal laws. New permanent structures, and expansions
thereof, projecting into or over water bodies shall require a permit from
the Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the Natural
Resources Protection Act, 38 M.R.S. §480-C. Permits may also be
required from the Army Corps of Engineers if located in navigable waters. 
CHAPTER 230 § VIII5 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 106
Campgrounds
Campgrounds shall conform to the minimum requirements imposed under state licensing
procedures, Article VII of this chapter, and the following:
Campgrounds shall provide a minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet of land,
not including roads and driveways, for each site. Land supporting wetland
vegetation and land below the normal high-water line of a water body shall not be
included in calculating land area per site.
The areas intended for placement of a recreational vehicle, tent or shelter, and
utility and service buildings shall be set back a minimum of one hundred (100) feet,
horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of a great pond classified GPA
or a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, and seventy-five (75) feet,
horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary
streams, or the upland edge of a wetland.
Parking
Parking areas shall meet the shoreline and tributary stream setback requirements for
structures for the district in which such areas are located, except that in the CE District,
parking areas shall be set back at least (twenty-five) 25 feet from the normal high-water
line or the upland edge of a wetland. The setback requirement for parking areas serving
public boat launching facilities in other districts shall be no less than (fifty) 50 feet from
the normal high-water line or upland edge of a wetland if the Planning Board finds that
no other reasonable alternative exists.
Parking areas shall be designed to prevent stormwater runoff from flowing directly into a
water body and, to the greatest extent practicable, to retain all runoff on site.
All parking spaces shall be nine (9) feet wide and (eighteen) 18 feet long, except that
parking spaces for a vehicle and boat trailer shall be (forty) 40 feet long. See Article X
herein for additional parking standards.
Roads, Driveways, and Drainage Systems
The following standards shall apply to the construction of roads and/or driveways and
drainage systems, culverts and other related features:
1. Setback.
a) Roads and driveways shall be set back at least seventy-five (75) feet,
horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of water bodies, tributary
streams, or the upland edge of a wetland, unless no reasonable alternative
exists as determined by the Planning Board. If no other reasonable alternative
exists, the road and/or driveway setback requirement shall be no less than fifty
(50) feet, horizontal distance, upon clear showing by the applicant that
appropriate techniques will be used to prevent sedimentation of the water 
CHAPTER 230 § VIII7 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 107
body. Such techniques may include, but are not limited to, the installation of
settling basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and
turnouts placed so as to avoid sedimentation of the water body, tributary
stream, or wetland.
b) On slopes of greater than twenty (20) percent, the road or driveway setback
shall be increased by ten (10) feet, horizontal distance, for each five (5)
percent increase in slope above twenty (20) percent.
c) This subsection shall neither apply to approaches to water crossings nor to
roads or driveways that provide access to permitted structures, and facilities
located nearer to the shoreline due to an operational necessity.
2. Existing public roads may be expanded within the legal road right-of-way
regardless of its setback from a water body, tributary stream or wetland.
3. New roads and driveways are prohibited in the Resource Protection Overlay District
except to provide access to permitted uses within the district, or as approved by the
Planning Board upon a finding that no reasonable alternative route or location is
available outside the district, in which case the road and/or driveway shall be set
back as far as practicable from the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary
stream, or upland edge of a wetland.
4. Road and driveway banks shall be no steeper than a slope of two (2) horizontal to
one (1) vertical and shall be graded and stabilized in accordance with the
provisions for erosion and sedimentation control detailed in §VIII14.
5. Road and driveway grades shall be no greater than ten (10) percent except for
short segments of less than two hundred (200) feet.
6. In order to prevent road and driveway surface drainage from directly entering water
bodies, tributary streams, or wetlands, roads and driveways shall be designed,
constructed, and maintained to empty onto an unscarified buffer strip at least fifty
(50) feet plus two (2) times the average slope, in width between the outflow point of
the ditch or culvert and the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream,
or upland edge of a wetland. Surface drainage which is directed to an unscarified
buffer strip shall be diffused or spread out to promote infiltration of the runoff and to
minimize channelized flow of the drainage through the buffer strip.
7. Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips and water turnouts shall be
installed in a manner effective in directing drainage onto unscarified buffer strips
before the flow gains sufficient volume or head to erode the road, driveway, or
ditch. To accomplish this, the following shall apply:
a) Ditch relief culverts, drainage dips, and associated water turnouts shall be
spaced along the road or driveway at intervals no greater than indicated in
Table 8-4:
Table 8-4 Maximum distance between ditch relief culvert, drainage dips, and
associated water turnouts
Grade Spacing 
CHAPTER 230 § VIII8 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 108
(percent) (feet)
0% to 2% 250
3% to 5% 200 to 135
6% to 10% 100 to 80
11% to 15% 80 to 60
16% to 20% 60 to 45
21+ % 40
b) Drainage dips may be used in place of ditch relief culverts only where the
grade is ten (10) percent or less.
c) On sections having slopes greater than ten (10) percent, ditch relief culverts
shall be placed at approximately a thirty (30) degree angle downslope from a
line perpendicular to the centerline of the road or driveway.
d) Ditch relief culverts shall be sufficiently sized and properly installed in order to
allow for effective functioning, and their inlet and outlet ends shall be
established with appropriate materials.
e) Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other stormwater runoff
control installations associated with roads and driveways shall be maintained
on a regular basis to assure effective functioning.
Mineral Exploration and Extraction
Mineral exploration to determine the nature or extent of mineral resources shall be
accomplished by hand sampling, test boring, or other methods which create minimal
disturbance of less than one hundred (100) square feet of ground surface. A permit from
the CEO shall be required for mineral exploration which exceeds the above limitation. All
excavations, including test pits and holes, shall be immediately capped, filled or secured
by other equally effective measures to restore disturbed areas and to protect the public
health and safety.
Mineral extraction may be permitted under the following conditions:
1. A reclamation plan shall be filed with and approved by the Planning Board before a
permit is granted. Such plan shall describe in detail procedures to be undertaken to
fulfill the requirements of Subsection B (4) below.
2. No part of any extraction operation, including drainage and runoff control features,
shall be permitted within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of any water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a
wetland. Extraction operations shall not be permitted within fifty (50) feet, horizontal
distance, of any property line without written permission of the owner of such
adjacent property.
3. Gravel pits within the Shoreland Zone shall be set back as far as practicable from
the normal high-water line and no less than seventy-five (75) feet and screened
from the river by existing or planted landscaping vegetation. 
CHAPTER 230 § VIII9 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 109
4. Within twelve (12) months following the completion of extraction operations at any
extraction site, which operations shall be deemed complete when less than one
hundred (100) cubic yards of materials are removed in any consecutive twelvemonth period, ground levels and grades shall be established in accordance with the
following:
a) All debris, stumps, and similar material shall be removed for disposal in an
approved location or shall be buried on site. Only materials generated on site
may be buried or covered on site.
b) The final graded slope shall be two to one (2:1) slope or flatter.
c) Topsoil or loam shall be retained to cover all disturbed land areas, which shall
be reseeded and stabilized with vegetation native to the area. Additional
topsoil or loam shall be obtained from off-site sources if necessary to complete
the stabilization project.
d) In keeping with the purposes of this chapter, the Planning Board may impose
such conditions as are necessary to minimize the adverse impacts associated
with mineral extraction operations on surrounding uses and resources.
Agriculture
All spreading of manure shall be accomplished in conformance with the Manure
Utilization Guidelines published by the former Maine Department of Agriculture on
November 1, 2001, and the Nutrient Management Law (7 M.R.S. §4201-4214.
Manure shall not be stored or stockpiled within three hundred (300) feet, horizontal
distance, of a water body, tributary stream, or wetland. All manure storage areas within
the Shoreland Zoning Overlay Districts must be constructed or modified such that the
facility produces no discharge of effluent or contaminated stormwater.
Agricultural activities involving tillage of soil greater than forty thousand (40,000) square
feet in surface area within the Shoreland Zoning Overlay Districts shall require a
conservation plan to be filed with the Planning Board. Nonconformance with the
provisions of said plan shall be considered a violation of this chapter.
There shall be no new tilling of soil within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from
water bodies nor within twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal distance, of tributary streams and
wetlands. Operations in existence on the effective date of this chapter and not in
conformance with this provision may be maintained, provided that such tilling is
conducted in accordance with a soil and water conservation plan.
Newly established livestock grazing areas shall not be permitted within seventy-five (75)
feet, horizontal distance, of water bodies nor within twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal
distance, of tributary streams and wetlands. Livestock grazing associated with ongoing
farm activities, and which is not in conformance with the above setback provisions, may 
CHAPTER 230 § VIII10 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 110
continue, provided that such grazing is conducted in accordance with a conservation
plan that has been filed with the Planning Board.
Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities other than Timber Harvesting
Within the RP Overlay District, cutting or removal of vegetation shall be limited to that
which is necessary for uses expressly authorized in that district and shall be
demonstrated on a lot clearing plan presented to the CEO or Planning Board as
appropriate.
Buffer strip.
In areas that are not in a RP Overlay District and within seventy-five (75) feet,
horizontal distance, from any water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a
wetland, a buffer strip of vegetation shall be preserved as follows:
a) There shall be no cleared opening greater than two hundred fifty (250) square
feet in the forest canopy (or other existing woody vegetation if a forested
canopy is not present), as measured from the outer limits of the tree or shrub
crown. However, a single footpath not to exceed six (6) feet in width, as
measured between tree trunks and/or shrub stems is allowed for accessing the
shoreline, provided that a cleared line of sight to the water through the buffer
strip is not created.
b) Selective cutting of trees within the buffer strip is allowed, provided that a welldistributed stand of trees and other natural vegetation is maintained. For the
purposes of this section, a "well-distributed stand of trees" adjacent to water
bodies, tributary streams, and wetlands is defined as maintaining a minimum
rating score of sixteen (16) or more per twenty-five (25) foot by fifty (50)foot
rectangular area (1,250 square feet) as determined by the following rating
system (Table 8-5).
Table 8-5 Points per tree
Diameter of Tree at 4 1/2 feet
Above Ground Level (inches)
Points
2 to < 4 1
4 to < 8 2
8 to < 12 4
12 or greater 8
c) For the purposes of Subsection B(1)(b) above, "other natural vegetation" is
defined as retaining existing vegetation under three (3) feet high and other
ground cover and retaining at least fsuive (5) saplings less than two (2) inches
in diameter at four and one-half (4.5) feet above ground level for each twentyfive (25) foot by fifty (50) foot rectangular area. If five saplings do not exist, no
woody stems less than two inches in diameter can be removed until five
saplings have been recruited into the plot.
CHAPTER 230 § VIII10 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 111
d) Notwithstanding the above provisions, no more than forty (40) percent of the
total volume of trees four (4) inches or more in diameter, measured at four and
one-half (4.5) feet above ground level, may be removed in any ten (10) year
period.
e) Pruning of tree branches on the bottom one-third (1/3) of the tree is allowed.
f) In order to maintain a buffer strip of vegetation, when the removal of stormdamaged, dead or hazard trees results in the creation of cleared openings,
these openings shall be replanted with native tree species and non-invasive
species that are migrating to Maine from southern New England due to climate
change, in accordance with §VIII13 unless existing new tree growth is present.
g) In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitats, existing vegetation under
three feet high and other ground cover, including leaf litter and the forest duff
layer, shall not be cut, covered, or removed, except to provide for a footpath or
other permitted uses as described above.
h) In order to maintain the vegetation in the shoreline buffer, clearing or removal
of vegetation for allowed activities, including associated construction and
related equipment operation, within or outside the shoreline buffer, must
comply with the requirements of §VIII10.
The provisions of Subsection B(1) above shall not apply to those portions of public
recreational facilities adjacent to public swimming areas. Cleared areas, however,
shall be limited to the minimum area necessary.
Selective cutting.
1. At distances greater than seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from the
normal high-water line of any water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a
wetland, there shall be allowed on any lot, in any ten (10) year period, selective
cutting of not more than forty (40) percent of the volume of trees four (4) inches or
more in diameter, measured four and one-half (4.5) feet above ground level. Tree
removal in conjunction with the development of permitted uses shall be included in
the forty (40) percent calculation. For purposes of these standards, volume may be
considered to be equivalent to basal area.
2. In no event shall cleared openings for any purpose, including, but not limited to,
principal and accessory structures, driveways, lawns and sewage disposal areas,
exceed, in the aggregate, twenty-five (25) percent of the lot area within the
Shoreland Zoning Overlay Districts or ten thousand (10,000) square feet,
whichever is greater, including land previously cleared. This provision applies to the
portion of a lot within the Shoreland Zoning Overlay Districts, including the buffer
area, but shall not apply to industrial or business districts, including the CE District.
Legally existing, nonconforming cleared openings may be maintained but shall not be
enlarged, except as allowed by this chapter. 
CHAPTER 230 § VIII11 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 112
Fields and other cleared openings which have reverted to primarily shrubs, trees, or
other woody vegetation shall be regulated under the provisions of this section.
Hazard Trees, Storm-Damaged Trees, and Dead Tree Removal
Hazard trees in the Shoreland Zoning Overlay Districts may be removed without a permit
after consultation with the CEO if the following requirements are met:
1. Within the shoreline buffer, if the removal of a hazard tree results in a cleared
opening in the tree canopy greater than two hundred fifty (250) square feet,
replacement with native tree species is required, unless there is new tree growth
already present. New tree growth must be as near as practicable to where the
hazard tree was removed and be at least two (2) inches in diameter, measured at
four and one-half (4.5) feet above ground level. If new growth is not present,
replacement trees shall consist of native species and be at least four feet high and
be not less than two (2) inches in diameter. Stumps may not be removed.
2. Outside of the shoreline buffer, when hazard tree removal exceeds forty (40)
percent of the volume of trees four (4) inches or more in diameter, measured at four
and one-half (4.5) feet above ground level in any ten-year period, and/or results in
cleared openings exceeding twenty-five (25) percent of the lot area within the
Shoreland Zoning Overlay Districts or ten thousand (10,000) square feet,
whichever is greater, replacement with native tree species is required, unless new
tree growth is already present. New tree growth must be as near as practicable to
where the hazard tree was removed and be at least two (2) inches in diameter,
measured at four and one-half (4.5) feet above ground level. If new growth is not
present, replacement trees shall consist of native species and be at least two
inches in diameter, measured at four and one-half (4.5) feet above ground level.
3. Removal of standing dead trees, resulting from natural causes, is permissible
without need for replanting or a permit, provided the removal does not result in
creation of new lawn areas, or other permanently cleared areas, and stumps are
not removed. For purposes of this provision, dead trees are those trees that contain
no foliage during the growing season.
4. The CEO may require the property owner to submit an evaluation from a licensed
forester or arborist before any hazard tree can be removed within the Shoreland
Zoning Overlay Districts.
5. The CEO may require more than a one-for-one replacement for hazard trees
removed that exceed eight (8) inches in diameter measured at four and one-half
(4.5) feet above ground level.
Storm-damaged trees in the Shoreland Zoning Overlay Districts may be removed
without a permit after consultation with the CEO if the following requirements are met:
1. Within the shoreline buffer, when removal of storm-damaged trees results in a
cleared opening in the tree canopy greater than two hundred fifty (250) square feet, 
CHAPTER 230 § VIII12 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 113
replanting is not required, but the area shall be required to naturally revegetate, and
the following requirements must be met:
a) The area from which a storm-damaged tree is removed does not result in new
lawn areas or other permanently cleared areas;
b) Stumps from the storm-damaged trees may not be removed;
c) Limbs damaged from a storm event may be pruned even if they extend beyond
the bottom one-third (1/3) of the tree; and
d) If, after one growing season, no natural regeneration or regrowth is present,
replanting of native tree seedlings or saplings is required at a density of one (1)
seedling per every eighty (80) square feet of lost canopy.
2. Outside of the shoreline buffer, if removal of storm-damaged trees exceeds forty
(40) percent of the volume of trees four (4) inches or more in diameter, measured
at four and one-half (4.5) feet above the ground level, in any ten (10) year period or
results, in the aggregate, in cleared openings exceeding twenty-five (25) percent of
the lot area within the Shoreland Zoning Overlay Districts or ten thousand (10,000)
square feet, whichever is greater, and no natural regeneration occurs within one
growing season, then native tree seedlings or saplings shall be replanted on a onefor-one basis.
Exemptions to Clearing and Vegetation Removal Requirements
A. The following activities are exempt from clearing and vegetation removal standards set
forth in §VIII10, provided that all other applicable requirements of this chapter are
complied with and vegetation removal is limited to that which is necessary:
1. Vegetation removal that occurs at least once every two (2) years for maintenance
of legally existing areas that do not comply with the vegetation standards in this
chapter, such as, but not limited to, cleared openings in the canopy or fields. Such
areas shall not be enlarged, except as allowed by this section. If any of these
areas, due to lack of vegetation removal every two (2) years, reverts back to
primarily woody vegetation, the requirements of §VIII10 apply.
2. Vegetation removal from the location of allowed structures or allowed uses, when
the shoreline setback requirements are not applicable.
3. Vegetation removal from the location of public swimming areas associated with an
allowed public recreational facility.
4. Vegetation removal associated with allowed agricultural uses, provided best
management practices are utilized, and provided all requirements of §VIII9 are
complied with.
5. Vegetation removal associated with brownfields or voluntary response action
program (VRAP) projects, provided that vegetation removal is necessary for
remediation activities to clean up contamination on a site approved by the 
CHAPTER 230 § VIII13 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 114
Commissioner that is part of a state or federal brownfields program or a voluntary
response action program pursuant 38 M.R.S. §343-E and that is located along:
A coastal wetland; or
A river that does not flow to a great pond classified as GPA pursuant to 38
M.R.S. §465-A.
6. Removal of nonnative invasive vegetation species, provided the following minimum
requirements are met:
a) If vegetation removal occurs via wheeled or tracked motorized equipment, the
wheeled or tracked motorized equipment is operated and stored at least
twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal distance, from the shoreline, except that
wheeled or tracked equipment may be operated or stored on existing structural
surfaces, such as pavement or gravel;
b) Vegetation removal within twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal distance, from the
shoreline occurs via hand tools; and
c) If applicable clearing and vegetation removal standards are exceeded due to
removal of nonnative invasive species vegetation, the area shall be
revegetated with native species.
7. Vegetation removal associated with emergency response activities conducted by
the Department of Environmental Protection, the United States Environmental
Protection Agency, the United States Coast Guard, and their agents.
Revegetation Requirements
A. When revegetation is required in response to violations of vegetation standards set forth
in §VIII10, to address removal of nonnative vegetation invasive species, or as a
mechanism to allow for development that may otherwise not be permissible due to
vegetation standards, including vegetation removal in conjunction with a shoreline
stabilization project, revegetation must comply with the following requirements:
1. The property owner must submit a revegetation plan, prepared with and signed by
a qualified professional, that describes revegetation activities and maintenance.
The plan must include a scaled site plan depicting where vegetation was or is to be
removed, where existing vegetation will remain, and where vegetation will be
planted, including a list of all vegetation to be planted.
2. Revegetation must occur along the same segment of shoreline and in the same
area where vegetation was removed and at a density comparable to the preexisting
vegetation, except where a shoreline stabilization activity does not allow
revegetation to occur in the same area and at a density comparable to the
preexisting vegetation, in which case revegetation must occur along the same
segment of shoreline and as close as possible to the area where vegetation was
removed. 
CHAPTER 230 § VIII13 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 115
3. If part of a permitted activity, revegetation shall occur before the permit expiration. If
the activity or revegetation is not completed before the permit expiration, a new
revegetation plan shall be submitted with any renewal or new permit application.
4. Revegetation activities must meet the following requirements for trees and
saplings:
a) All trees and saplings removed must be replaced with native noninvasive
species;
b) Replacement vegetation must at a minimum consist of saplings;
c) If more than three (3) trees or saplings are planted, at least three (3) different
species shall be used;
d) No one species shall make up fifty (50) percent or more of the number of trees
and saplings planted;
e) If revegetation is required for a shoreline stabilization project, and it is not
possible to plant trees and saplings in the same area where trees or saplings
were removed, then trees or saplings must be planted in a location that
effectively reestablishes the screening between the shoreline and structures;
and
f) A survival rate of at least eighty (80) percent of planted trees or saplings is
required for a minimum five (5) year period.
5. Revegetation activities must meet the following requirements for woody vegetation
and other vegetation under three (3) feet high:
a) All woody vegetation and vegetation under three feet high must be replaced
with native noninvasive species of woody vegetation and vegetation under
three feet high, as applicable;
b) Woody vegetation and vegetation under three (3) feet high shall be planted in
quantities and variety sufficient to prevent erosion and provide effective
infiltration of stormwater;
c) If more than three (3) woody vegetation plants will be planted, then at least
three (3) different species shall be planted;
d) No one species shall make up fifty (50) percent or more of the number of
planted woody vegetation plants; and
e) Survival of planted woody vegetation and vegetation under three (3) feet high
must be sufficient to remain in compliance with the standards contained within
this chapter for a minimum of five (5) years.
6. Revegetation activities must meet the following requirements for ground vegetation
and ground cover:
a) All removed ground vegetation and ground cover must be replaced with native
herbaceous vegetation in quantities and variety sufficient to prevent erosion
and provide effective infiltration of stormwater; 
CHAPTER 230 § VIII14 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 116
b) Where necessary due to lack of sufficient ground cover, an area must be
supplemented with a minimum four (4) inch depth of leaf mulch and/or bark
mulch to prevent erosion and provide for effective infiltration of stormwater; and
c) Survival and functionality of ground vegetation and ground cover must be
sufficient to remain in compliance with the standards contained within this
chapter for a minimum of (5) five years.
Erosion and Sedimentation Control
A. All activities which involve filling, grading, excavation or other similar activities which
result in un-stabilized soil conditions and which require a permit shall also require a
written soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. The plan shall be submitted to the
permitting authority for approval and shall include, where applicable, provisions for:
1. Mulching and revegetation of disturbed soil.
2. Temporary runoff control features, such as hay bales (that contain no invasive
species), silt fencing or diversion ditches.
3. Permanent stabilization structures, such as retaining walls or riprap.
B. To create the least potential for erosion, development shall be designed to fit with
topography and soils of sites. Areas of steep slopes where high cuts and fills may be
required shall be avoided wherever possible, and natural contours shall be followed as
closely as possible.
C. Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall apply to all aspects of a proposed
project involving land disturbance and shall be in operation during all stages of the
activity. The amount of exposed soil at every phase of construction shall be minimized to
reduce erosion potential.
D. Any exposed ground area shall be temporarily or permanently stabilized within one (1)
week from the time it was last actively worked, by riprap, sod, seed, and mulch, or other
effective measures. In all cases, permanent stabilization shall occur within nine (9)
months of initial exposure date. In addition:
1. Where mulch is used, it shall be applied at a rate of at least one (1) bale per five
hundred (500) square feet and shall be maintained until a catch of vegetation is
established.
2. Anchoring the mulch with netting, peg and twine or other suitable method may be
required to maintain mulch cover.
3. Additional measures shall be taken where necessary to avoid siltation into water.
Such measures may include staked hay bales and/or silt fences.
E. Natural and man-made drainageways and drainage outlets shall be protected from
erosion from water flowing through them. Drainageways shall be designed and 
CHAPTER 230 § VIII15 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 117
constructed in order to carry water from a fifty-year (50) storm or greater and shall be
stabilized with vegetation or lined with riprap.
Septic Waste Disposal
A. All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be installed in conformance with State of
Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules and the following:
1. Clearing or removal of woody vegetation necessary to site a new system and any
associated fill extension shall not extend closer than seventy-five (75) feet,
horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of a water body or the upland
edge of a wetland to the potential water source.
2. A holding tank is not allowed for a first-time residential use in the Shoreland Zoning
Overlay Districts.
Soils
Land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which proposed uses or structures can be
established or maintained without causing adverse environmental impacts, including severe
erosion, mass soil movement, improper drainage, and water pollution, whether during or
after construction. Proposed uses requiring subsurface wastewater disposal, and
commercial or industrial development and other similar intensive land uses, shall require a
soils report based on an on-site investigation and be prepared by state-certified
professionals. Certified persons may include Maine certified soils scientists, Maine
registered professional engineers, Maine state certified geologists and other persons who
have training and experience in recognition and evaluation of soil properties. The report
shall be based upon the analysis of characteristics of the soil and surrounding land and
water areas, maximum groundwater elevation, presence of ledge, drainage conditions, and
other pertinent data which the evaluator deems appropriate. The soils report shall include
recommendations for a proposed use to counteract soil limitations where they exist.
Water Quality
No activity shall deposit on or into the ground or discharge to waters of the state any
pollutant that, by itself or in combination with other activities or substances, will impair
designated uses of the water classification of the water body, tributary stream or wetland.
Archaeological Sites
Proposed land use activity involving structural development or soil disturbance on or
adjacent to sites listed on, or eligible to be listed on, the National Register of Historic Places,
as determined by the permitting authority, shall be submitted by the applicant to the Maine
Historic Preservation Commission for review and comment, at least twenty (20) days prior to
action by the permitting authority. The permitting authority shall consider comments prior to
rendering a decision on the application.
CHAPTER 230 § VIII19 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 118
Variances and Appeals – See Article XIV.
Definitions Pertaining to Shoreland Zoning
Except as otherwise provided, for purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall
apply:
Accessory structure or use - a use or structure which is incidental and subordinate to the
principal use or structure. Accessory uses, when aggregated, shall not subordinate the
principal use of the lot. A deck or similar extension of the principal structure or a garage
attached to the principal structure by a roof or a common wall is considered part of the
principal structure.
Aggrieved party - an owner of land whose property is directly or indirectly affected by the
granting or denial of a permit or variance under this Ordinance; a person whose land abuts
land for which a permit or variance has been granted; or any other person or group of
persons who have suffered particularized injury as a result of the granting or denial of such
permit or variance.
Agriculture - the production, keeping or maintenance for sale or lease of plants or animals,
including, but not limited to, forages and sod crops, grains and seed crops, dairy animals
and dairy products, poultry and poultry products, livestock, fruits and vegetables and
ornamental green-house products. Agriculture does not include forest management and
timber harvesting activities.
Aquaculture - the growing or propagation of harvestable freshwater, estuarine, or marine
plant or animal species.
Basal Area - the area of cross-section of a tree stem at 4 1/2 feet above ground level and
inclusive of bark.
Basement - any portion of a structure with a floor-to-ceiling height of 6 feet or more and
having more than 50% of its volume below the existing ground level.
Boat Launching Facility - a facility designed primarily for the launching and landing of
watercraft, and which may include an access ramp, docking area, and parking spaces for
vehicles and trailers.
Bureau of Forestry – State of Maine Department of Agriculture, Conservation, and
Forestry, Bureau of Forestry.
Campground - any area or tract of land to accommodate two (2) or more parties in temporary
living quarters, including, but not limited to tents, recreational vehicles or other shelters.
Canopy – the more or less continuous cover formed by tree crowns in a wooded area.
CHAPTER 230 § VIII20 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 119
Coastal wetland - all tidal and subtidal lands; all lands with vegetation present that is tolerant
of salt water and occurs primarily in a salt water or estuarine habitat; and any swamp, marsh,
bog, beach, flat or other contiguous low land that is subject to tidal action during the highest
tide level for the year in which an activity is proposed as identified in tide tables published by
the National Ocean Service. Coastal wetlands may include portions of coastal sand dunes.
Commercial use - the use of lands, buildings, or structures, other than a "home occupation,"
defined below, the intent and result of which activity is the production of income from the
buying and selling of goods and/or services, exclusive of rental of residential buildings and/or
dwelling units.
Cross-sectional area – the cross-sectional area of a stream or tributary stream channel is
determined by multiplying the stream or tributary stream channel width by the average
stream or tributary stream channel depth. The stream or tributary stream channel width is
the straight line distance from the normal high-water line on one side of the channel to the
normal high-water line on the opposite side of the channel. The average stream or tributary
stream channel depth is the average of the vertical distances from a straight line between
the normal high-water lines of the stream or tributary stream channel to the bottom of the
channel.
DBH – the diameter of a standing tree measured 4.5 feet from ground level.
Development – a change in land use involving alteration of the land, water or vegetation, or
the addition or alteration of structures or other construction not naturally occurring.
Dimensional requirements - numerical standards relating to spatial relationships including
but not limited to setback, lot area, shore frontage and height.
Disability - any disability, infirmity, malformation, disfigurement, congenital defect or mental
condition caused by bodily injury, accident, disease, birth defect, environmental conditions
or illness; and also includes the physical or mental condition of a person which constitutes a
substantial handicap as determined by a physician or in the case of mental handicap, by a
psychiatrist or psychologist, as well as any other health or sensory impairment which
requires special education, vocational rehabilitation or related services.
Disruption of shoreline integrity - the alteration of the physical shape, properties, or
condition of a shoreline at any location by timber harvesting and related activities. A
shoreline where shoreline integrity has been disrupted is recognized by compacted,
scarified and/or rutted soil, an abnormal channel or shoreline cross-section, and in the case
of flowing waters, a profile and character altered from natural conditions.
Driveway - a vehicular access-way less than five hundred (500) feet in length serving two
single-family dwellings or one two-family dwelling, or less.
Emergency operations - operations conducted for the public health, safety or general
welfare, such as protection of resources from immediate destruction or loss, law 
CHAPTER 230 § VIII20 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 120
enforcement, and operations to rescue human beings, property and livestock from the threat
of destruction or injury.
Essential services - gas, electrical or communication facilities; steam, fuel, electric power
or water transmission or distribution lines, towers and related equipment; telephone cables
or lines, poles and related equipment; gas, oil, water, slurry or other similar pipelines;
municipal sewage lines, collection or supply systems; and associated storage tanks. Such
systems may include towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarms
and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar accessories, but shall not include
service drops or buildings which are necessary for the furnishing of such services.
Expansion of a structure - an increase in the footprint of a structure, including all
extensions such as, but not limited to: attached decks, garages, porches and greenhouses.
Expansion of use - the addition of one or more months to a use's operating season; or the
use of more footprint of a structure or ground area devoted to a particular use.
Family - one or more persons occupying a premise and living as a single housekeeping unit.
Floodway - the channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must
be reserved in order to discharge the 100-year flood without cumulatively increasing the
water surface elevation by more than one foot in height.
Floor area - the sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a structure enclosed by
exterior walls.
Footprint - the entire area of ground covered by the structure(s) on a lot, including but not limited
to cantilevered or similar overhanging extensions, as well as unenclosed structures, such as
patios and decks.
Forest management activities - timber cruising and other forest resource evaluation
activities, pesticide or fertilizer application, management planning activities, timber stand
improvement, pruning, regeneration of forest stands, and other similar or associated
activities, exclusive of timber harvesting and the construction, creation or maintenance of
roads.
Forest Stand - a contiguous group of trees sufficiently uniform in age class distribution,
composition, and structure, and growing on a site of sufficiently uniform quality, to be a
distinguishable unit.
Forested wetland - a freshwater wetland dominated by woody vegetation that is six (6)
meters tall (approximately twenty (20) feet) or taller.
CHAPTER 230 § VIII20 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 121
Foundation - the supporting substructure of a building or other structure, excluding wooden
sills and post supports, but including basements, slabs, frostwalls, or other base consisting
of concrete, block, brick or similar material.
Freshwater wetland - freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas, other than
forested wetlands, which are: 1) Of ten or more contiguous acres; or of less than 10
contiguous acres and adjacent to a surface water body, excluding any river, stream or
brook, such that in a natural state, the combined surface area is in excess of 10 acres; and
2) Inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for a duration
sufficient to support, and which under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils. Freshwater wetlands may
contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that do not conform to the criteria of this
definition.
Functionally water-dependent uses - those uses that require, for their primary purpose,
location on submerged lands or that require direct access to, or location in, coastal or inland
waters and that can not be located away from these waters. The uses include, but are not
limited to, commercial and recreational fishing and boating facilities, finfish and shellfish
processing, fish-related storage and retail and wholesale fish marketing facilities, waterfront
dock and port facilities, shipyards and boat building facilities, marinas, navigation aids,
basins and channels, shoreline structures necessary for erosion control purposes, industrial
uses dependent upon water-borne transportation or requiring large volumes of cooling or
processing water that can not reasonably be located or operated at an inland site, and uses
that primarily provide general public access to coastal or inland waters. Recreational boat
storage buildings are not considered to be a functionally water-dependent use.
Great pond - any inland body of water which in a natural state has a surface area in excess
of ten acres, and any inland body of water artificially formed or increased which has a
surface area in excess of thirty (30) acres except for the purposes of this Ordinance, where
the artificially formed or increased inland body of water is completely surrounded by land
held by a single owner,
Great pond classified GPA - any great pond classified GPA, pursuant to 38 M.R.S. Article
4-A Section 465-A. This classification includes some, but not all impoundments of rivers that
are defined as great ponds.
Ground cover – small plants, fallen leaves, needles and twigs, and the partially decayed
organic matter of the forest floor.
Harvest Area - the area where timber harvesting and related activities, including the cutting
of trees, skidding, yarding, and associated road construction take place. The area affected
by a harvest encompasses the area within the outer boundaries of these activities,
excepting unharvested areas greater than 10 acres within the area affected by a harvest.
CHAPTER 230 § VIII20 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 122
Hazard tree - a tree with a structural defect, combination of defects, or disease resulting in a
structural defect that under the normal range of environmental conditions at the site exhibits
a high probability of failure and loss of a major structural component of the tree in a manner
that will strike a target. A normal range of environmental conditions does not include
meteorological anomalies, such as, but not limited to: hurricanes; hurricane-force winds;
tornados; microbursts; or significant ice storm events. Hazard trees also include those trees
that pose a serious and imminent risk to bank stability. A target is the area where personal
injury or property damage could occur if the tree or a portion of the tree fails. Targets include
roads, driveways, parking areas, structures, campsites, and any other developed area
where people frequently gather and linger.
Height of a structure - the vertical distance between the mean original (prior to
construction) grade at the downhill side of the structure and the highest point of the
structure, excluding chimneys, steeples, antennas, and similar appurtenances that have no
floor area.
Home occupation - an occupation or profession which is customarily conducted on or in a
residential structure or property and which is 1) clearly incidental to and compatible with the
residential use of the property and surrounding residential uses; and 2) which employs no
more than two (2) persons other than family members residing in the home.
Increase in nonconformity of a structure - any change in a structure or property which
causes further deviation from the dimensional standard(s) creating the nonconformity such
as, but not limited to, reduction in water body, tributary stream or wetland setback distance,
increase in lot coverage, or increase in height of a structure. Property changes or structure
expansions which either meet the dimensional standard or which cause no further increase
in the linear extent of nonconformance of the existing structure shall not be considered to
increase nonconformity. For example, there is no increase in nonconformity with the setback
requirement for water bodies, wetlands, or tributary streams if the expansion extends no
further into the required setback area than does any portion of the existing nonconforming
structure. Hence, a structure may be expanded laterally provided that the expansion
extends no closer to the water body, tributary stream, or wetland than the closest portion of
the existing structure from that water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Included in this
allowance are expansions which in-fill irregularly shaped structures.
Individual private campsite - an area of land which is not associated with a campground,
but which is developed for repeated camping by only one group not to exceed ten (10)
individuals and which involves site improvements which may include but not be limited to a
gravel pad, parking area, fire place, or tent platform.
Industrial - The assembling, fabrication, finishing, manufacturing, packaging or processing
of goods, or the extraction of minerals.
CHAPTER 230 § VIII20 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 123
Institutional – a non-profit or quasi-public use, or institution such as a church, library, public
or private school, hospital, or municipally owned or operated building, structure or land used
for public purposes.
Land Management Road - a route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil,
gravel, or other surfacing materials constructed for, or created by, the passage of motorized
vehicles and used primarily for timber harvesting and related activities, including associated
log yards, but not including skid trails or skid roads.
Licensed Forester - a forester licensed under 32 M.R.S. Chapter 76.
Lot area - The area of land enclosed within the boundary lines of a lot, minus land below the
normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland and areas beneath
roads serving more than two lots.
Marina - a business establishment having frontage on navigable water and, as its principal
use, providing for hire offshore moorings or docking facilities for boats, and which may also
provide accessory services such as boat and related sales, boat repair and construction,
indoor and outdoor storage of boats and marine equipment, bait and tackle shops and
marine fuel service facilities.
Market value - the estimated price a property will bring in the open market and under
prevailing market conditions in a sale between a willing seller and a willing buyer, both
conversant with the property and with prevailing general price levels.
Mineral exploration - hand sampling, test boring, or other methods of determining the
nature or extent of mineral resources which create minimal disturbance to the land and
which include reasonable measures to restore the land to its original condition.
Mineral extraction - any operation within any twelve (12) month period which removes
more than one hundred (100) cubic yards of soil, topsoil, loam, sand, gravel, clay, rock,
peat, or other like material from its natural location and to transport the product removed,
away from the extraction site.
Minimum lot width - the closest distance between the side lot lines of a lot. When only two
lot lines extend into the shoreland zone, both lot lines shall be considered to be side lot
lines.
Multi-unit residential - a residential structure containing three (3) or more residential dwelling
units.
Native – indigenous to the local forests.
CHAPTER 230 § VIII20 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 124
Non-conforming condition – non-conforming lot, structure or use which is allowed solely
because it was in lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendment
took effect.
Non-conforming lot - a single lot of record which, at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this Ordinance, does not meet the area, frontage, or width requirements of
the district in which it is located.
Non-conforming structure - a structure which does not meet any one or more of the
following dimensional requirements; setback, height, lot coverage or footprint, but which is
allowed solely because it was in lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent
amendments took effect.
Non-conforming use - use of buildings, structures, premises, land or parts thereof which is
not allowed in the district in which it is situated, but which is allowed to remain solely
because it was in lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendments
took effect.
Non-native invasive species of vegetation - species of vegetation listed by the Maine
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry as being invasive in Maine
ecosystems and not native to Maine ecosystems.
Normal high-water line (non-tidal waters) - that line which is apparent from visible
markings, changes in the character of soils due to prolonged action of the water or changes
in vegetation, and which distinguishes between predominantly aquatic and predominantly
terrestrial land. Areas contiguous with rivers and great ponds that support non-forested
wetland vegetation and hydric soils and that are at the same or lower elevation as the water
level of the river or great pond during the period of normal high-water are considered part of
the river or great pond. Adjacent to tidal waters, setbacks are measured from the upland
edge of the “coastal wetland.
Outlet stream - any perennial or intermittent stream, as shown on the most recent highest
resolution version of the national hydrography dataset available from the United States
Geological Survey on the website of the United States Geological Survey or the national
map, that flows from a freshwater wetland.
Person - an individual, corporation, governmental agency, municipality, trust, estate,
partnership, association, two or more individuals having a joint or common interest, or other
legal entity.
Piers, docks, wharves, bridges and other structures and uses extending over or beyond
the normal high-water line or within a wetland.
Temporary: Structures which remain in or over the water for less than seven (7)
months in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
CHAPTER 230 § VIII20 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 125
Permanent: Structures which remain in or over the water for seven (7) months or
more in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
Principal structure - a structure other than one which is used for purposes wholly incidental
or accessory to the use of another structure or use on the same lot.
Principal use - a use other than one which is wholly incidental or accessory to another use
on the same lot.
Public facility - any facility, including, but not limited to, buildings, property, recreation
areas, and roads, which are owned, leased, or otherwise operated, or funded by a
governmental body or public entity.
Recent floodplain soils - the following soil series as described and identified by the
National Cooperative Soil Survey: Fryeburg, Hadley, Limerick, Lovewell, Medomak,
Ondawa, Alluvial Cornish, Charles, Podunk, Rumney, Saco, Suncook, Sunday, and
Winooski
Recreational facility - a place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure
time activities, and other customary and usual recreational activities, excluding boat
launching facilities.
Recreational vehicle - a vehicle or an attachment to a vehicle designed to be towed, and
designed for temporary sleeping or living quarters for one or more persons, and which may
include a pick-up camper, travel trailer, tent trailer, camp trailer, and motor home. In order to
be considered as a vehicle and not as a structure, the unit must remain with its tires on the
ground, and must be registered with the State Division of Motor Vehicles.
Replacement system - a system intended to replace: 1.) an existing system which is either
malfunctioning or being upgraded with no significant change of design flow or use of the
structure, or 2.) any existing overboard wastewater discharge.
Residential dwelling unit - a room or group of rooms designed and equipped exclusively
for use as permanent, seasonal, or temporary living quarters for only one family at a time,
and containing cooking, sleeping and toilet facilities. The term shall include mobile homes
and rental units that contain cooking, sleeping, and toilet facilities regardless of the timeperiod rented. Recreational vehicles are not residential dwelling units.
Residual basal area - the average of the basal area of trees remaining on a harvested site.
Residual Stand - a stand of trees remaining in the forest following timber harvesting and
related activities
CHAPTER 230 § VIII20 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 126
Riprap - rocks, irregularly shaped, and at least six (6) inches in diameter, used for erosion
control and soil stabilization, typically used on ground slopes of two (2) units horizontal to
one (1) unit vertical or less.
River - a free-flowing body of water including its associated floodplain wetlands from that
point at which it provides drainage for a watershed of twenty five (25) square miles to its
mouth. The portion of a river that is subject to tidal action is a coastal wetland.
Road - a route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil, gravel, asphalt, or other
surfacing material constructed for or created by the repeated passage of motorized vehicles,
excluding a driveway as defined.
Salt marsh - Areas of coastal wetland (most often along coastal bays) that support salt
tolerant species, and where at average high tide during the growing season, the soil is
irregularly inundated by tidal waters. The predominant species is saltmarsh cordgrass
(Spartina alterniflora). More open areas often support widgeon grass, eelgrass, and Sago
pondweed.
Salt meadow - Areas of a coastal wetland that support salt tolerant plant species bordering
the landward side of salt marshes or open coastal water, where the soil is saturated during
the growing season but which is rarely inundated by tidal water. Indigenous plant species
include salt meadow cordgrass (Spartina patens) and black rush; common three-square
occurs in fresher areas.
Sapling - a tree species that is less than two (2) inches in diameter at four and one half (4.5)
feet above ground level.
Seedling - a young tree species that is less than four and one half (4.5) feet in height above
ground level.
Service drop - any utility line extension which does not cross or run beneath any portion of
a water body provided that:
In the case of electric service
the placement of wires and/or the installation of utility poles is located entirely
upon the premises of the customer requesting service or upon a roadway rightof-way; and
the total length of the extension is less than one thousand (1,000) feet.
In the case of telephone service
the extension, regardless of length, will be made by the installation of
telephone wires to existing utility poles, or
the extension requiring the installation of new utility poles or placement
underground is less than one thousand (1,000) feet in length.
CHAPTER 230 § VIII20 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 127
Setback - the nearest horizontal distance from the normal high-water line of a water body or
tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland, to the nearest part of a structure, road,
parking space or other regulated object or area.
Shore frontage - the length of a lot bordering on a water body or wetland measured in a
straight line between the intersections of the lot lines with the shoreline.
Shoreland zone - the land area located within two hundred and fifty (250) feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of any great pond or river; within 250 feet, horizontal
distance, of the upland edge of a coastal wetland, including all areas affected by tidal action;
within 250 feet of the upland edge of a freshwater wetland; or within seventy-five (75) feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a stream.
Shoreline – the normal high-water line, or upland edge of a freshwater or coastal wetland.
Significant River Segments - See Appendix A or 38 M.R.S. section 437.
Skid Road or Skid Trail - a route repeatedly used by forwarding machinery or animal to
haul or drag forest products from the stump to the yard or landing, the construction of which
requires minimal excavation.
Slash - the residue, e.g., treetops and branches, left on the ground after a timber harvest.
Storm-damaged tree - a tree that has been uprooted, blown down, is lying on the ground,
or that remains standing and is damaged beyond the point of recovery as the result of a
storm event.
Stream - a free-flowing body of water from the outlet of a great pond or the confluence of
two (2) perennial streams as depicted on the most recent, highest resolution version of the
national hydrography dataset available from the United States Geological Survey on the
website of the United States Geological Survey or the national map to the point where the
stream becomes a river or where the stream meets the shoreland zone of another water
body or wetland. When a stream meets the shoreland zone of a water body or wetland and
a channel forms downstream of the water body or wetland as an outlet, that channel is also
a stream.
Structure – In the Shoreland Zone, “structure” means anything temporarily or permanently
located, built, constructed or erected for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons,
animals, goods or property of any kind or anything constructed or erected on or in the
ground. The term includes structures temporarily or permanently located, such as decks,
patios, and satellite dishes. Structure does not include fences; poles and wiring and other
aerial equipment normally associated with service drops, including guy wires and guy
anchors; subsurface waste water disposal systems as defined in Title 30-A, section 4201, 
CHAPTER 230 § VIII20 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 128
subsection 5; geothermal heat exchange wells as defined in Title 32, section 4700-E,
subsection 3-C; or wells or water wells as defined in Title 32, section 4700-E, subsection 8.
Substantial start - completion of thirty (30) percent of a permitted structure or use
measured as a percentage of estimated total cost.
Subsurface sewage disposal system – any system designed to dispose of waste or waste
water on or beneath the surface of the earth; includes, but is not limited to: septic tanks;
disposal fields; grandfathered cesspools; holding tanks; pretreatment filter, piping, or any
other fixture, mechanism, or apparatus used for those purposes; does not include any
discharge system licensed under 38 M.R.S. section 414, any surface waste water disposal
system, or any municipal or quasi-municipal sewer or waste water treatment system..
Sustained slope - a change in elevation where the referenced percent grade is
substantially maintained or exceeded throughout the measured area.
Temporary structure - A structure that is placed on or in the water or shore for a period no
greater than seven months in any period of 12 consecutive months. These structures
include, but are not limited to, docks, floats, or ramps.
Tidal waters – all waters affected by tidal action during the highest annual tide.
Timber harvesting - The cutting and removal of timber for the primary purpose of selling or
processing forest products. “Timber harvesting” does not include the cutting or removal of
vegetation within the shoreland zone when associated with any other land use activities.
The cutting or removal of trees in the shoreland zone on a lot that has less than two (2)
acres within the shoreland zone shall not be considered timber harvesting. Such cutting or
removal of trees shall be regulated pursuant to VIII10, Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for
Activities Other Than Timber Harvesting.
Timber harvesting and related activities - timber harvesting, the construction and
maintenance of roads used primarily for timber harvesting and other activities conducted to
facilitate timber harvesting.
Tree - a woody perennial plant with a well-defined trunk(s) at least two (2) inches in
diameter at four and one half (4.5) feet above the ground, with a more or less definite crown,
and reaching a height of at least ten (10) feet at maturity.
Tributary stream – means a channel between defined banks created by the action of
surface water, which is characterized by the lack of terrestrial vegetation or by the presence
of a bed, devoid of topsoil, containing waterborne deposits or exposed soil, parent material
or bedrock; and which is connected hydrologically with other water bodies. “Tributary
stream” does not include rills or gullies forming because of accelerated erosion in disturbed
soils where the natural vegetation cover has been removed by human activity. This
definition does not include the term "stream" as defined elsewhere in this Ordinance, and 
CHAPTER 230 0 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 129
only applies to that portion of the tributary stream located within the shoreland zone of the
receiving water body or wetland. Water setback requirements apply to tributary streams
within the shoreland zone. This term is used solely in the shoreland zone.
Upland edge of a wetland - the boundary between upland and wetland. For purposes of a
coastal wetland, this boundary is the line formed by the landward limits of the salt tolerant
vegetation and/or the highest annual tide level, including all areas affected by tidal action.
For purposes of a freshwater wetland, the upland edge is formed where the soils are not
saturated for a duration sufficient to support wetland vegetation; or where the soils support
the growth of wetland vegetation, but such vegetation is dominated by woody stems that are
six (6) meters (approximately twenty (20) feet) tall or taller.
Vegetation - all live trees, shrubs, and other plants including without limitation, trees both
over and under 4 inches in diameter, measured at 4 1/2 feet above ground level.
Velocity zone - an area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of
the primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity
wave action from storms or seismic sources.
Volume of a structure - the volume of all portions of a structure enclosed by roof and fixed
exterior walls as measured from the exterior faces of these walls and roof.
Water body - any great pond, river or stream.
Water crossing - any project extending from one bank to the opposite bank of a river,
stream, tributary stream, or wetland whether under, though, or over the water or wetland.
Such projects include but may not be limited to roads, fords, bridges, culverts, water lines,
sewer lines, and cables as well as maintenance work on these crossings. This definition
includes crossings for timber harvesting equipment and related activities.
Wetland - a freshwater or coastal wetland.
Windfirm - the ability of a forest stand to withstand strong winds and resist windthrow, wind
rocking, and major breakage.
Woody Vegetation - live trees or woody, non-herbaceous shrubs.
CHAPTER 230 § IX1 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 130
Signs
Purpose
The purpose of this section is to maintain an attractive, uncluttered appearance throughout
the City, to minimize distractions to motorists, and to protect the value of nearby properties,
while providing for sufficient communication, advertising, and identification of businesses.
Permit Required
No sign, billboard, or exterior graphic display shall be erected, enlarged, refaced, or
replaced without first obtaining a sign permit from the Code Enforcement Officer. Within the
Historic District, a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be obtained before a sign permit is
issued.
Exemptions
For regulatory purposes, the following do not require a sign permit under this Article:
Temporary (on-site) signs that meet the following standards do not require a permit:
1. The dimension of the sign does not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.
2. The sign is posted for a period of ten (14) consecutive days or less. The duration
the sign will be posted shall be written on the sign and visible to the Code
Enforcement Officer.
3. The sign is posted for a maximum of thirty (30) days per year.
Public purpose signs and signs such as directional signs (no more than four (4) square
feet in area, and three (3) feet above grade) that guide motorists to exits and entrances,
signs erected by a government agency, signs prohibiting trespassing or hunting, and
historical plaques.
Signs not visible from the public way
Signs on the interior of windows visible from a public way
Directional signs not exceeding three (3) square feet in area as measured on one side
and not exceeding six (6) feet above ground level may be installed within a site with
permission of the Code Enforcement Officer. The purpose of such signs shall be
directional only.
Dimensional Requirements and Signage Standards
All signs as defined herein shall adhere to the requirements of Table 9-1. Area
limitations noted below for freestanding and projecting signs refer to the size of one face
of the sign.
Measurement.
CHAPTER 230 § IX4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 131
1. The area of a sign shall be computed by means of the smallest rectangle, circle,
triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the
writing or other graphical display, together with any material or color forming an
integral part of the background of the sign, or used to differentiate the sign from
the structure against which it is placed but does not include supporting posts or
any structural elements outside the limits of such perimeter and which do not
form an integral part of the display.
2. Awning signs, if opaque, shall be measured in the same manner as described
directly above. Opaque awnings with one small opaque monogram or opaque
logo of less than six inches in height shall not be considered signs. For awnings
that are translucent and internally illuminated and incorporate any commercial
message or symbol, the entire translucent and illuminated portion of the awning
shall be counted.
Sight Line Obstruction: For traffic safety, the entire signboard or display area of a
freestanding sign located on a double frontage corner lot or near a business exit lane
shall be either below three (3) feet or above ten (10) feet in height from the average
ground level when the sign is within fifteen (15) feet of a public right-of-way.
Official Business Directional Signs: Official business directional signs, as otherwise
regulated by 23 M.R.S. §1901-1925, as amended, are permitted for any business
located in Saco and for businesses within abutting communities that have or are eligible
to have guide signs on the Maine Turnpike that display business identification and
directional information for services and eligible attractions. Official business directional
signs for businesses within abutting communities shall only be permitted when a guide
sign for the applicant’s business on the Maine Turnpike either exists or has been
approved and then installed. When permitted by this section, official business directional
signs may be erected only within the business and industrial districts, subject to all
restrictions and conditions of 23 M.R.S. §1901-1925, as amended.
Business Signs in Residential Districts
1. Exterior signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet. Signs shall not be illuminated.
Only one category of sign (wall sign, projecting, freestanding) shall be allowed per
building. No illuminated or mobile (chassis-mounted) signs shall be permitted in a
Residential District. No signs are permitted on trucks or trailers parked continuously
in a Residential District.
2. Exterior signs for properties approved for non-residential uses in residential districts
with frontage on roads or streets listed below shall not exceed twelve (12) square
feet if attached parallel to the wall of a building, twelve (12) square feet is projecting
from the wall of a building, or twelve (12) square feet if the sign is freestanding.
Signs may be illuminated during hours of operation only, and only with a top of
sign-mounted, fully shielded fixture which illuminates the sign only. The roads and
streets affected include Route One (Elm Street, Main Street, Portland Road),
Industrial Park Road, and North Street/Route 112 (Park Street to Rotary Drive). 
CHAPTER 230 § IX4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 132
Signs in Business, Industrial Districts, and Master Planned Developments: Any
establishment in a business or industrial district shall have no more than two signs, one
of which may be freestanding.
The size and number of signs permitted in business and industrial districts is
regulated by Table 9-1 below.
In addition to other signs permitted in business districts only, a single banner not
larger than three (3) feet by five (5) feet may be displayed. Such banners shall be
displayed on the building or on a permitted freestanding sign only. Banners shall be
installed in a safe manner that does not interfere with pedestrian or other traffic,
and shall be maintained in an attractive, untattered condition and may be erected
for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. A system of decorative banners may be
placed on buildings, utility poles or light poles by a business association or civic
group if approved by the City Council.
Business advertising signs shall not be placed closer than five (5) feet from any lot
line. The maximum height for freestanding signs shall be 25 feet above the
adjacent ground grade.
Freestanding signs shall be required to be attached to permanent posts and to be hung
vertically above the ground. So-called “A-frame” signs shall be prohibited, except as
indicated. Any business which is permitted to have more than one freestanding sign and
chooses to do so shall maintain 100 feet of separation between freestanding signs on
same property.
Projecting Signs: No sign shall project into or over a public street or way except in the
Downtown District on Main Street and in Pepperell Square, as permitted below:
The sign has a combined surface area no greater than one and one-half (1.5)
square feet for each foot of width of the principal structure. In no case shall the
combined surface area be greater than 50 square feet.
The sign does not project more than ten (10) feet out from the building line.
The sign is at least three (3) feet back from a line perpendicular to the curb line.
The bottom edge of the sign is at least ten (10) feet above the sidewalk.
A-Frame Signs: One small A-frame sandwich board sign may be placed on the
sidewalks in front of any business in the Downtown District and Main and Beach
Districts. Such signs shall be taken in each day before close of business. Such signs
shall not exceed 30 inches in width and 42 inches in height and shall be placed only in
locations where the sidewalk is wide enough to allow four feet of passage. Such signs
shall be constructed of exterior grade plywood or of other durable materials intended for
exterior use, be of sturdy construction, and shall be weighted to prevent them from
blowing over. All such signs shall be neatly painted, not illuminated, and subject to
review under the Historic Preservation section of this ordinance. The city may remove
from public property any A-frame sign which is not in compliance with this ordinance. 
CHAPTER 230 § IX4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 133
Signs must be removed prior to and 24 hours after any snow event to allow for municipal
snow removal. The City is not responsible for any signs damaged nor is the City of Saco
responsible for any harm to people or property occurring as a consequence of a sign
being placed on public property. 
CHAPTER 230 § IX4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 134
Table 9-1 Dimensional Requirements for Signs
D, SI, CE GB, HB, I, BI PR MB I, BI abutting
turnpike
Overall Size
Allowance per
premise per foot
of width of
principal
structure
2 sf to
maximum of
100 sf
2 sf to
maximum of
150 sf
2 sf to
maximum of
200 sf
2 sf to a
maximum
of 48 sf
2 sf to
maximum of
350 sf
Number of signs
per single
occupancy
premise
2 signs, only
one of which
may be
freestanding,
plus 1
additional wall
sign not
exceeding 12
sf
2 signs, only
one of which
may be
freestanding,
plus 1
additional wall
sign not
exceeding 12
sf
2 signs, plus
1 additional
wall sign not
exceeding
12 sf
2 signs,
only one of
which may
be
freestandin
g
3 signs, only
one of which
maybe
freestanding
Multiple occupancy premises, number and type of sign:
For entire
complex
1 freestanding
or wall sign
serving as a
directory or
anchor tenant
sign not to
exceed 50% of
overall size
allowance
1 freestanding
or wall sign
serving as a
directory or
anchor tenant
sign not to
exceed 50% of
overall size
allowance
1 freestanding
or wall sign
serving as a
directory or
anchor tenant
sign not to
exceed 50%
of overall size
allowance
2 signs
only one of
which may
be
freestandin
g
1 freestanding
or wall sign
serving as a
directory or
anchor tenant
sign not to
exceed 50% of
overall size
allowance
For each first
floor occupancy
2 wall,
projecting or
awning signs
per occupancy
2 wall,
projecting or
awning signs
per occupancy
2 wall,
projecting or
awning signs
per
occupancy
N/A
2 wall,
projecting or
awning signs
per occupancy
Upper floor and
basement
occupancies
1 wall or
projecting sign
not exceeding
12 sf
1 wall or
projecting sign
not exceeding
12 sf
I wall or
projecting
sign not
exceeding 12
sf
N/A N/A
Size limits, individual sign types for all zones:
Wall and awning
signs maximum
size
100 sf 100 sf 150 sf 16 sf
If facing
Turnpike, within
50 ft of
Turnpike ROW,
150 sf;
greater than 50
ft from Turnpike
ROW, 200 sf
Freestanding and
projecting signs
maximum size per
side
50 sf 75 sf 100 sf 16sf 100 sf
CHAPTER 230 § IX5 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 135
Prohibited Signs
Signs that block the view of traffic, street signs, traffic signals, or that distract motorists.
Signs that are flashing, moving, animated, spinning, revolving, scrolling, inflatable,
intensely lighted, or that emit audible sounds or noise.
Roof signs above the cornice or top of the parapet wall, if any.
Signs on motor vehicles or trailers parked or stored in a location visible from a public
way or is regularly parked or stored in a front yard or side yard or in the public right-ofway adjacent to the front yard when there is parking available elsewhere on the property.
Electronic message center signs that change messages more frequently than every five
minutes, or that have continuously scrolling, blinking, or intermittent lighting. The display
of the time and temperature is exempt from this five (5) minute limit.
Billboards
Generally Acceptable Signs
In any district a sign not exceeding four square feet in surface size is permitted which
announces name and/or activity of the occupant of the premises on which said sign is
located.
In any district on a building more than 50 years old, a sign or placard noting the history
of the building may be placed on a building. Such signs shall not exceed two square feet
and shall not be lit if in a residential district.
Illumination
Illuminated signs shall be in compliance with dark sky standards. Light trespass on
nearby residential properties is prohibited.
Where illuminated signs are permitted, they shall conform to the following requirements:
1. Signs shall be illuminated only by steady, stationary, shielded light sources directed
solely on the sign without causing glare or by constant internal illumination. Any
light source shall be shielded with a fixture so that bulbs are not directly visible from
neighboring properties or public ways. No sign shall be animated by means of
flashing, blinking or traveling lights or by any other means not providing constant
illumination. Sign illumination shall be of reasonable intensity and shall avoid
excessive brightness or glare on nearby properties and avoid creating unnecessary
distractions on the street.
2. Gas-filled light tubes shall be allowed for indirect illumination. 
CHAPTER 230 § IX8 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 136
3. Illuminated signs shall be constructed and erected in such a manner as to deflect
light away from residential properties and public roads.
4. Notwithstanding the above, electronic message center signs are permitted if they
change messages no more than every five (5) minutes. Electronic message center
signs shall not have continuously scrolling, blinking or intermittent lighting.
Electronic message center signs are permitted as any sign type (freestanding, wall
or projecting) within the overall sign allowance.
LED Signs
In order to minimize driver distraction, LED signs shall adhere to the following standards:
Be permanently affixed to the ground or structure;
Maximum luminance shall not exceed five thousand (5,000) nits (candela per square
meter) during daylight hours, and three hundred (300) nits after sunset.
Be illuminated only during business hours.
Nonconforming Signs
A nonconforming sign may have its message changed, but its structure shall not be altered,
enlarged or replaced. A nonconforming sign damaged by fire, wind, or other casualty may
be reconstructed as before if such construction is performed within one (1) year of such
damage.
Discontinuance
Any sign appurtenant to a discontinued or relocated use shall be removed together with its
supporting structure by the owner of the property within one hundred eighty (180) days of
the closing of business. After that period the Code Enforcement Officer may provide written
notice to the property owner that the sign and supporting structure must be removed. Where
written notice has been given by the Code Enforcement Officer and the sign has not been
removed within the thirty (30) day period, the city may cause the removal of the sign and
charge the cost of the removal to the owner of the property. Nothing in this subsection shall
preclude the use of other enforcement measures authorized by this ordinance.
Appeals
Appeal processes shall follow Article XVI of the Zoning Ordinance. 
CHAPTER 230 § X1 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 137
Parking
Off-Street Parking
A minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the
specifications in this section when a new use is established, or an existing use is
enlarged. Off-street public parking lots and spaces may be utilized to fulfill parking
requirements in lieu of on-premises parking when such parking lots have been provided
for that purpose.
The number of off-street parking spaces shall conform to the limits specified in Table 10-
1.
Table 10-1 Parking requirements by use
Type of Use Minimum Number of Spaces Required
Residential – single-family 2 space per dwelling unit
Residential – 2-family 2 space per dwelling unit
Residential – multi-family • 1.5 spaces per unit for 1-bedroom units
• 2 spaces per unit for 2-bedroom units
• 2.5 spaces per 3+ bedroom units in residential district
• 1 additional visitor’s space for every 6 units or fraction
thereof
Residential – multi-family
restricted to elderly
1 space per 2 units
Elderly non-congregate detached
housing
1 space per 3 units
Churches 1 space per 4 seats in principal assembly room
Schools – excluding high schools
and colleges
1 space for each employee and staff, plus sufficient offstreet space for safe loading and unloading of students
Schools - high schools and
colleges
1 space per 5 students based on the maximum number of
students attending the school at any period in the day
Schools - Commercial 1 space per 3 students based on the maximum number of
students attending the school at any period in the day
Private clubs, lodges, or fraternal
organizations
1 space per 75 sf of total floor area
Recreation assembly places 1 space per 75 sf of total floor area
Theaters 1 space per 4 seats
Bowling alleys 5 spaces per alley
Funeral homes 1 space per 100 sf of total floor area
Adult daycare center 1 space per employee plus 1 space per 6 clients
Hospitals & nursing homes 1 space per 3 beds plus 1 space per 2 employees per shift
Professional offices 1 space per 250 sf of total floor area
Banks 1 space per 150 sf of total floor area
Medical offices 1 space per 100 sf of total floor area
Veterinarian clinics & kennels 5 spaces per veterinarian
Retail 1 space per 75 sf of total
floor space
1 space per 200 sf of total floor area
Eating & drinking 1 space per 75 sf of total floor area
Barber, salon 4 spaces per chair
CHAPTER 230 § X2 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 138
Type of Use Minimum Number of Spaces Required
Industrial businesses 1 space per employee on the maximum working shift
Warehouses 1 space per 500 sf of floor area
Childcare facilities 1 space per 4 children
Temporary lodging 1 space per guest rooms plus 1 space per employee per
shift
Golf courses 50 spaces per 9 holes
Marinas 1 space per 2 slips or moorings
Where a proposed use cannot be reasonably fit into one of the categories in Table 10-1,
the Planning Board shall prescribe the required number of off-street parking spaces.
The Planning Board may grant a waiver of minimum parking requirements after
determining the following:
1. The applicant demonstrates that the number of off-street parking spaces is
adequate for a proposed use.
2. On-street parking is available within a reasonable distance.
3. Off-street parking in public lots is not available.
4. Granting the waiver will not create excess congestion, hazardous, or unsafe
conditions in the neighborhood.
Parking Design
Dimensions. Every parking space shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet in width, and
eighteen (18) feet in length. Parking lot travel lanes shall be a minimum of twenty (20)
feet in width if a herringbone configuration is utilized. Otherwise the travel lanes shall be
a maximum of twenty-four (24) feet in width. One-way aisles may be reduced to sixteen
(16) feet in width.
Handicap. These spaces shall meet the requirements set forth in ANSI 117.1.A.
Visual Obstructions and Internal Walkways. All driveway entrances and exits shall be
kept free from visual obstructions higher than three feet above street level for a distance
of 15 feet measured along the intersecting driveway in order to provide the required
visibility for entering and exiting vehicles. Continuous internal walkways shall be
provided from the public sidewalk to the principal customer entrances, connecting
pedestrian activity. All internal pedestrian walkways shall be distinguished from driving
surfaces through use of durable surface materials to enhance safety and comfort, as
well as the attractiveness of the walkways.
Lighting. Artificial lighting used to illuminate parking spaces shall be arranged so that no
direct rays from such lighting falls upon neighboring properties.
Buffers. All parking spaces and access drives shall be at least five (5) feet from side and
rear lot lines. Off-street parking and access drives for nonresidential uses that abut lots 
CHAPTER 230 § X2 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 139
in residential or conservation districts shall meet the dimensional requirements of the
zoning ordinance.
Landscaping. The existing landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar as
practicable. Tree removal shall be kept to a minimum. Grade changes shall be in
keeping with the general appearance of neighboring developed areas.
Parking lots in residential districts. These lots shall be landscaped with a
continuous border of shrubbery along all lot lines abutting properties in residential
use. This vegetative buffer shall have a mature height of three to six feet and shall
provide a year-round screen.
Large Parking Areas. Large parking areas of 35 or more spaces shall include at
least one tree of 2 1/2 inches caliper. Planting islands for such trees shall not be
less than five (5) feet wide nor 75 square feet. Parking lots of 5,000 to 10,000
square feet shall include 5% of that space for internal landscaping. Parking lots
over 10,000 square feet shall include 10% internal landscaping.
Special Main Street standards. In the Main Street corridor from Saco Island to the I195 connector, no parking spaces shall be located between the front of the building
and the street.
Shared Parking. The Planning Board may allow a reduction in the off-street parking
requirements for properties that share parking. To obtain such an approval, the applicant
must conclusively demonstrate that one (1) or more proposed uses will generate a
demand for parking spaces primarily during periods when the other use or uses are not
in operation.
Parking Lot Interconnections. Where practical, the design of parking lots shall provide for
lot-to-lot vehicle movement via interior connecting roadways and cross-access
easements.
In the MB District, parking shall be located to the side and rear of buildings.
Parking held in reserve. If the applicant can clearly demonstrate to the Planning Board
that, because of the nature of the operation or use, the parking or loading requirements
of this chapter are unnecessary or excessive, the Planning Board shall have the power
to approve a site plan showing less parking or loading area than required; provided,
however, that a landscaped area of sufficient size to meet the deficiency shall be set
aside and reserved for the purpose of meeting future off-street parking and loading
requirements in the event that a change of use of the premises shall make the use of
such additional off-street facilities necessary. The applicant, at the time of the initial
application, shall submit for Planning Board approval a design of this possible future
parking area. The reserved area shall be converted to parking in whole or in part
whenever the owner desires, or when deemed necessary by the Planning Board. In
addition, a reevaluation of the parking requirement shall be required upon a change of 
CHAPTER 230 § X2 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 140
use, expansion, or renovation. Notations describing these arrangements shall be
included on the face of the plan.
Drive-through facilities. Each drive-through or queuing lane shall be separated from the
circulation lanes by means of pavement markings, signs, and/or islands and shall not
block access to any parking spaces. Stacking spaces shall not be permitted in the
required building setbacks. Five stacking spaces shall be provided for each bank teller
station or automated teller machine. At least 10 stacking spaces will be provided for a
restaurant's drive-in window.
CHAPTER 230 § XI1 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 141
Private Roads
General Provisions
No permit shall be issued to erect any structure containing a dwelling unit on a lot without
frontage on a public road, nor shall a new lot be created without frontage on a public road,
unless a road meeting the criteria for a “private road” has been approved under site plan
review and constructed. A private road may be established in accordance with the following
provisions, subject to site plan review and approval:
No more than four (4) new lots shall be established on a private road or private road
network. A private road network shall have no more than two (2) private roads.
A maintenance agreement shall be required when a private road is created or extended
or a new lot is created on a private road, and if the private road is to provide access to
two (2) or more lots. The maintenance agreement shall specify each lot owner's rights
and responsibilities with respect to ownership, maintenance, repair, and plowing and
shall be submitted for the City's approval. After approval by the City, this agreement shall
be recorded in the York County Registry of Deeds before a permit is issued.
The plan of the new, extended, or improved road as approved and signed by the City
Planner or Planning Board shall be recorded in the York County Registry of Deeds within
ninety (90) days of such approval. If the plan is not recorded within ninety (90) days, the
approval shall become null and void.
Nothing in this section shall override any requirement in the Subdivision Regulations.
The person proposing the private road shall submit a name for City review. The name of
the street shall not be so similar to the name of other streets or locations in the City, as
determined by the E-911 Addressing Officer. The City reserves the right to designate
any name for the road, and number it in accordance with E-911 standards.
The land within the right-of-way of an approved private road shall not be used to meet
the frontage or lot area requirements of any lot obtaining its frontage from the private
road.
The creation of a private road shall not reduce the frontage, lot area, or other
dimensional requirements of an existing lot below that required by the Zoning Ordinance.
Private road plans shall bear a note that "The City of Saco will not be responsible for the
maintenance, repair, plowing or similar services for the private way. Future lot divisions
may be prohibited."
Construction standards for private roads:
1. Minimum aggregate subbase (Type D): Fifteen (15) inches.
2. Crushed gravel (Type A) or reclaimed surface course: three inches. 
CHAPTER 230 § XI1 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 142
3. Maximum length dead end: One thousand five hundred (1,500) feet (including a
dead-end public road, an existing private road or a private road network).
4. A turnaround suitable for public safety vehicles is required. It may be designed as a
hammerhead, T, or cul-de-sac.
5. Swales and culverts are generally acceptable. However, at the intersection with a
City street, the drainage practice used on the intersecting street may be required
for the portion within the City right-of-way.
6. At intersections with public streets, the private road shall have a paved apron forty
(40) feet in length. The portion in the public right-of-way will be constructed to City
standards.
7. The applicant shall provide a stop sign and street name sign meeting City
specifications at the intersection with the public street prior to the issuance of an
occupancy permit.
8. Trees and brush shall be cleared from within three (3) feet of the travel way with an
unobstructed vertical clearance of fourteen (14) feet, and this clear zone shall be
maintained permanently.
9. The Saco Fire Department may inspect the road periodically. If the road is not in
good repair in the judgment of the Fire Department, the parties to the maintenance
agreement may be notified that the road needs repair and that the City may
discontinue emergency services.
10. Before an occupancy permit is issued, the road will be inspected by the City, and
the applicant’s engineer shall certify that it has been constructed as designed.
11. Existing private roads. Any private road existing on October 15, 2001, which
provides frontage for one (1) or more lots shall be allowed to provide frontage to
those existing lots and up to four additional lots if it meets the standards or is
improved to the standards of this section.
12. A private road cannot run parallel to an existing private road within 250’ feet of the
existing.
13. If public water connection is available within 150 feet of the property, the private
road shall be served by public water.
Submission Requirements for private roads: In addition to the site plan submission
requirements, the applicant shall submit:
A plan of the private road, prepared by a Maine professional engineer. The plan
shall be labeled “Plan of a Private Road” and shall include a City Planner signature
block. The plan shall delineate the private road and each of the lots it will serve,
including complete descriptive data by bearings and distances of existing and
proposed rights-of-way. 
CHAPTER 230 § XI2 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 143
If the private road is to provide access to two or more lots: a maintenance
agreement specifying the maintenance, repair and plowing responsibilities of each
lot owner.
Application
Applicants who propose the construction, extension or expansion of a private road shall
provide:
A plan showing the new private road, or extensions, or improved private road shall be
prepared by a registered professional engineer. The plan shall be labeled "Plan of a
Private Road" and shall provide a signature block. The plan shall delineate the private
road and each of the lots it will serve, including complete descriptive data by bearings
and distances of existing and proposed rights-of-way.
The plan for the road shall include grades, road profile, typical section, grading plan,
drainage plan, plan for erosion and sedimentation control, and a utilities plan for private
roads serving two or more lots.
A copy of the signed standard boundary survey on which the street plan is based.
If the private road is to provide access to two or more lots, a maintenance agreement
specifying the maintenance, repair and plowing responsibilities of each lot owner shall
be submitted.
The location and size of existing and proposed utility connections, including sewer, or
subsurface wastewater disposal systems, water, power, telephone, stormwater drainage
systems, power poles, light poles and nearest hydrants.
If only minor improvements to an existing private road are proposed, the City Planner
may waive the submission and recording of some or all of a detailed plan.
Design Standards
Design standards for private roads are displayed in Table 11-1.
Table 11-1 Design standards for Private Roads
Design Standard Built prior
to 2001
Built since
2001
Minimum Right-of-way width 40 50
Minimum Travel width 18 18
Minimum Centerline Grade 1% 1%
Maximum Centerline Grade 10% 10%
Minimum Centerline radius 150
Roadway Crown 3/8” 3/8”
Minimum angle of street intersections 90 90
Maximum Grade at Intersection (within 75'
of intersections)
2% 2%
CHAPTER 230 § XII1 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 144
Stormwater and Erosion Control
General Stormwater Runoff Provisions
A. In general, surface water runoff shall be minimized, and it shall be the responsibility of
the person developing the land to demonstrate that the work will not have an adverse
impact on abutting or downstream properties. Sites shall be designed to minimize the
amount of impervious area with a focus on reducing vehicle areas, including parking,
drives aisles, and service areas.
B. The volume of stormwater discharged from a parcel shall be minimized through the use
of on-site infiltration, detention, or retention to the extent practical. When stormwater
must be discharged from a parcel, the preferred method is to discharge into the natural
drainage system. Discharge of stormwater to the City's municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) shall be allowed only when on-site retention and/or discharge to the
natural system is not practical.
C. Infiltration, detention, or retention of stormwater shall assure that the total maximum
daily loads (TMDLs) that have been established by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency for various water bodies in the City will be met to the extent practical.
The disposal of stormwater shall not constitute a threat to public health, safety, and
welfare and shall not degrade the quality of surface water or groundwater below city,
state, or federal standards.
D. Projects resulting in one or more acres of disturbed area shall be subject to the
requirements of the Maine Construction General Permit (MCGP); Maine State
Stormwater Management Law, 38 M.R.S. §420-D, and the latest revision of the
"Stormwater Management Rules," Chapters 500, 501 and 502; and the requirements of
Sections 1202 Stormwater Runoff Management, 1203 Stormwater Quantity and Quality
Control, and 1204 Post Construction Management. Where the standards or provisions of
such stormwater rules conflict with City ordinances, the stricter (more-protective)
standard shall apply.
E. Groundwater. To the extent practical, the stormwater design shall maximize aquifer
recharge.
F. Vegetative buffers shall be utilized to the extent practical to manage stormwater flow.
G. The use of Low Impact Development (LID) practices appropriate for the type of
development as set forth in Chapter 10 of the DEP Stormwater Manual, Volume III -
BMPs Technical Design Manual, is encouraged but not required.
Stormwater Runoff Management
The City is a regulated community under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) MS4 Program; therefore, provisions for stormwater runoff 
CHAPTER 230 § XII3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 145
management are required for all new development or redevelopment projects that result
in one (1) or more acres of disturbed area. This provision also applies to projects
disturbing less than one acre if the construction activity is part of a larger common
scheme of development or sale that would disturb one (1) or more acres. In addition, the
City also requires stormwater runoff management for all projects that result in ten
thousand (10,000) square feet or more of new or redeveloped impervious area. In
determining if these thresholds have been met, all disturbed or impervious areas created
after December 27, 2006 (original effective date of this provision), shall be included in
this total.
Exemptions
1. New development or redevelopment on a parcel that is part of a subdivision
previously approved under this chapter that has a compliant post-construction
stormwater management plan with sufficient capacity to accept and treat increases
in stormwater discharges associated with the project.
2. Smaller projects resulting in less than one acre of disturbed area but more than ten
thousand (10,000) square feet of new or redeveloped impervious area are exempt
from Sections XII3 Stormwater Quantity and Quality Control and XII4 Post
Construction Management, but shall comply with requirements of Subsection XII5
Drainage Plan.
3. All other projects are exempt from Sections XII3 Stormwater Quantity and Quality
Control, 1204 Post Construction Management, and XII5 Drainage Plan but shall
meet the general provisions in Section XII1 to the maximum extent practicable.
Stormwater Quantity and Quality Control
All projects subject to this section shall be designed to meet the requirements below:
To the extent possible, the design shall dispose of stormwater runoff on the land at
the proposed development through the appropriate use of the natural features of
the site. Stormwater runoff systems will infiltrate, detain, or retain stormwater falling
on the site such that the rate of flow from the site does not exceed that which would
occur in the undeveloped state for a storm of intensity equal to the two (2)-, ten
(10)-, twenty-five (25)-, and fifty (50)-year storm events.
If the post-development peak runoff rate exceeds the predevelopment peak runoff
rate, on-site mitigation measures, such as detention basins or flow restrictors, shall
be required.
All natural drainageways shall be preserved at their natural gradients and shall not
be filled or converted to a closed system except as approved by the City’s
reviewing authority and appropriate state agencies.
The design of the storm drain system shall fully incorporate the existing upstream
runoff which must pass over or through the site to be developed. The system shall
be designed to pass upstream flows without surcharging the system. Any special 
CHAPTER 230 § XII4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 146
roadway culvert crossing designed to meet other applicable state regulations (i.e.,
fish passage) shall be specifically identified on the plans.
Proposed alterations in stormwater drainage paths shall not enable the crossing of
runoff over a City street in order to enter a drainage system.
The drainage study shall meet the "urban impaired stream standard" when located
within a watershed designated by the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection as an urban impaired stream.
A waiver may be granted by the City of Saco Department of Public Works to discharge
an insignificant increase in stormwater runoff to the municipal storm drain system when
all of the following conditions are met:
1. A drainage study is prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the State of
Maine, which demonstrates that the increase has no adverse impact to the
downstream conditions, including impacts on abutting or City properties.
Improvements may be required of the developer to prevent adverse downstream
impacts caused by the project.
2. The increase in the peak flow from the site or in the peak flow of the receiving
waters cannot be avoided by reasonable changes in project design or density.
3. Written authorization to discharge the increased peak flow rates has been provided
by the Director of Public Works or their designee.
At the time of application, the applicant shall notify the Department of Public Works if its
stormwater management system includes any stormwater BMP(s) that will discharge to
the City's municipal storm drain system and shall include in this notification a listing of
which stormwater BMP(s) will so discharge.
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan
A. All projects subject to this section shall be designed to meet the requirements below:
The applicant may meet the quantity and quality standards listed in Section XII3
Stormwater Quantity and Quality Control either on site or off site; but where off-site
facilities are used, the applicant shall submit documentation to Saco’s Department
of Public Works that the applicant has sufficient property interest where the off-site
facilities are located, by perpetual easement or other appropriate legal instrument,
to ensure that the facilities will be available to provide post-construction stormwater
management for the project and that the property will not be altered in a way that
interferes with the off-site facilities.
Where the applicant proposes to retain ownership of the stormwater management
facilities shown in its Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan, and the
stormwater management facilities will not be dedicated to the City, the applicant
shall enter into a maintenance agreement with the City. A form for the maintenance
agreement is available on the City’s web site. The applicant shall be responsible for
recording the maintenance agreement form at the York County Registry of Deeds 
CHAPTER 230 § XII4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 147
within thirty (30) days of the date of execution of the agreement. Failure to comply
with the terms of the maintenance agreement shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.
Whenever elements of the stormwater management facilities are not within the
right-of-way of a public street and the facilities will not be offered to the City for
acceptance as public facilities, the Planning Board may require that perpetual
easements be provided to the City allowing access for maintenance, repair,
replacement, and improvement of the stormwater management facilities in
accordance with the approved drainage maintenance agreement. If an offer of
dedication is proposed, the applicant shall be responsible for the maintenance of
these stormwater management facilities until such time (if ever) as they are
accepted by the City. Nothing in this chapter requires the City to accept any
stormwater management facilities offered or dedicated by the applicant.
Any person, business, corporation, or other entity owning, leasing, or having control
over stormwater management facilities required by a Post-Construction Stormwater
Management Plan shall demonstrate compliance with that plan as follows:
At least annually, inspect, clean, and maintain the stormwater management
facilities, including, but not limited to, parking areas, catch basins, drainage
swales, detention basins and ponds, pipes, and related structures, in
accordance with all City and state inspection, cleaning and maintenance
requirements of the approved post-construction stormwater management plan.
Repair deficiencies found during inspection of the stormwater management
facilities.
On or by July 15 of each year, provide a completed and signed certification to
the Department of Public Works certifying that the person has inspected,
cleaned, and maintained the stormwater management facilities, describing any
deficiencies found during inspection of the stormwater management facilities,
and certifying that the person has repaired any deficiencies in the stormwater
management facilities noted during the annual inspection. A form for the
annual stormwater certification is available on the City’s web site.
The required inspection(s) must be conducted by a qualified inspector. The
inspector shall perform an initial inspection to determine the status of the
stormwater management facilities. If the initial inspection identifies any
deficiencies with the facilities, the same inspector shall reinspect the facilities
after they have been maintained or repaired to determine if they are performing
as intended.
"Qualified Inspector" means a person who conducts post-construction
stormwater management facilities, best management practice ("BMP")
inspections, and meets the following qualifications:
CHAPTER 230 § XII4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 148
vi. The inspector shall not have any ownership or financial interest in the
property being inspected nor be an employee or partner of any entity
having an ownership or financial interest in the property; and
vii. The inspector shall have a working knowledge of Chapter 500,
Stormwater Management Rules, and Maine's Stormwater BMP Manual;
and
viii. The qualified inspector must be on the DEP's list of approved postconstruction stormwater BMP inspectors, or alternately, shall satisfy at
least one of the criteria outlined below:
1. Nonproprietary stormwater management facilities
a. Has a college degree in environmental science or civil engineering
and is a professional engineer with at least three years of
experience designing, evaluating or inspecting stormwater
management facilities; or
b. Has a college degree in an environmental science or civil
engineering, or comparable expertise, and has demonstrated a
practical knowledge of stormwater hydrology and stormwater
management techniques, including the maintenance requirements
for stormwater management facilities, and has the ability to
determine if stormwater facilities are performing as intended. This
qualification must be accompanied by two professional references
to be valid; or
c. Has successfully completed the requirements of a DEP training
course on inspecting post-construction stormwater management
facilities. Note: successful completion may require receiving a
passing grade in an examination at the conclusion of the course.
2. Proprietary stormwater management facilities
a. Proprietary stormwater management facilities must be inspected
by a person approved by the manufacturer.
In order to determine compliance with this section and with the Post-Construction
Stormwater Management Plan, the Director of the Department of Public Works or their
designee may enter upon a property at reasonable hours and after making a good-faith
effort to contact the owner, occupant, or agent to inspect the stormwater management
facilities. Entry into a building shall only be after notice is provided to the owner,
occupant, or agent.
Submission requirements.
The Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan shall conform to the
applicable submission requirements of Section 8 of DEP Chapter 500 Rules.
The applicant shall provide the Department of Public Works with an electronic
copy of the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan in a format that is
compatible with the City's requirements. Following completion of construction, 
CHAPTER 230 § XII5 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 149
the applicant shall provide the City with an updated version of the plan showing
the stormwater management facilities as actually constructed.
The Planning Board may modify or waive any of the submission requirements
for a Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan if the Planning Board
finds that, due to the unique physical characteristics of the site or the scale of
the proposed activity, the information is not required to allow the Planning
Board to determine if the applicable stormwater management standards are
met
As-built certification. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a project
requiring a Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan under this chapter, the
applicant shall submit evidence in the form of a letter with as-built survey plan
prepared and stamped by a professional engineer who either prepared the PostConstruction Stormwater Management Plan and its associated facilities or
supervised the plan and facilities construction and implementation. The letter or
plan shall certify that the stormwater management facilities have been installed in
accordance with the approved Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan
and that they will function as intended by said plan. The as-built survey plan shall
be performed for all post-construction stormwater facilities to document general
conformance with the approved plans.
Drainage Plan
A. A drainage plan is required for activities that result in the expansion or alteration of an
existing building or structure that results in the creation or redevelopment of ten
thousand (10,000) square feet of impervious surface. New principal buildings that are
located in a subdivision with an approved post-construction stormwater management
plan are not required to comply with the requirement for a drainage plan if the approved
stormwater management plan contains provisions that adequately address surface
drainage related to the construction of the building, as determined by the CEO.
B. The drainage plan shall meet the "urban impaired stream standard" of DEP Chapter 500
Rules when located within a watershed designated by the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection as an urban impaired stream.
C. The drainage plan shall demonstrate that the proposed improvements are designed to
minimize the volume of stormwater leaving the site. This shall include consideration of
the design and location of improvements to minimize the total area of impervious surface
on the site and stormwater management techniques to minimize both the volume and
rate of runoff from the lot. The drainage plan shall provide for the treatment of 0.5 inch of
runoff from 90% of the new or redeveloped impervious area and 0.2 inch of runoff from
75% of the new or redeveloped non-impervious surface area.
D. The drainage plan must also demonstrate that:
CHAPTER 230 § XII6 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 150
Stormwater draining onto or across the lot in its pre-development state will not be
impeded or redirected so as to create ponding on or flooding of adjacent lots;
Any increase in volume or rate of stormwater draining from the lot onto an adjacent
lot following the improvement can be handled on the adjacent lot without creating
ponding, flooding, or other drainage problems and that the owner of the lot being
improved has the legal right to increase the flow of stormwater onto the adjacent
lot;
Any increase in volume or rate of stormwater draining from the lot onto City
property following the improvement can be handled without creating ponding,
flooding, or other drainage problems and that the owner of the lot being improved
has the legal right to increase the flow of stormwater onto the City's property; and
Any increase in volume or rate of stormwater draining from the lot into the City's
municipal storm drain system can be accommodated in the system without creating
downstream problems or exceeding the capacity of the storm drain system.
E. Submission requirements.
A drainage plan must include a written statement demonstrating how the project
has been designed to minimize the volume and rate of stormwater leaving the site,
including provisions for minimizing the area of impervious surface or the use of LID
practices, and a plan and supporting documentation with at least the following
information:
a) The location and characteristics of streams or drainage courses existing on the
parcel and/or abutting parcels.
b) The existing and proposed grading of the site using one-foot contours.
c) The location and area of existing and proposed buildings and impervious
surfaces on the site.
d) The existing pattern of stormwater drainage on the site, including points of
discharge to the City's municipal storm drain system or adjacent properties.
e) The proposed pattern of stormwater drainage after development, including the
location and design of any stormwater facilities.
The City’s reviewing authority may modify or waive any of the submission
requirements for a Drainage Plan if the reviewing authority determines that the
information is not required to determine if the drainage standard is met.
Standards for Drainage Easements and Rights-of-Way
If components of the stormwater runoff system lie outside of the public right-of-way, the
applicant shall convey a stormwater easement that conforms to the following standards.
The minimum width of the easement shall be thirty (30) feet, provided that where a
watercourse or retention area is wider than thirty (30) feet, the City’s reviewing authority
may require a drainage easement of adequate width to conform substantially to the lines 
CHAPTER 230 § XII7 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 151
of such watercourse or retention area, including additional width to provide access. The
City’s reviewing authority may reduce the width of the easement upon a positive
recommendation from the Director of Public Works or their designee if the narrower
easement will allow the stormwater facilities to be maintained or if the unique
characteristics of the site make the creation of a wider easement impractical.
Where a drainage easement would include an open channel, stream or drainageway,
the easement shall be designed and landscaped to further the objectives of the
stormwater management plan. The natural landscape shall be retained to the extent
practical, as determined by the Planning Board.
Where a drainage easement would include a closed conduit, the easement shall be
centered along the conduit.
A public stormwater management system that will be offered to the City for acceptance
as a public facility shall be located on a separate parcel of land deeded to the City.
General Erosion and Sediment Control Provisions
The Erosion and Sedimentation Control Law (Title 38 M.R.S. Section 420-C) applies to
all activities in Maine’s organized territories that will cause the filling, displacement or
exposure of all earthen materials. The Erosion and Sedimentation Control Law requires
that appropriate measures prevent unreasonable soil erosion and sedimentation beyond
the site or into a protected natural resource (such as a river, stream, brook, lake, pond,
or wetland). Erosion control measures must be installed before the activity begins and
must be maintained until the site is permanently stabilized.
An Erosion Control Plan is required for all new development or redevelopment projects
that result in one (1) or more acres of disturbed area or more than ten thousand (10,000)
square feet of new or redeveloped impervious area. This provision also applies to
projects disturbing less than one acre if the construction activity is part of a larger
common plan or development or sale that would disturb one (1) or more acres.
Erosion Control Plan. The plan shall include comprehensive erosion and sediment
control provisions as summarized below:
The plan shall show the use of erosion and sediment control best management
practices (BMPs) at construction sites consistent with the minimum standards
outlined in the Maine DEP Stormwater Rule Chapter 500 Appendix A – Erosion and
Sediment Control, Appendix B – Inspections and Maintenance, Appendix C –
Housekeeping. Erosion and Sedimentation Control BMPs shall be designed,
installed and maintained in accordance with the standards contained in the latest
revisions of the following Maine DEP documents:
Maine Erosion and Sediment Control Best Management Practices (BMPs)
Manual for Designers and Engineers
Maine Erosion and Sediment Control Practices Field Guide for Contractors
CHAPTER 230 § XII7 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 152
An erosion control plan prepared by a registered Maine professional engineer shall
be submitted. The plan shall include the following:
Narrative. Provide a narrative describing the site's erosion potential and the
measures to be employed to control erosion and sedimentation during
construction and after completion of the development. Describe the temporary
and permanent erosion control methods to be employed on the site.
Give the expected date by which final stabilization of the site will be complete.
Show the locations of all roads, lot boundaries, buildings, parking lots, material
stockpiles, existing and proposed culverts, drainage channels, catch basins,
subsurface drainage pipes and storm drain outfalls.
Show the location of all temporary and permanent erosion controls to be
installed on the site.
Show the limits of the areas disturbed by construction.
Provide design drawings and specifications for the temporary and permanent
erosion and sedimentation control measures to be used on the site. The
drawings and details must be sufficiently detailed to allow a contractor
unfamiliar with the controls to install and maintain them.
Provide calculations for sizing, spacing or stabilizing each erosion and
sedimentation control measure in accordance with the latest revision of the
Maine DEP “Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Construction: Best
Management Practices”. These calculations must include analyses for
determining the peak runoff flow to a control, its storage volume and its outlet
design. At a minimum, the erosion and sedimentation control plan must include
the following:
i. Location plan(s) showing, at a minimum, the location of structures,
disturbed land, pre-construction site topography, post-construction site
topography, on-site or adjacent water resources, and all erosion and
sediment control measures.
ii. Detail plan(s) showing the following:
CHAPTER 230 § XII7 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 153
1. Erosion and sedimentation control notes including, but not limited to,
permanent stabilization measures, seeding and mulching rates, and a
construction schedule with the proposed construction dates and
timeframe for major earth moving and construction events.
2. Construction and installation details for erosion and sedimentation
control measures including, but are not limited to, sedimentation
barriers, ditch lining, rip rap, and culvert inlet and outlet designs.
3. Inspection and maintenance requirements for the temporary and
permanent erosion and sedimentation controls for the project site
shall be specified for each BMP in accordance with Maine DEP
Stormwater Rule Chapter 500 Appendices A and B. At a minimum,
the inspection and maintenance plan must include the following:
a. List of the erosion control measure and stormwater management
measures to be inspected and maintained (e.g., “parking lot catch
basins”).
b. Inspection and maintenance tasks specific to each erosion control
measure or stormwater management measure (e.g., “remove
accumulated sediments in basin sumps”). Submit the specific
qualifications of the person performing each task (e.g., “a
professional engineer registered in the State of Maine will inspect
the retention pond embankment”).
c. Specify required frequency of each inspection and maintenance
task (e.g., “accumulated sediments will be removed from all catch
basins annually in early spring”).
4. Responsible parties. Submit the name, job title, employer, employer
address, phone number, and current email contact information for the
person responsible for ensuring that inspection and maintenance
tasks are completed. Submit the names, job titles, employer
addresses, phone number, and any current email contact information
of the engineers or other design professionals who designed the
erosion control measures and stormwater management measures for
the site. Include suppliers of proprietary erosion control measures or
proprietary stormwater management measures used on the site.
5. For stormwater management pond(s) or basin(s) include a
Maintenance Plan that specifies, at a minimum, the inspection and
maintenance requirements for the pond’s embankments, outlet
structure, and emergency spillway. Include as part of this plan
provisions for the removal and disposal of accumulated sediments in
the pond and the control of woody vegetation on the pond’s
embankments.
6. For infiltration structure(s) or basin(s) include a Maintenance Plan that
specifies, at a minimum, the inspection and maintenance
requirements for the structure’s pretreatment measures,
embankments, surface lining, and overflow spillway. Include as part of
this plan provisions for the removal and disposal of accumulated
sediments in the structure and for the rehabilitation of clogged surface
linings. 
CHAPTER 230 § XII7 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 154
7. For vegetated underdrained filter basins include a Maintenance Plan
that specifies, at a minimum, the inspection and maintenance
requirements for the filter embankments, surface lining, underdrain
piping, and overflow spillway. Include as part of this plan provisions
for the removal and disposal of accumulated sediments in the
structure, the rehabilitation of clogged surface linings, and the flushing
of underdrain piping.
8. For stormwater buffer(s) include a Maintenance Plan that specifies, at
a minimum, the inspection and maintenance requirements to ensure
the integrity and function of the project’s stormwater buffers. As part of
this plan, include provisions for the inspection, maintenance, and, if
necessary, reconstruction of any level spreaders or ditch turnouts
used to spread runoff into the buffers. Include as part of this plan
provisions for the frequent removal and disposal of accumulated
sediments and debris in the level spreader and turnout bays,
provisions for the inspection and repair of any eroded areas within the
buffer, and provisions for the re-establishment of buffer vegetation
destroyed by post-construction activities.
9. For manufactured stormwater treatment system(s) include a
Maintenance Plan that specifies, at a minimum, the inspection and
maintenance requirements for the system’s inlet, treatment
chamber(s), and outlet. The plan shall conform to the inspection and
maintenance guidelines recommended by the manufacturer based on
the estimated runoff and pollutant load expected to the system from
the project. As part of this plan, include provisions for the frequent
removal of accumulated sediments, debris, and contaminated waters
from the system and, if applicable, provisions for the removal,
disposal, and replacement of any clogged or spent filter media.
10. For ditches, culverts, and storm drains include a Maintenance Plan
that specifies, at a minimum, the inspection and maintenance
requirements for all stormwater conveyances to be built or installed on
the site – including, but not limited to, ditches, swales, culverts, catch
basins, and storm drain piping. As part of this plan, include provisions
for the repair of eroded areas at the inlet, within, and at the outlet of
each conveyance and include provisions for the frequent removal and
disposal of accumulated sediments and debris at the inlet, within, and
at the outlet of each conveyance.
Submit a Housekeeping Plan in accordance with the requirements contained in
Maine DEP Stormwater Rule Chapter 500, Appendix C. The Housekeeping Plan
shall address spill prevention, groundwater protection, fugitive sediment and dust,
debris and other materials, trench or foundation de-watering, or non-stormwater
charges, as applicable to the specific site.
CHAPTER 230 § XIII1 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 155
General Provisions for Impact Fees
Authority
These impact fee provisions are adopted by the City under the authority of 30-A M.R.S.
§4354 and under statutory and constitutional home rule provisions.
Purpose
The purpose of these impact fee provisions is to ensure that new development in Saco will
be accomplished in a safe and healthful manner and that such development will bear a
proportional or reasonably related share of the cost of new, expanded, or modified
infrastructure necessary to service the development through:
The payment of impact fees that shall be dedicated to paying for the needed
improvements.
The construction of appropriate improvements as provided for herein.
Standard
The amount of impact fees or the value of constructed improvements required of a
development must be reasonably related to the development’s share of the cost of
infrastructure improvements made necessary by the development, or if the improvements
were constructed at municipal expense prior to the development, shall be reasonably related
to the portion or percentage of the infrastructure used by the development.
Impact fee accounts. As required by State law, funds received from impact fees must be
segregated from the City’s general fund and revenues, and such funds shall be
expended solely for the purposes for which they were collected. There are four impact
fee fund accounts:
Recreational facilities impact fee account;
Open Space impact fee account;
Fire Department/emergency medical service impact fee account; and
Traffic Mitigation & Bicycle & Pedestrian Infrastructure impact fee account.
Use of impact fees. Impact fees collected under the provisions of this article shall be
used only to pay for the capital cost of the infrastructure improvements specifically
associated with the impact fee accounts as identified below. No portion of the fee shall
be used for routine maintenance or operational activities.
Acquisition of land or easements, including conservation easements.
Engineering, surveying, and environmental assessment services directly related to
the design, construction, and oversight of the construction of the improvement. 
CHAPTER 230 § XIII3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 156
The actual construction of the improvement, including, without limitation, demolition
costs, clearing, and grading of the land, and necessary capital equipment.
Mitigation costs.
Legal and administrative costs associated with construction of the improvement,
including any borrowing necessary to finance the project.
Debt service costs, including interest if the City borrows for the construction of the
improvement.
Relocation costs.
Similar costs that are directly related to the project.
Modification of impact fees. The City Council may, by formal vote following a public
hearing, reduce or eliminate the payment of a required impact fee if it finds that:
The developer or property owner who would otherwise be responsible for the
payment of the impact fee voluntarily agrees to construct the improvement for
which the impact fee would be collected, or an equivalent improvement approved
by the City Council; or
The developer or property owner is required, as part of a development approval by
the City or a state or federal agency, to make or to pay for infrastructure
improvements that are of the same nature as the improvement to be funded by the
impact fee; or
The project subject to the impact fee involves the construction of affordable housing
as defined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development or
the Maine State Housing Authority. If only part of the project is affordable housing,
the Council may waive only the portion of the fee attributable to the affordable units;
or
The project involves the construction of an elder/disability housing facility or other
eldercare facilities.
Review and revision. The City Council shall periodically review each impact fee
established under this chapter. If the Council finds that the anticipated cost of the
improvement has changed or that the identification of developments subject to the fee is
no longer appropriate, the Council may adopt changes to the impact fee.
Payment of impact fees. The impact fees provided for under this article shall be paid to
the City of Saco in care of the Code Enforcement Department.
Refunds. Impact fees shall be refunded in the following cases:
1. If a building permit is surrendered or if a subdivision or site plan approval lapses
without commencement of construction, the permit holder or developer shall be
entitled to a refund, without interest, of any impact fee paid in conjunction with that 
CHAPTER 230 § XIII4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 157
project. A request for a refund shall be made in writing to the City Planner and shall
occur within 90 days of the lapse of the approval or the expiration of the permit.
2. Any fees collected that are not spent or obligated by contract for the specified
improvements or acquisitions by the end of the calendar quarter immediately
following 10 years from the date the fee was paid shall be returned to the current
owner of the property for which the fee was paid, together with interest calculated
at three (3) percent per year from the date of the payment of the fee.
Recreational Facilities and Open Space Impact Fees
Description of the improvements.
This project involves the acquisition of land for and the development of new
community-wide recreational facilities and the acquisition of land or conservation
easements for use as substantially undeveloped open space and the related
development of these parcels to facilitate their role and use as open space. The
recreational facilities portion of this impact fee may be used for the following
improvements:
a) The development of the City's former landfill on Foss Road into a multipurpose
community recreational complex;
b) The development of a skating area at Pepperell Park or another location;
c) The construction of a baseball field at the Middle School Recreational Area;
d) The construction of pedestrian and bicycle trails, including the City's share of
the cost of the development of the Eastern Trail;
e) The acquisition of land for the future development of community recreation
facilities; and/or
f) The development of other community recreational facilities that expand the
City's supply of recreational areas or facilities.
The open space facilities portion of this impact fee may be used for the following
improvements:
The acquisition of land or conservation easements for use as substantially
undeveloped open space and the related development of these parcels to
facilitate their role and use as open space.
Need for the improvements. The need for community recreation facilities and open
space is a function of the size of the community's population. As the community grows, it
needs more recreation land, fields, playgrounds, natural areas, and open spaces. The
City's duly adopted Comprehensive Plan identifies the need to expand the supply of
recreational facilities and open space to serve a growing population. The need for the
specific improvements is set out in the City of Saco's Recreational Facilities and Open
Space Impact Fee Methodology. 
CHAPTER 230 § XIII4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 158
Activities subject to the fee.
1. Any construction or development that involves the creation of a new dwelling unit,
as defined by this chapter, including single-family homes, apartment units, mobile
home units, and mobile homes, shall be subject to the payment of an impact fee for
this project, except as provided below:
a) The recreational facilities portion of the impact fee shall not be paid if the unit is
located in a residential subdivision or other residential development that has
provided recreational facilities in accordance with the requirements of the City's
Subdivision Regulations.
b) The open space portion of the impact fee shall not be paid if the unit is located
in a residential subdivision or other residential development that has provided
open space in accordance with the requirements of the City's Subdivision
Regulations.
c) No impact fee shall be paid if the new dwelling unit is to be constructed on a lot
where a dwelling unit has been demolished or permanently removed from use
within the last twelve (12) months. The fee shall be charged for any unit
beyond the number demolished or permanently removed from use.
d) No impact fee shall be paid if the dwelling unit is moved from one (1) lot within
the City to another lot within the City.
e) Downsizing provisions for elderly homeowners.
2. Persons building new single-family dwelling units which meet the following
requirements, which shall be memorialized in an agreement outlining the limitations
on the waiver shall be recorded at the York County Registry, and evidence of the
recording shall be presented to the CEO before the building permit is issued, are
not required to pay the recreation and open space impact fee:
a) The person or persons proposing to build the new single-family dwelling unit
have previously owned and occupied an existing permanent residence in Saco
and paid property taxes on it continuously for at least twenty (20) years.
b) The owner(s) are selling or transferring their existing permanent residence in
Saco and are planning to make the new house their permanent residence.
c) At least one (1) owner of the proposed house is sixty-two (62) years old or
older.
d) The proposed house is a single-family dwelling unit with one (1) or two (2)
bedrooms.
e) The property is not transferred by any means during the five (5) years following
the issuance of a building permit.
f) The property is not be leased or rented during the five (5) years after the
issuance of a building permit.
CHAPTER 230 § XIII5 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 159
Calculation of the Fee. The recreational facilities and open space impact fee is a per
capital fee and is based upon the City's Impact Fee Calculation Methodology. The per
capita fee consists of a recreational facilities component and an open space component.
The amount of the fee paid by a development project shall be determined by multiplying
the per capita fee by the number of people expected to reside in the project. The
occupancy ratios in Table 13-1 shall be used in determining the fee, unless the applicant
provides verifiable written documentation from an independent, objective source
demonstrating other occupancy levels.
Table 13-1. Occupancy ratios for determining recreational facilities and open space impact
fee
Type Ratio
(people per
unit)
Single-family dwellings and mobile homes 3.2
Dwelling unit in a 2-family or multifamily dwelling with:
1 bedroom 1.2
2 bedrooms 2.0
3 or more bedrooms 3.0
Dwelling unit in elderly housing, assisted living facility, or other
eldercare facility limited to occupancy by households 65 years of age
or older
1.2
Impact fee. Fees shall be determined by Council.
Collection of the fee. The CEO shall collect the impact fee prior to the issuance of a
building, plumbing or other permit for residential construction that is subject to the fee.
The amount of the fee shall be based upon the procedure set out in Subsection D
above. The City Administrator may approve the payment of impact fees over time in
accordance with an approved payment schedule, provided that appropriate
arrangements are in place to guarantee collection of the fees.
Fire Department / Emergency Medical Services (FD/EMS) Impact Fee
A. Description of the Improvements. The FD/EMS impact fee will be used to ensure an
adequately capitalized and funded Fire Department in the provision of fire, rescue and
emergency medical services. The fee may be used for the following purposes:
1. Acquisition of vehicles and/or purchases of equipment used by Fire Department
personnel for fire, rescue, and emergency medical services.
2. Construction of capital improvements, including the expansion or replacement of
existing infrastructure facilities, or, if the improvements were constructed at
municipal expense prior to the development, the fee must be reasonably related to
the portion of percentage of the infrastructure used by the development.
3. Acquisition of land or easements necessary for or related to existing and proposed
Fire Department facilities.
CHAPTER 230 § XIII5 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 160
4. Engineering, surveying, and environmental assessment services directly related to
the design, construction, and oversight of the construction of the improvement.
5. The actual construction of the improvement, including, without limitation, demolition
costs, clearing, and grading of the land, and necessary capital equipment.
6. Mitigation costs.
7. Legal and administrative costs associated with construction of capital
improvements, including any borrowing necessary to finance the project.
8. Debt service costs, including interest if the City borrows for the construction of the
improvement.
B. Need for the improvements. The need for public safety equipment and facilities is a
function of the growth of the community's population. As the community grows,
increased capacity is required to meet the public safety needs of greater numbers of
residents. The City's duly adopted Comprehensive Plan identifies the need to expand
the ability of the Fire Department and emergency medical services to serve a growing
population. The need for the specific improvements is set out in the City of Saco's
FD/EMS impact fee methodology.
C. Activities subject to the fee. Any construction or development that involves the creation
of a new dwelling unit, as defined by this chapter, including single-family homes,
apartment units, mobile home units, and mobile homes, shall be subject to the payment
of a Fire Department/emergency medical services impact fee, except as provided below:
1. No impact fee shall be paid if a new dwelling unit is to be constructed on a lot
where a dwelling unit has been demolished or permanently removed from use
within the last twelve (12) months. The fee shall be charged for any unit beyond the
number demolished or permanently removed from use.
2. No impact fee shall be paid if a dwelling unit is moved from one lot within the City to
another lot within the City.
3. No impact fee shall be paid if a proposed dwelling unit is created as the result of a
conveyance of a parcel to a family member.
4. No impact fee shall be paid for the creation of an accessory apartment in a singlefamily dwelling.
D. Calculation of the fee. The FD/EMS impact fee is based upon the City's Impact Fee
Calculation Methodology.
E. Impact fee. Fees shall be determined by the Council.
F. Collection of the fee. The CEO shall collect the impact fee prior to the issuance of any
building, plumbing, or other permit for construction that is subject to the fee. The amount
of the fee shall be based upon the procedure set out in Subsection D above. The City
Administrator may approve the payment of impact fees over time in accordance with an 
CHAPTER 230 § XIII6 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 161
approved payment schedule, provided that appropriate arrangements are in place to
guarantee collection of the fees.
G. Effective dates. This impact fee shall be applicable to activities subject to the impact fee
30 days after the date of amendment of this article.
Traffic Mitigation and Bicycle & Pedestrian Infrastructure Fee
A. Description of the Improvements. This impact fee will be used to mitigate traffic
congestion and to enhance the safety of motorists, bicyclists and pedestrians in the
City’s public ways. The fee may be used for the following purposes:
1. Roadway improvements
2. Bicycle & pedestrian infrastructure improvements.
B. Impact fee. Fees shall be determined by the Planning Board.
Other Impact Fees
Refer to Chapter 176 for sewer-related impact fees. 
CHAPTER 230 § XIV1 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 162
Conditional Uses
Applicability
Conditional Use Permit (CUP). The following are eligible for a CUP:
Uses that are designated “C” for conditional use in Table 3-3.
Changing one nonconforming use to another use that is equally or more appropriate to
the zoning district and meets the standards of Article V and this section.
Certain conversions of buildings to multi-family use as described in Article V.
Review and Approval Authority
The Planning Board shall review and approve, or approve with conditions, or deny
applications for a Conditional Use Permit.
Procedures
Applicants shall submit a complete application.
If the development proposal under conditional use permit review is also subject to site
plan review, conditional use permit review, and site plan review may occur
simultaneously.
Waiver
Applicants may submit a written request for a waiver of submission requirements
with their Conditional Use Permit application.
The Planning Board may grant a waiver(s) of application submission requirement(s)
if it finds that, due to special circumstances of a particular plan, the submission of
required exhibits is not necessary or is inappropriate because of the nature of the
proposed development.
The Planning Board may request additional information as it deems necessary for
proper review to ensure that sufficient information is presented to the Planning
Board when it initially reviews an application.
An application is not deemed to be complete until declared to be so by vote of the
Planning Board, which may, in any case, request additional information and materials.
Public Hearing Requirements for a Conditional Use Permit
1. For each application for a CUP, the Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing.
2. The Planning Board shall cause public notice to be posted and published in both
the City Building and at least one (1) newspaper of circulation in the area, of any 
CHAPTER 230 § XIV4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 163
public hearing which the Planning Board shall conduct, indicating the property
involved, the nature of the application, and the time and place of the public hearing.
3. The Planning Board shall also notify all property owners within two hundred (200)
feet when the applicant's property is located in the HDR District or any business
district, and within six hundred (600) feet of the property when the applicant's
property is located in any other zoning district. The Planning Board shall cause a
list of such property owners to be drawn from the Assessor's records, and such
notices to property owners shall be sent by mail at least seven days prior to the
date set for the public hearing.
4. The Planning Board shall not continue hearings to a future date except for good
cause.
Conditions of approval. The Planning Board may attach conditions to further the
purposes of this chapter. These conditions include, but are not limited to, specifications
for type of vegetation and sewage disposal and water supply facilities, landscaping and
planting screens, operational hours, operational controls, professional inspection and
maintenance, sureties, deed restrictions, restrictive covenants, type of construction, or
any other reasonable conditions necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter.
Appeals. An aggrieved person may appeal a Planning Board decision on a conditional
use application to the Maine Superior Court under Rule 80B within 30 days from receipt
of a written decision.
Application Submission Requirements
CUP Application Submission Requirements
A signed copy of the application.
The name and address of the owner and conditional use permit application with
evidence of sufficient right, title, or interest in the premises to permit the application to
undertake the proposed use.
Names, addresses, and tax map and lot number of all abutting property owners.
Building plans, which shall include line drawings of all sides of the proposed building(s)
that show, the first-floor plan, all elevations, and the proposed construction material.
A plan that includes the following information:
1. A map of the site with reference to surrounding area and existing street locations.
2. A plan of the area showing the lot line dimensions, applicable zone or zones, and
the normal high-water mark, if applicable.
3. The location of all existing and proposed buildings and structures, streets,
easements, driveways, entrances, and exits on the site and within one hundred
(100) feet thereof. 
CHAPTER 230 § XIV4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 164
4. All setbacks from bodies of water and lot lines.
5. Parking, loading and unloading areas with dimensions, traffic patterns, access
aisles, and curb radii.
6. The location and design of existing and proposed stormwater systems, sanitary
waste disposal systems and potable water supply, and methods of solid waste
storage and disposal.
7. A landscaping and buffering plan showing what will remain and what will be
planted, indicating botanical and common names of plants and trees, dimensions,
approximate time of planting and maintenance plans.
8. Lighting details indicating type of fixtures, location, radius, and intensity of light.
9. The location, dimensions, and details of signs.
10. The proposed use of all floor area.
11. Improvements such as roads, curbs, bumpers, and sidewalks with cross sections,
design details, and dimensions.
12. All existing physical features on the site and within two hundred (200) feet of the
site, including streams, watercourses, and existing woodlands.
13. Soil conditions as reflected by a medium-intensity survey (such as wetlands, rock
ledge, and areas of high-water table). The City Planner or Planning Board may
require a high-intensity soils survey where necessary.
14. A narrative and sketch sufficient to describe trees and other vegetation located on
the site. The City Planner or Planning Board may require mapping of trees
proposed to be preserved as part of the site and landscaping plans presented for
approval.
15. Topography showing existing and proposed contours at five (5) foot intervals for
slopes averaging five (5) percent or greater and at two (2) foot intervals for land of
lesser slope. A reference benchmark shall be clearly designated. Where variations
in the topography may affect the layout of buildings and roads, the City Planner or
Planning Board may require that the topographic maps be based on an on-site
survey.
The application for conditional use permit review for business, commercial, and industrial
uses shall also include:
1. A written description of the proposed operations in sufficient detail to indicate the
degree to which the operations will create traffic congestion, noise, toxic or noxious
matter, vibration, odor, heat, glare, air pollution, waste, and other objectionable
effects, along with engineering and architectural plans for mitigating such effects.
2. The proposed number of shifts to be worked and the maximum number of
employees on each shift. 
CHAPTER 230 § XIV5 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 165
3. A list of all hazardous materials to be hauled, stored, used, generated, or disposed
of on the site, and state or federal permits required.
4. Completed Industrial Waste Discharge Application.
Minor conditional uses
In order to process applications more efficiently, certain conditional uses, due to the limited
nature of the proposed use, may be reviewed by the Planning Office, as authorized in 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4353. The Planning Office may, however, decline to review an application
requesting approval for a minor conditional use and forward such application to the Planning
Board. Only uses that meet all of the following applicability standards may be reviewed as
minor conditional uses:
Applicability. This article shall apply to:
Home occupations in which there is no point of purchase for retail merchandise at
the home. Phone and mail order businesses, wholesale businesses and other
similar businesses may be reviewed as minor conditional uses.
Home occupations in which the required number of parking spaces for all uses on
the lot does not exceed four spaces.
Home occupations in which there are not significant exterior alterations to the
building or site.
Two-family dwellings.
Administration
Application contents. An application for a minor conditional use shall include four
copies of the information required under Subsection XIV4.
Notice and public comment. Upon receipt of an application for minor conditional
use, the Planning Office shall send a notice of the application, including the name
of the applicant, address of the applicant, the nature and address of the proposed
use, to all property owners within 200 feet. The notice shall also include a deadline
for comment on the application, to be 10 calendar days from the date of the notice.
Time frame for decisions. The Planning Office shall act upon all applications for
minor conditional uses, approval, or referral to the Planning Board, within five days
of the close of the public comment period.
Criteria for approval. Minor conditional use applications shall be approved, or approved
with conditions, by the Planning Office unless the proposed use does not satisfy the
approval criteria in Subsection XIV3, or other relevant sections of this chapter, or other
local, state and federal laws. Notice of decisions by the Planning Office shall be provided
to those parties detailed above in Subsection XIV5B. If, in the opinion of the Planning
Office, an application does not meet the applicability criteria set out in Subsection
XIV5B, then the application shall be referred to the Planning Board for a full conditional
use review.
CHAPTER 230 § XIV6 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 166
Planning Board jurisdiction. The Planning Board shall review any application for a minor
conditional use upon a determination by the Planning Office that the potential impacts
from a proposed use warrant a public hearing before the Planning Board. Upon referral
to the Planning Board, the applicant shall submit a full application for conditional use.
Standards
Standards for a CUP. It is the applicant's burden to establish that the proposal satisfies
each of the following standards:
1. The proposed use will meet the definition and specific requirements set forth in this
chapter and will comply with applicable state or federal laws.
2. The proposed use will not impede vehicular and pedestrian circulation, or access for
emergency responders, nor create hazards on site and on adjacent streets. The
proposed exterior lighting will not create hazards to motorists traveling on adjacent
public streets, is adequate for the safety of occupants or users of the site and will
not damage the value and diminish the usability of adjacent properties.
3. The provisions for buffers and on-site landscaping will provide adequate protection
to neighboring properties from detrimental features of the proposal.
4. The proposed use will not have a significant detrimental effect on the use and
peaceful enjoyment of abutting properties as a result of noise, vibrations, fumes,
odor, dust, glare, fire hazard, hours of operation, nor unreasonably restrict access to
light and air, or other cause.
5. The proposed use will not have a significant detrimental effect on the value of
adjacent properties that could be avoided by reasonable modification of the plan.
6. The design of the project will not result in significant flood hazards or flood damage
and will be in conformance with applicable flood hazard protection requirements.
7. Adequate provision has been made for disposal of wastewater and solid waste and
for the prevention of ground or surface water contamination.
8. The proposed use will not have an adverse impact on significant scenic vistas or on
significant wildlife habitats that could be avoided by a reasonable modification of the
plan.
9. The use will not cause safety hazards for pedestrians, cyclists, and operators of
motor vehicles, and will not result in a decrease in the Level of Service (LOS) D at
nearby intersections or at the project driveway during the peak hour. However, the
Planning Board may approve the application under the following circumstances if it
finds that an adequate level of safety can be attained through imposing certain
conditions of approval:
a) At signalized intersections where the level of service is already below LOS D;
b) At signalized intersections predicted to drop below LOS D where physical
improvements cannot be made to attain LOS D;
CHAPTER 230 § XIV6 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 167
c) At unsignalized intersections where physical improvements cannot be made to
improve the level of service to LOS D;
d) Where warrants for a traffic signal are not met; or
e) Where signal installation is not desirable.
These conditions of approval may include as upgrades in signalization, one-way
driveways, prohibiting certain turning movements, construction of turning lanes,
sidewalks, bicycle paths, or other improvements, or through implementation of
transportation demand management measures.
Additional standards for projects situated within the RPOD, SLOD, and CDOD Districts.
The Planning Board shall find that the proposed conditional use:
1. Will maintain safe and healthful conditions.
2. Will not result in water pollution, erosion, or sedimentation to surface waters.
3. Will adequately provide for the disposal of all wastewater.
4. Will not have an adverse impact on spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life, bird, or
other wildlife habitats.
5. Will conserve shore cover and visual, as well as actual, points of access to inland
and coastal waters.
6. Will protect archaeological and historic resources in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan.
7. Will not adversely affect existing commercial fishing or maritime activities in the CE
District.
8. Will avoid problems associated with floodplain development and use.
9. Is in conformance with the provisions of §VIII3, Land Use Standards.
10. If located in a structure, the structure is located in an approved subdivision and will
not violate any other local ordinance or regulation or any state law.
Additional Standards for Offices in Residential Districts:
1. In order to preserve neighborhood character, offices shall be located only within
converted residential structures, except as allowed in Subsection D(4) below.
2. Parking for offices shall be located to the side or rear of the building.
3. All outdoor lighting shall be shielded to avoid glare and light trespass.
4. In special situations where a building is extremely dilapidated and structurally
unsound and where reuse is therefore not practicable or economically feasible or
where a building is not judged to be a significant component of the neighborhood's
overall architectural and historic character, the Planning Board may approve plans
to replace an existing residential building with a new office building whose scale and
design would be compatible with the neighborhood. The Planning Board shall obtain 
CHAPTER 230 § XIV7 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 168
the recommendation of the Saco Historic Preservation Commission before granting
permission to demolish. In the Historic District, and on historic sites, the decision on
demolition shall rest entirely with the Historic Preservation Commission.
5. Outdoor storage is prohibited.
Limits and Expiration
Construction, or occupancy if no construction is involved, shall commence within twentyfour (24) months of the issuance of a conditional use permit. If construction or
occupancy is not commenced within this period, the conditional use permit shall be null
and void. The deadline may be extended for one (1) additional year by the Planning
Board or City Planner, upon a written request. The request for an extension must be
submitted before the date of expiration of the CUP. After the CUP has expired, or an
extension is denied by the Planning Board, the applicant may reapply for a CUP at any
time without prejudice.
Requests for extensions shall be approved unless one or more of the following occurs:
Additional information indicates that the plan does not meet the conditional use
standards.
Failure to meet a condition of approval.
An amendment in this chapter prohibits or alters the proposed conditional use.
Reapplication
If a conditional use permit is denied, a second request of a similar nature shall not be
resubmitted within two years from the date of the first request, unless, in the opinion of the
majority of the Planning Board, substantial new evidence is brought forward, or unless the
Planning Board finds that an error of law or misunderstanding of facts has been made, or
unless amendment has been made to this chapter which changes the status,
circumstances, or conditions of the application which was originally submitted.
Nonconformance
Conditional uses may be permitted in buildings that are nonconforming in respect to
dimensional standards.
CHAPTER 230 § XV1 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 169
Enforcement
Administrative Official
Unless otherwise specifically stated, this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the
City of Saco Code Enforcement Officer (“CEO”).
It shall be the duty of the CEO to enforce this chapter and, in connection therewith, to
investigate all complaints of alleged violations of this chapter and cases that violate this
chapter.
Furthermore, it shall be the duty of the CEO to enforce the City of Saco Subdivision
Ordinance and, in connection therewith, to investigate complaints of alleged violations of
the Subdivision Ordinance and cases that violate the Subdivision Ordinance.
Furthermore, it shall be the duty of the CEO to enforce the City of Saco Site Plan
Ordinance and, in connection therewith, to investigate complaints of alleged violations of
the Site Plan Ordinance and cases that violate the Site Plan Ordinance.
Other City officials. It shall be the duty of the Mayor, City Council, and members of the
Fire Department, Police Department, Electrical Inspector, Local Plumbing Inspector, City
Planner, Health Officer, and Tax Assessor to assist the CEO by reporting new
construction, reconstruction, or land use in apparent violation of this chapter.
Permits Required
Building Permit and Certificate of Occupancy (CO)
1. CO. No new structure shall be occupied or used, nor shall the occupancy of any
commercial or industrial building change, prior to the issuance of a CO by the CEO.
The CEO shall not issue a CO unless the new structure or proposed use is in
conformance with this chapter.
Building codes. Building permits and COs shall be issued in conformance both with this
chapter and with Chapter 73 and all applicable ordinances of the City of Saco.
Shoreland Zoning Overlay Districts
1. Shoreland Permits Required. No person shall, without first obtaining a shoreland
zoning permit, engage in any activity or use of land or structure requiring a permit
or expand, change, or replace an existing use or structure, or renew a discontinued
nonconforming use.
2. Shoreland Standards. Prior to making a decision on an application for a Shoreland
Zoning permit, the permitting authority shall make findings, based on the
information presented, that the proposed use:
a) Will maintain safe and healthful conditions; 
CHAPTER 230 § XV2 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 170
b) Will not result in water pollution, erosion, or sedimentation to surface waters;
c) Will adequately provide for the disposal of all wastewater;
d) Will not have an adverse impact on spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life, bird or
other wildlife habitats;
e) Will conserve shore cover and visual, as well as actual, points of access to
inland and coastal waters;
f) Will protect archaeological and historic resources as in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan;
g) Will not adversely affect existing commercial fishing or maritime activities
h) Will avoid problems associated with floodplain development and use;
i) Is in conformance with the provisions of §VIII3 Land use standards;
j) If located in a structure, the structure is located in an approved subdivision and
will not violate any other local ordinance or regulation or any state law.
Exemptions. No permit shall be required for the construction, alteration, relocation, or
replacement of any building or part thereof having a total cost of construction of $500 or
less, provided it conforms with the provisions of this chapter.
Material Accompanying Applications. The application for the permit shall be in writing
and shall be made on such form as the CEO shall prescribe and shall contain a scale
drawing of the proposed new, altered or relocated building, or the replacement
contemplated, including a plot plan (unless waived by the CEO). The application shall be
filed with the CEO.
Residential and Shoreland Zoning Overlay Districts. This subsection applies only to
Residential Districts and Shoreland Zoning Overlay Districts. The CEO will notify
abutting landowners by mail that a building permit has been issued whenever a building
permit will lead to the construction of a new dwelling unit, will lead to the creation or
expansion of a commercial use, or will lead to the creation or expansion of an accessory
use with commercial aspects. In addition, in the Shoreland Zoning Overlay Districts, the
notice will be issued for any exterior change requiring a building permit. These notices
are not required if earlier approvals required for such a permit have been the subject of a
public hearing, such as those held for conditional use, site plan review, subdivision,
shoreland zoning, a variance, or other similar permitting actions. The notice will be
mailed within one week of the issuance of the building permit, and shall describe briefly
what the permit is for, and describe briefly the appeals process. Failure to receive the
notice shall not invalidate any action taken by the CEO.
Permit Approval. The CEO, after proper examination of the application, shall either issue
the requested permit or transmit a Notice of Refusal within ten (10) calendar days.
Notice of Refusal shall be in writing and shall state the reasons therefor. However, when
the CEO has reason to believe that the proposed construction would not be in 
CHAPTER 230 § XV2 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 171
compliance with other local regulations or state laws, the building permit shall not be
issued until all questions have been resolved to the CEO’s satisfaction. When a violation
of subdivision standards is believed to exist, the Planning Board shall be given an
opportunity to examine the proposal.
Record of Permit Applications. Each application for a building permit, together with all
plans, drawings, correspondence, and a copy of the issued building permit, shall be
made part of a permanent file, and such file shall be kept in a locked cabinet in a City
Building or electronically on a secure City server.
Installation of Public Utility Service. No public utility, water district, sanitary district or any
utility company may install services to new structures located in the Shoreland Zone
unless all permits required under this chapter or any previous ordinance have been
issued by the appropriate municipal officials.
Limits on Shoreland Approvals.
If substantial construction is not commenced within twenty-four (24) months of the
Planning Board's or CEO's written approval of a shoreland permit, the shoreland
permit shall be null and void. "Substantial construction" shall mean the completion
of a foundation, addition, or other evidence satisfactory to Department staff. The
deadline may be extended for one (1) additional year by the appropriate permitting
authority upon written request of the applicant. The written request for an extension
must be submitted before the date of expiration of the shoreland permit. After the
shoreland permit has expired or an extension denied by the permitting authority,
the applicant may reapply for a Shoreland Zone approval at any time without
prejudice.
The permitting authority shall approve the request for an extension unless:
Additional information indicates that the plan does not meet the standards of
this chapter.
Failure to meet a condition of approval within required timeframe.
Contractor certification. When an excavation contractor proposes an activity that results
in more than one cubic yard of soil disturbance, the person responsible for management
of erosion and sedimentation control practices at the site must be certified in erosion
control practices by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection. This person
must be present at the site each day earthmoving activity occurs for a duration that is
sufficient to ensure that proper erosion and sedimentation control practices are followed.
This is required until erosion and sedimentation control measures have been installed
which will either stay in place permanently or stay in place until the area is sufficiently
covered with vegetation necessary to prevent soil erosion. The name and certification
number of the person who will oversee the activity causing or resulting in soil
disturbance shall be included on the permit application. This requirement does not apply
to a person or firm engaged in agriculture or timber harvesting if best management 
CHAPTER 230 § XV3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 172
practices for erosion and sedimentation control are used; and municipal, state, and
federal employees engaged in projects associated with that employment.
Enforcement of Shoreland Zoning Overlay District Provisions
Nuisances. Violations of shoreland zoning overlay district provisions, including this
chapter’s performance standards, shall be deemed a nuisance.
Code Enforcement Officer.
1. It shall be the duty of the CEO to enforce provisions of Article VIII. If the CEO finds
that any provision of Article VIII is violated, the CEO shall notify, in writing, the
person(s) responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and
ordering action necessary to correct it, including discontinuance of illegal use of
land, buildings or structures, or work being done, removal of illegal buildings or
structures, and abatement of nuisance conditions. A copy of such notice shall be
submitted to the City Administrator, Mayor, and City Council and be maintained as
a permanent record.
2. The CEO shall conduct on-site inspections to ensure compliance with all applicable
laws and conditions attached to permit approvals. The CEO shall also investigate
all complaints of alleged violations of Article VIII.
3. The CEO shall keep a complete record of all essential transactions of the office,
including applications submitted, permits granted or denied, variances granted or
denied, revocation actions, revocation of permits, appeals, court actions, violations
investigated, violations found, and fees collected.
Violations and Penalties
The CEO is hereby authorized to institute or cause to be instituted by the City Solicitor in
the name of the City of Saco all actions that may be appropriate or necessary for the
enforcement of this chapter. This section shall not prevent a person entitled to equitable
relief from enjoining an act contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
Furthermore, the CEO is hereby authorized to institute or cause to be instituted by the
City Solicitor in the name of the City of Saco all actions that may be appropriate or
necessary for the enforcement of the Subdivision Regulations. This section shall not
prevent a person entitled to equitable relief from enjoining an act contrary to the
provisions of the Subdivision Regulations.
Any person, firm, corporation, or other business association, being the owner or having
control of land, building, or other structures, or part thereof, which violates the provisions
of this chapter, shall be penalized in accordance with 30-A M.R.S. §4452, with fines of
not less than one hundred dollars ($100) nor more than those amounts set forth in 30-A
M.R.S. § 4452. Each day may constitute a separate offense. Fines shall apply following
issuance of a notice of violation signed by the CEO. Such notice shall be mailed by
certified mail, with return receipt requested, or served in person by the CEO. 
CHAPTER 230 § XV5 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 173
Actions and Proceedings
When the actions in §XVI4 do not result in the correction or abatement of the violation or
nuisance condition, the CEO is hereby authorized to institute actions and proceedings,
either legal or equitable, including seeking injunctions of violations and the imposition of
fines, that may be appropriate or necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter in
the name of the City. City officers, or their authorized agents, are hereby authorized to
enter into administrative consent agreements for the purpose of eliminating violations of
this chapter and recovering fines without court action. Such agreements shall not allow
an illegal structure or use to continue unless there is clear and convincing evidence that
the illegal structure or use was constructed or conducted as a direct result of erroneous
advice given by an authorized city official and there is no evidence that the owner acted
in bad faith, or unless the removal of the structure or use will result in a threat or hazard
to public health and safety, or will result in substantial environmental damage.
Any person, including, but not limited to, a landowner, a landowner's agent, or a
contractor, who orders or conducts any activity in violation of this chapter shall be
penalized in accordance with 30-A M.R.S. §4452, with fines of not less than $100 nor
more than those amounts set forth in 30-A M.R.S. §4452. Each day may constitute a
separate offense. 
CHAPTER 230 § XVI1 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 174
Zoning Board of Appeals
Organization
Establishment. The City of Saco Zoning Board of Appeals, hereinafter the "BoA," is
hereby created, which BoA shall consist of seven regular members and two alternates,
who shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council, none
of whom shall hold any elective office or any other appointive position in the City
government. The BoA shall elect a Chair and a Secretary from its members.
Quorum. A quorum shall consist of four (4) members. All decisions by the BoA shall be
by a majority vote by members present and voting at the meeting, but under no
circumstances shall fewer than three (3) members comprise a majority. Alternates shall
vote only in the absence of regular members. In the event of the absence of a regular
member or member(s), the alternate who has served the longest time shall fill the first
vacancy, and the other alternate shall fill the second vacancy. In the event that both
alternates shall have served the same period of time, selection of an alternate shall be at
the discretion of the Chair.
Qualifications.
1. Only residents of Saco may serve as a member of the BoA.
2. There shall be no more than two (2) members on the BoA who are residents of the
same ward.
3. No City Council member, nor spouse of a City Councilor, may be a member of the
BoA.
Terms of Office, and Vacancies
Terms. The term of the members shall be (5) five years, and terms shall be staggered
with twelve (12) month intervals. Any vacancy during the unexpired term of a member
shall be filled for the remainder of the term.
Vacancies.
1. Vacancies on the BoA occur under the following circumstances:
a) A member submits their resignation in writing to the Mayor.
b) A member's official residence is no longer within the City of Saco, in which
instance the Secretary of the BoA shall notify the Mayor.
c) Upon expiration of the term of a member.
d) A member fails to attend three or more consecutive meetings of the BoA,
without being excused by the BoA.
2. In the case of vacancies occurring in the manner described in Subsection B(1)(d)
above, the Chair shall first contact the absent member to determine their ability to 
CHAPTER 230 § XVI3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 175
attend future hearings on a regular basis. The BoA shall then recommend
appropriate action to the City Council.
3. A vacancy during the unexpired term of a member shall be filled by a person
appointed by the Mayor for the duration of the unexpired term.
4. A member of the BoA may be removed for cause by the City Council, provided that
the member shall first be notified in writing and given the opportunity for a hearing.
Powers and Duties
The BoA shall hear the following matters:
Administrative Appeals from decisions by the CEO. An aggrieved party may appeal a
decision of the CEO regarding a zoning violation, a building permit or a certificate of
occupancy in those cases where it is alleged the CEO has made an error of law, or has
abused their discretion, or the evidence of record compelled a different decision. An
aggrieved party may also appeal to the BoA if a permit holder has meaningfully
exceeded the authority granted in their building permit or their certificate of occupancy.
An appeal filed hereunder must be brought within thirty (30) days of the alleged act,
action or failure to act. This provision is intended to effectuate the process set out by the
Legislature in 30-A M.R.S. §2691 (4). The appeal review shall be de novo as set out
below in §XVI5(G). The BoA may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the CEO, and
that decision may be appealed as set out in this Article.
Variances from Decisions by the CEO
1. The BoA has authority to approve, approve with conditions, or deny applications for
variances from decisions made by the CEO regarding standards of this chapter as
allowed under this Article. The review conducted by the BoA on such variances
shall be de novo as set out below in this Article. Such decisions by the BoA may be
appealed as set out in this Article.
2. All variances, including those described here, and in Subsections C and E below,
shall meet the requirements and conditions set out in this Article.
Variances from historic preservation conditions. The BoA shall have authority to
approve, approve with conditions, or deny applications for variances as further detailed
in Article XIX. The review conducted by the BoA shall be de novo as set out below in this
Article.
Historic Preservation Commission. The BoA may hear appeals of decisions made by the
Historic Preservation Commission. A decision by the Historic Preservation Commission
on an application for a certificate of appropriateness may be appealed, in writing, to the
BoA within thirty (30) days of the Commission's decision. The BoA may affirm the
decision, or it may reverse the Commission's decision upon a finding that there has been
an error of law or that the facts leading to the decision of the Commission were
erroneous. The review made by the BoA shall be appellate. If the BoA reverses the
decision of the Commission, it shall be remanded to the Commission for further 
CHAPTER 230 § XVI4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 176
consideration, but not more than once. Thereafter, the parties shall have their appeal
rights as allowed under this Article.
Shoreland and Natural Resource District Variances. The BoA shall have authority to
approve, approve with conditions, or deny applications for a variance from shoreland
and natural resource standards set out in §VIII of this Chapter. The review conducted by
the BoA shall be de novo as set out in this Article.
Variances
Applicability. A variance is authorized only for the following space and bulk
requirements:
Minimum lot area.
Lot area per dwelling unit.
Minimum street frontage.
Minimum yards and setbacks.
Maximum lot coverage.
Maximum height.
On lots divided by district boundaries, the extension of uses allowed in the lessrestricted zone more than fifty (50) feet into the more-restricted zone.
Curb cut standards.
Sign standards.
Establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by
variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of nonconforming
structures in the particular zone or adjoining zones.
Authority. Except as provided in D and E, below, the BoA may only grant a variance
upon finding that the application meets the standards for a variance, below, as well as
the standards for a variance in shoreland areas, when applicable.
Standards for a Variance.
1. That strict application of the ordinance to the petitioner and the petitioner’s property
would cause undue hardship. The term "undue hardship" shall mean specifically
that:
a) The land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is
granted;
b) The need for the variance is due to unique circumstances of the property and
not to the general conditions of the neighborhood;
CHAPTER 230 § XVI4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 177
c) That the granting of the variance will not alter the essential character of the
locality; and
d) The hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner.
2. No variance shall be granted merely to relieve inconvenience to the property owner
or for economic considerations alone.
3. Any variance granted by the BoA shall be the minimum variance from the terms of
this chapter as will relieve the hardship pleaded.
Special standards for certain variances for single-family dwellings.
1. Pursuant to 30-A M.R.S. §4353 (4-B), the BoA may also grant setback variances
for single-family detached dwellings under the alternate definition of "undue
hardship" below. Variances granted under this section are limited to single-family
detached dwellings that are the primary year-round residence of the petitioner, and
are subject to the following:
a) Variances in front yard or side yard and rear yard, not to exceed twenty (20)
percent of the setback requirement;
b) Variances granted under this subsection shall not cause the area of the
dwelling to exceed the maximum lot coverage permitted in the district;
c) Variances granted under this subsection shall be the minimum variance
needed; and
d) Variances granted under this subsection shall not cause the house which
receives the variance to be within ten (10) feet of an occupied building on the
adjacent lot.
2. Prior to voting to grant a variance, the BoA shall review the application and find that
all of the following standards of the alternative definition of "undue hardship" for this
subsection have been met:
a) The need for the variance is due to unique circumstances of the property and
not to the general conditions of the neighborhood;
b) The granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality;
c) The hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner;
d) The granting of the variance will not substantially reduce or impair the use of
abutting property; and
e) The granting of a variance is based upon demonstrated need, not
convenience, and no other feasible alternative is available.
Disability variance. The BoA may grant a variance to an owner of a dwelling for the
purpose of making that dwelling accessible to a person with a disability who resides in or
regularly uses the dwelling. 
CHAPTER 230 § XVI4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 178
1. The BoA shall restrict any variance granted under this section solely to the
installation of equipment or the construction of structures necessary for access to
or egress from the dwelling by the person with the disability.
2. The BoA may impose conditions on the variance, including limiting the variance to
the duration of the disability or to the time that the person with the disability lives in
the dwelling. For the purposes of this paragraph, the term “structures necessary for
access to or egress from the dwelling” is defined to include railing, wall, or roof
systems necessary for the safety or effectiveness of the structure.
Standards for a Variance in Shoreland Areas.
1. A copy of each variance request, including the application and all supporting
information supplied by the applicant, shall be forwarded by the municipal officials
to the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection at least twenty
(20) days prior to action by the BoA. Comments received from the Commissioner
prior to the action by the BoA shall be made part of the record and shall be taken
into consideration by the BoA.
2. Prior to voting to grant a variance within the mandated shoreland area, the BoA
shall, in addition to the undue hardship standards in Section D above, find that the
proposed variance:
a) Will not result in unsafe or unhealthful conditions;
b) Will not result in erosion or sedimentation;
c) Will not result in water pollution;
d) Will not result in damage to spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life, bird, and other
wildlife habitats;
e) Will conserve shoreland vegetation;
f) Will conserve visual points of access to waters as viewed from public facilities;
g) Will conserve actual points of public access to waters;
h) Will conserve natural beauty; and
i) Will avoid problems associated with floodplain development and use.
3. The BoA shall cause written notice of its decision to be mailed or hand-delivered to
the applicant and to the Department of Environmental Protection within seven (7)
days of the BoA's decision.
Conditions of approval. The BoA may impose such conditions on its approval of a
variance as are necessary, in its judgment, to protect surrounding property owners or the
City from adverse impacts resulting from the variance.
Limits on variances. A variance granted by the BoA shall expire if the work or change
involved is not commenced within six (6) months of the date on which the variance was 
CHAPTER 230 § XVI5 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 179
granted or if the work or change is not substantially completed within a twelve (12)
month period, unless extended by the BoA.
Prior work. Any construction activity commenced prior to the granting of a required
variance shall be a violation of this chapter.
Procedures
Application for a variance. Application to the BoA for a variance shall be submitted to the
CEO on forms provided for that purpose, accompanied by a fee as may be established
by the City Council for such applications. The application shall clearly state the location
of the property, the relief sought, and the reason(s) for requesting the variance.
Denial of building permit. All applicants for building permits denied for any reason shall
be advised, in writing, of the right of appeal.
Application for a variance and filing of an appeal.
1. An appeal or application for a variance shall be commenced as set forth below in
Subsection 2.
2. Such appeal or application for a variance shall include the following information:
a) A concise, written statement indicating what relief is requested and why it
should be granted.
b) A description of the regulation, ordinance provision, or permit that is subject to
review or from which relief is requested.
c) A sketch, drawn to scale, showing lot lines, location of existing buildings and
structures and other physical features of the lot pertinent to the relief sought.
d) If applicable, a demarcation on the sketch showing low tide and mean high tide
and designating the 100-year flood area, wetlands, shorelines, or other
pertinent natural features.
e) If applicable, color pictures of the exterior features at issue if the appeal or
variance concerns a structure found in the Historic District.
3. Upon being notified of an appeal or of an application for a variance, the CEO or
designee shall arrange to secure and transmit to the BoA all of the papers and
evidence constituting the record of the decision that is to be reviewed.
Public hearing required.
1. For all appeals from decisions of the CEO, for all requests for any variance, the
BoA shall hold a public hearing, but the BoA shall only take and hear new evidence
or testimony in those matters where de novo review is expressly permitted. The
BoA will hear argument from the parties only when it conducts appellate review,
and oral argument will be limited to the record of proceedings before the Planning 
CHAPTER 230 § XVI5 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 180
Board. The hearing shall be held within thirty-five (35) days of the receipt of an
appeal or application for variance.
2. The BoA shall cause public notice to be posted and published in both the City
Building and at least one newspaper of circulation in the area, of any public hearing
which the BoA shall conduct, indicating the property involved, the nature of the
appeal, and the time and place of the public hearing.
3. The BoA shall also cause to have notified all property owners of property within six
hundred (600) feet of the property when the applicant's property is located in the
RR, I, LDR, and MDR Districts, and within two hundred (200) feet when the
applicant's property is located in the HDR District or any business district. The BoA
shall cause a list of such property owners to be drawn from the Assessor's records,
and such notices to property owners shall be sent by mail at least seven days prior
to the date set for the public hearing.
4. The BoA shall not continue hearings to a future date except for good cause. Written
notice of the decision of the BoA shall be sent to the appellant and the CEO.
Time for appeal, forms and fees.
1. When a person is aggrieved by a decision of the CEO, by a decision of the Historic
Preservation Commission, or by a decision of the Planning Board, if an appeal or
variance application is authorized elsewhere under this chapter, the aggrieved
person must file their appeal or variance application with the Code Enforcement
Department within thirty (30) days of the day the decision was rendered.
2. Any appeal or application for variance to the BoA shall be accompanied by a fee as
established by the City Council.
Rules of procedure. The BoA shall adopt its own rules of procedure for the conduct of its
business not inconsistent with this chapter and the statutes of Maine and may amend
the same after notice and public hearing. Such rules shall be filed with the BoA
Secretary and the City Clerk. Any rule so adopted and not mandated by this chapter or
the statutes of Maine may be waived by the Chair of the BoA for good cause shown.
Submission of evidence. Where the BoA conducts de novo review of a decision, the BoA
may receive oral or documentary evidence, including new evidence and testimony, but
shall provide as a matter of policy for the exclusion of irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly
repetitious evidence. In a de novo proceeding, every party shall have the right to present
their own case or defense by oral or documentary evidence, to submit rebuttal evidence,
and to conduct such cross-examination as may be required for a full and true disclosure
of the facts.
Presence of CEO. The CEO, unless prevented by illness or absence from the state,
shall attend all hearings and shall present to the BoA all plans, photographs, or other
factual material that is appropriate to an understanding of the appeal. 
CHAPTER 230 § XVI6 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 181
Conflict of interest. No member of the BoA shall vote on a matter in which they have a
direct or indirect financial or personal interest. Any question of whether a particular issue
involves a conflict of interest sufficient to disqualify a member from voting thereon shall
be decided by a majority vote of the members, except the member who is either
requesting a decision or who is being challenged.
Records and decisions.
1. The Secretary shall maintain a permanent record of all BoA meetings and all
correspondence of the BoA. The Secretary shall be responsible for maintaining
those records which are required as part of the various proceedings which may be
brought before the BoA. All records to be maintained or prepared by the Secretary
are deemed public, shall be filed in the City Clerk's office, and may be inspected at
reasonable times.
2. The transcript of testimony, if any, and exhibits, together with all papers and
requests filed in the proceedings, shall constitute the record. All decisions shall
become a part of the record and shall include a statement of findings and
conclusions, as well as the reasons or basis therefor, upon all the material issues of
fact, law, or discretion presented and the appropriate order, relief, or denial thereof.
3. Notification of decision. The City Clerk, Planning Board, and CEO shall be notified,
in writing, within seven days of all decisions of the BoA. Written notice to the
appellant shall be sent within seven days after the date of the decision. The notice
shall include, as every decision of the BoA shall include, findings of fact; shall refer
to the evidence in the record and the exhibits, plans, or specifications upon which
such decision is based; shall specify the reason or reasons for such decision; and
shall contain a conclusion or statement separate from the findings of fact setting
forth the specific relief granted or denied.
Reapplication. If the BoA denies a variance, a second request of a similar nature shall
not be brought before the BoA within two years from the date of the first request, unless,
in the opinion of a majority of the BoA, substantial new evidence can be brought forward,
or unless the BoA finds, in its sole and exclusive judgment, that an error of law or
misunderstanding of facts has been made, or unless amendment has been made to this
chapter which changes the status, circumstances, or conditions of the matter which was
appealed.
Reconsideration
The BoA may reconsider any decision reached under this section within forty-five (45) days
of its prior decision. A request to the BoA to reconsider a decision must be filed within ten
(10) days of the decision that is to be reconsidered. A vote to reconsider and the action
taken on that reconsideration must occur and be completed within forty-five (45) days of the
date of the vote on the original decision. The BoA may conduct additional hearings and
receive additional evidence and testimony as provided in this subsection. Notwithstanding
Section XVI7, appeal of a reconsidered decision must be made within fifteen (15) days after
the decision on reconsideration or within the applicable time period under 30-A M.R.S.
CHAPTER 230 § XVI7 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 182
Section 4482-A. if the final municipal review of the project is by a municipal administrative
review board other than a board of appeal.
Appeals
Any aggrieved party may take an appeal, within forty-five (45) days of the date of the vote
on the original BoA decision, to Superior Court from any order, relief or denial in accordance
with the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 80B.
CHAPTER 230 § XVII1 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 183
Amendments
Administration and Enforcement
On petition, or recommendation of the Planning Board, or on its own motion, the City
Council may amend, supplement, or repeal the regulations and provisions of this
chapter.
The City Council shall refer all proposed amendments to the Board for a report thereon.
The Board shall hold a public hearing for consideration of the proposed amendment at
least ten (10) days before the report is submitted to the City Council. Notice of the
hearing before the Board shall be made in at least one newspaper of general circulation
in the area with published notice including a small map of the area to be affected, and
mailed notice also shall be made, all as required by 30-A M.R.S. §4352(9) and (10).
Amendments to Shoreland Zoning Overlay Districts
The shoreland zoning overlay district provisions in this chapter may be amended by majority
vote of the City Council, pursuant to the procedures in Article XV. Copies of amendments,
attested and signed by the City Clerk, shall be submitted to the Commissioner of the
Department of Environmental Protection following adoption by the City Council. If the
Commissioner fails to act on any amendment within forty-five (45) days of the
Commissioner's receipt of the amendment, the amendment is automatically approved. An
application for a permit received by the City within the forty-five (45) day period shall be
governed by the terms of the amendment, if such amendment is approved by the
Commissioner.
Petitions
An application for change or amendment of the text and/or map of this chapter shall
include the submittal of a written petition to the City Clerk setting forth the proposed
change and the reasons therefor, which shall be promptly referred to the Planning Board
for the setting of the hearing date, in accordance with this chapter. In the case of a
proposed textual change, the petition shall clearly identify and describe that section or
portion of the text to be changed and shall identify the proposed revision or amendment
being requested.
In the case of a proposed map change, the petition shall include the legal description of
the parcels of land involved, a scaled drawing of the parcel of land showing all boundary
dimensions and the existing and total area, and the proposed zoning classification(s)
applying to the parcel(s) of land.
The petitioner shall bear the cost of advertising (to notify the general public) and postage
(to notify abutters and neighborhood property owners) of the change or amendment. The
petitioner shall also furnish such additional information as may be necessary to enable
the Planning Board to properly evaluate the petition. 
CHAPTER 230 § XVII4 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 184
Repetitive Petitions
A proposed change in this chapter which has been unfavorably acted upon by the City
Council on the merits of the petition shall not thereafter be considered by the City Council for
a period of two years, unless adoption of the proposed change is recommended by the
unanimous vote of the Planning Board at a meeting where at least two-thirds (2/3) of the full
membership is present.
Contract Zoning
Purpose. Occasionally, competing and incompatible land uses conflict; and traditional
zoning methods and procedures, such as variances, conditional use permits, and
alterations to the zone boundaries, are inadequate to promote desirable growth. In these
special situations, more flexible and adaptable zoning methods are needed to permit
differing land uses in both developed and undeveloped areas, and at the same time
recognize the effects of change. In consideration of a change in zoning classification for
a particular property or group of properties, it may be determined that public necessity,
convenience, or the general welfare requires that provisions be made to impose certain
limitations or restrictions on the use or development of the property. Such conditions are
deemed necessary to protect the best interests of the property owner, the surrounding
property owners and the neighborhood, all other property owners and citizens of the
City, and to secure appropriate development consistent with the City's Comprehensive
Plan.
Authorization. Pursuant to 30-A M.R.S. §4352 (8), contract zoning is hereby authorized
for rezoning of property where, for reasons such as the unusual nature or the unique
location of the property, the City Council finds its necessary or appropriate to impose, by
agreement with the property owner, certain conditions or restrictions in order to ensure
that the rezoning is consistent with the City's Comprehensive Plan. Contract zoning shall
be limited to property for which a rezoning is requested by the owner or other person
with sufficient right, title and interest. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to permit
an amendment that is not consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. Areas rezoned under
this provision shall be consistent with, but not limited to, the existing and permitted
(whether permitted or conditional) uses within the original zones. Contract zoning is
permitted in all zones except RP. By "contract zoning," this section means both contract
and conditional zoning as enabled in 30-A M.R.S. §4352 (8).
Application. A request for a contract rezoning shall include a written petition to the
Planning Board requesting a rezoning, including the following:
1. Evidence of right, title, or interest in the property.
2. A plot plan showing the boundaries of the parcel and its dimensions, as well as the
existing and proposed buildings and structures.
3. A plan showing the location of existing streets and driveways within two hundred
(200) feet of the property.
CHAPTER 230 § XVII5 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 185
4. A detailed statement of the proposed use of the property and the precise zoning
change requested.
5. A statement explaining how it is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, and
permitted and existing uses within the original zone.
6. A description of the property's unusual nature or unique location.
7. A statement setting forth the conditions or restrictions that the applicant proposes.
8. The Planning Board may propose additional conditions or restrictions.
Hearing and notice.
1. The Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing before forwarding its
recommendation to the City Council under this provision.
2. Notice of the hearing shall be posted in City Hall at least fourteen (14) days before
the public hearing.
3. Notice shall also be published twice in a newspaper of general circulation, the date
of first publication to be at least seven (7) days before the hearing.
4. Public hearing notices shall be mailed to the owner of the property to be rezoned
and all abutters of that property. Property owners in residential (except HDR) and
industrial districts, and the RP district shall be notified by mail if their property is
within six hundred (600) feet of the applicant's property. Property owners in the
HDR District, business, and mixed-use districts shall be notified by mail when the
applicant's property is located within two hundred (200) feet. This notice shall be
sent out at least seven days prior to the public hearing. This notice must contain a
copy of the proposed conditions and restrictions with a map indicating the property
to be rezoned.
5. Failure of any property owner to receive a notice shall not necessitate another
hearing or invalidate any action by the Planning Board or City Council.
Conditions and Restrictions. Conditions and restrictions imposed under this section shall
relate only to the physical development and operation of the property and may include,
by way of example:
1. Limitations on the number and types of uses permitted;
2. Conditions on the scale and density of development, including the height, lot
coverage, and other space and bulk provisions;
3. Specifications for the design and layout of buildings and other improvements;
4. Schedules for commencement and completion of construction;
5. Performance guarantees securing completion and maintenance of improvements,
and guarantees against defects;
6. Preservation of open space and buffers, and protection of natural areas and historic
sites; 
CHAPTER 230 § XVII5 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 186
7. Provision of municipal services required by the development;
8. Provisions for enforcement and remedies for breach of any condition or restriction,
including the timing of the effective date of the change and its repeal should
conditions not be met;
9. The dedication or conveyance of property for public purposes, including, but not
limited to, streets, easements, parks, and utility systems.
Recommendation. Before forwarding a recommendation on a contract zoning
amendment to the City Council, the Planning Board shall make a finding on each of the
four standards in this subsection. A favorable recommendation to the Council requires a
positive finding on all four standards. If the Planning Board makes a negative finding on
any of the standards, its recommendation shall be negative. The Planning Board shall
base its recommendation on whether:
1. The rezoning is for land with an unusual nature or location;
2. The rezoning is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan;
3. The rezoning is consistent with, but not limited to, the existing uses and permitted
uses within the original zone; and
4. The conditions proposed are sufficient to meet the intent of this section.
Final Action. Before amending this chapter for contract zoning, the City Council shall
adopt the Planning Board's findings or other findings indicating that the rezoning is
consistent with all four standards referenced above.
Status of amendments. Amendments to the Zoning Map and this chapter made under
this section may be amended or repealed by the City Council.
Other permits. All applications for contract zoning are subject to site plan review. An
applicant may seek other permits at the same time as the contract zoning as if the
contract zoning were already in effect, or may seek them after the City Council has
approved the zoning amendment. If the applicant seeks approval before final Council
action on the amendment, the Planning Board shall make its approval of these other
permits contingent on the City Council's approval of the contract zoning amendment. 
CHAPTER 230 § XVIII1 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 187
Legal Provisions
Conflict with Other Provisions
Whenever the regulations of this chapter conflict with those of another ordinance or
regulations of Saco, the stricter regulations shall prevail.
Severability
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not be held to invalidate any
other section or provision of this chapter.
Effective Date
This chapter shall take effect upon its adoption by the City Council. All amendments
hereafter enacted shall likewise take effect upon adoption by the City Council.
CHAPTER 230 § XIX1 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 188
Special Preservation Standards in
the Downtown District
Applicability
The following provisions apply to any proposal involving the demolition or removal of any
building or structure built before 1895, or any appurtenance thereto, in the in the area
depicted in Figure 20-1.
Figure 20-1 Map of the Downtown District, excluding areas within the HPOD.
Demolition.
Buildings within this area may not be demolished without a certificate for demolition.
Certificate for Demolition in the Downtown District
Scope and purpose.
The purpose of this section is to afford the City the opportunity to preserve neighborhood
character and to preserve historic buildings and structures or important portions and
features thereof.
Procedure and submissions. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on each
application within thirty (30) days of submission. Notice shall be given in the same
manner as required for a site plan review. The Planning Board may waive any
application requirement if it determines it is not necessary to an application. There is no 
CHAPTER 230 § XIX3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 189
fee for this application. Applicants shall file with the Planning Board an application for a
certificate for demolition, which shall include at least the following:
1. The applicant's name, address, and interest in the subject property. If not
representing the owner, the applicant shall provide evidence of right, title, or
interest in the property.
2. The owner's name, address, and signature, if different from the applicant's.
3. The address and the Tax Map and lot number.
4. The present use and zoning classification of the subject property.
5. Photographs of the building involved and of adjacent buildings.
6. A brief description of the new construction, reconstruction, alteration, maintenance,
demolition or removal requiring the issuance of the certificate of demolition.
7. Evidence which supports one or more of the standards of approval below. This
might include evidence from a structural engineer, a Building Inspector, an
architectural historian, a builder, an appraiser, or other qualified expert.
Standards of approval for a certificate for demolition.
The building may be demolished within sixty (60) days, unless the Planning Board
makes the following three findings based on the record:
The building is of historical significance as defined in Article XIX of this chapter;
Prudent and feasible alternatives to demolition exist; or
The property is not deteriorated beyond reasonable repair.
If the Planning Board finds that any of the three standards are not met, it shall issue
a certificate for demolition. If it does not make such findings within 60 days of the
public hearing or if it issues a certificate of demolition, the Code Enforcement
Officer may issue a demolition permit.
Conditions of approval. In approving an application for the demolition, the Planning
Board may impose reasonable conditions, including, but not limited to, the following
conditions:
1. Photographic, video, or drawn recording of the property to be demolished; and/or
2. Reasonable salvage and curation of significant elements and/ or other reasonable
mitigation measures.
Hazard buildings. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature. Nothing in the section shall
prevent the construction, reconstruction, or demolition of any building or feature which
the Code Enforcement Officer determines is required because of concerns about
structural deficiencies, the safety of the building and the safety of its occupants.
CHAPTER 230 § XX1 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 190
Definitions
Interpretation
In the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, undefined terms are given their
common and generally accepted meanings unless the context requires otherwise. In the
case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this chapter and any
map, illustration, or table, the text shall control.
The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust,
company, or corporation, as well as an individual or any other legal entity.
The present tense includes the future tense; the singular number includes the plural, and
the plural number includes the singular.
The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory; the word "may" is permissive.
The word "lot" includes the words "plot" and "parcel."
Shoreland Zoning Definitions
Shoreland Zoning definitions are located in Article VIII.
Definitions
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE
A structure that is customarily both incidental and subordinate to the principal structure.
The term "incidental," in reference to the principal structure, shall mean both subordinate
and minor in significance to the principal structure, and attendant to the principal structure.
ACCESSORY USE
A use that is customarily both incidental and subordinate to the principal use. The term
"incidental," in reference to the principal use, shall mean both subordinate and minor in
significance to the principal use, and attendant to the principal use. Such accessory uses,
when aggregated, shall not subordinate the principal use of the lot.
ADDICTION TREATMENT FACILITY
A facility for the outpatient treatment of chemically or narcotic-dependent persons that
administers or dispenses narcotic drugs under the direction of a physician in a
rehabilitative context in order to alleviate, suppress, or eliminate adverse psychological or
physiological effects associated with the continuous or sustained use of chemical
substances or a narcotic drug.
ADJACENT LOT
Lots which adjoin at any point or are separated at any point by a body of water less than
forty (40) feet wide.
CHAPTER 230 § XX3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 191
ADULT BUSINESS
Any business otherwise permitted as a retail business or service establishment, a
substantial or significant portion of which consists of selling, renting, leasing, exhibiting,
displaying, or otherwise dealing in materials or devices of any kind which appeal to
prurient interests and which depict or describe specified sexual activities. If more than 30%
of the active display area of a facility is devoted to materials or devices which depict or
describe specified sexual activities, or videotapes rated X, NC-17, or classified as suitable
only for adults or persons 18 years of age or older, or are displayed in a portion of a facility
only open to persons older than 18 years of age, it will be deemed to be a significant or
substantial portion of the business.
ADULT DAY-CARE CENTER
A program of care and activities licensed by the Maine Bureau of Elderly and Adult
Services, carried out on a regular basis in a private dwelling or other facility, for a fee, for
any part of the day, for three or more adults, 19 years of age or older, who are not blood
relatives, as described in the licensing requirements of Section 61 of the State Bureau of
Elder Services Policy Manual. Type 1 accommodates five or fewer clients. Type 2
accommodates more than five clients.
AGENT OF THE PLANNING BOARD
The City Planner or authorized designee.
AGRICULTURE RELATED BUSINESS
A business that provides goods and/or services, a substantial portion of the market for
which is agricultural or other natural resources businesses, including uses such as farm
equipment dealers, feed and grain stores, and similar uses. This does not include
convenience stores, fueling stations, or other retail or service businesses that cater
primarily to the general public.
AGRICULTURE
The production, keeping or maintenance for sale or lease of plants, including, but not
limited to: forages and sod crops, grains and seed crops, fruits and vegetables, and
ornamental products, accessory farm stands; and, unless expressly prohibited, the
keeping of livestock, including, but not limited to: dairy animals and dairy products, poultry
and poultry products, cattle and cattle products, or horses and riding stables. Agriculture
does not include forest management and timber harvesting activities.
ALTERATION
Any addition, modification in construction, or any change in the structural members of a
building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders.
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURES
A non-tower mounting structure, such as a clock tower, steeple, light pole, water tower or
other structure upon which an antenna may be mounted, and which camouflages or
conceals the presence of the antenna.
AMUSEMENT CENTER
A private commercial premise that is maintained or operated for the amusement,
patronage, or recreation of the public, containing four or more video game machines, or
similar electronic games.
CHAPTER 230 § XX3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 192
AMUSEMENT PARK
An outdoor facility, which may include structures and buildings, where there are various
devices for entertainment, including rides, booths for conduct of games or sale of items
and buildings for shows and entertainment.
ART STUDIO
The place of work of an artist, craftsperson, photographer, or person similarly skilled in the
production of small craft or artistic products. A studio may include the retail sale of items
produced on the premises, but incidental items produced off premises shall not be sold
unless retail uses are permitted in the district. This definition does not include building or
industrial trades, automobile-related uses, adult businesses, or the production of items
larger than household furniture.
AUTOMOBILE DEALER
An establishment engaged primarily in the retail sale of automobiles and/or trucks, which
may include repair, service and parts facilities.
AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARD
A yard, field or other outdoor area used to store three (3) or more unregistered or
uninspected motor vehicles, or parts of the vehicles, and includes an area used for
automobile dismantling, salvage, and recycling operations, but does not include those areas
listed in 30A M.R.S. §3752 1.A.
AUTOMOBILE RECYCLING BUSINESS
The business premises of a dealer or a recycler licensed under Title 29-A M.R.S., sections
851 to 1112 who purchases or acquires salvage vehicles for the purpose of reselling the
vehicles or component parts of the vehicles or rebuilding or repairing salvage vehicles for
the purpose of resale or for selling the basic materials in the salvage vehicles, as long as
80% of the business premises specified in the site plan in section 3755-A, subsection 1,
paragraph C is used for automobile recycling operations. "Automobile recycling business"
does not include:
Financial institutions as defined in Title 9-B M.R.S., section 131, subsections 17 and
17-A;
Insurance companies licensed to do business in the State;
New vehicle dealers, as defined in Title 29-A M.R.S., section 851, licensed to do
business in the State; or
That portion of the business premises that is used for temporary storage of vehicles
by an establishment or place of business that is primarily engaged in business as
an insurance salvage pool. In order for a vehicle's storage to be considered
temporary under this subparagraph, the vehicle must be removed from the site
within 180 days of receipt of title by the business.
AUTOMOTIVE, REPAIR & FUEL SERVICES
A motor vehicle fueling station or an establishment that is primarily engaged in doing
vehicle repair work to make repairs to render a motor vehicle serviceable or small engine
repair. Such repair work includes, but is not limited to, the maintenance, care, repair, or
refinishing of motor vehicles, including paint, body, mechanical, and auto upholstery work,
and carwashes.
CHAPTER 230 § XX3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 193
BARN
A large farm building typically used for storing farm or agricultural products and sheltering
livestock, or similarly a very large garage for the housing of vehicles.
BASEMENT
The enclosed area underneath a structure, typically having a masonry floor, and the walls
of which are typically part of the structure's foundation. To be considered a “basement,”
the clear height of that enclosed area up to the joists supporting the floor directly above
must be three (3) feet or greater.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST INN
An owner-occupied residential structure in which no more than six (6) rooms are made
available for a fee to overnight travelers and which may provide guests with a morning
meal. Such establishments are further distinguished from a motel or hotel in that they do
not provide guests with the independent living quarters and eating facilities normally
associated with a motel or hotel.
BOARDINGHOUSE
A residential structure where lodging alone or lodging in conjunction with meals, is
provided for compensation for a period of at least one week. There shall be no provisions
for cooking in any individual guest room. Such terms as tourist homes, lodging houses,
and terms suggesting a similar context shall be included under the term. However, this
definition shall not apply to private homes used as lodging houses only, where no meals
are served to guests, where no more than three rooms are let to the public.
BOAT BUILDING & REPAIR FACILITIES
A business or activity primarily involved in business of building, repairing and servicing
boats. This use shall not include provisions for fueling watercraft.
BREWERY, SMALL
A facility that brews, lagers, and kegs, bottles or packages its own malt liquor, not to
exceed 30,000 barrels per year.
BUFFER
Vegetation, fences, and other means used to form a visual separation of one use from
another, or to shield or block noise, lights, or other nuisances.
BUSINESS/PROFESSIONAL OFFICE
A place of business where professional or clerical duties are performed, including limited
sales incidental to the principal use. Office uses in residential districts are subject to
additional performance standards.
CAMPGROUND
A parcel of land containing where sites are rented for short-term use for recreational
vehicles or tents.
CHICKEN PEN
A wire enclosure connected to a henhouse for the purpose of allowing chickens to leave
the henhouse while remaining in an enclosed, predator-safe environment.
CHAPTER 230 § XX3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 194
CHILDCARE CENTER
A house or other place in which a person maintains or otherwise carries out a
regular program, for consideration, for any part of a day providing care and
protection for thirteen (13) or more children under thirteen (13) years or age; or
Any location or locations operated as a single childcare program or by a person or
persons when there are more than twelve (12) children being cared for.
CHILDCARE FACILITY, SMALL
A house or other place, not the residence of the operator, in which a person maintains or
otherwise carries out a regular program, for consideration, for any part of a day providing
care and protection for three (3) to twelve (12) children under thirteen (13) years of age.
Any program for children under 5 years of age that is located in a private school and
programs that contract with one or more Child Development Services System sites are
required to be licensed as a Child Care Facility.
CITY ENGINEER
The person or firm employed or retained by the City to review plans, specifications, and
other engineering data.
CLUB (PRIVATE)
Any voluntary association of persons organized for social, religious, benevolent,
recreational, literary, scientific, or political purposes; where facilities, especially a
clubhouse, are open to members and not the general public; and not generally engaged in
activities customarily carried on by a business or for pecuniary gain. Such term shall
include fraternities, sororities, teen centers, and social clubs generally.
CO-LOCATION
The use of a wireless telecommunication facility, including but not limited to Alternative
Tower Structures, by more than one wireless telecommunication provider
COMMERCIAL FISHERIES, WHOLESALE FISH & SEAFOOD SALES
A parcel or building where commercial water dependent fishery facilities are located,
including structures for the packing, processing, canning, or freezing of fin fish,
crustaceans, mollusks, amphibians and reptiles, including related activities such as
wholesale and retail sales, product storage facilities, crab shedding, off-loading docks,
shellfish culture operations, and shore-based facilities.
COMMERCIAL GREENHOUSE & NURSERY
A retail business including the growing of plants, all or part of which are sold on site at
retail or wholesale. Commercial greenhouses and nurseries shall not include the growing
or selling of marijuana and marijuana products.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION
A commercial enterprise which receives a fee in return for the provision of some
recreational activity, including, but not limited to racquet clubs, gyms, amusement parks,
and golf courses. Freestanding golf-related facilities not associated with golf courses, such
as pitch and putt courses, miniature golf courses, and driving ranges also are categorized
as commercial recreation.
CHAPTER 230 § XX3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 195
COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM
Means a complete assembly consisting of one or more solar collectors and associated
mounting hardware or equipment that occupies more than 2,000 square feet of surface
area (surface area shall be measured by the total surface area of the solar collector at
maximum tilt that occupies a given space), intended to provide for the collection, storage
and distribution for sale or credit including, but not limited to, net energy billing, of solar
energy for heating or cooling, electricity generation, or solar/thermal hot water systems,;
these may be ground-mounted systems.
COMMERCIAL USE
The use of lands, buildings, or structures, other than a "home occupation," defined below,
the intent and result of which activity is the production of income from the buying and
selling of goods and/or services, exclusive of rental of residential buildings or dwelling
units.
COMMUNITY LIVING ARRANGEMENT
A state-approved, authorized, certified or licensed housing facility for eight or fewer
persons with disabilities. A community living arrangement may include a group home,
foster home, or intermediate care facility.
COMMUNITY SEPTIC SYSTEM
A subsurface septic system which is not administered by the City of Saco and which
serves more than two (2) dwelling units.
COMPLETE APPLICATION
An application shall be considered complete upon the Planning Board's decision that all
information required by these regulations has been submitted and the required fee under
the City's cost recovery ordinance has been submitted.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Any part or element of the over-all plan or policy for development of the City as defined in
Title 30-A M.R.S. §4301 et seq.
COMMUNITY SEPTIC SYSTEM
A subsurface septic system which is not administered by the City of Saco, and which
serves more than two (2) dwelling units.
CONDITIONAL USE
A use which would not be appropriate without restriction, but which would be allowed if
controlled as to number, area, location, relation to the neighborhood and similar criteria.
The term "conditional use" is used interchangeably with the term "special exception."
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT (CUP)
A permit authorized by the Planning Board for a conditional use, as defined above.
Conditional use permits are subject to the relevant application and review procedures in
this chapter, in order to ensure due process of law.
CONDOMINIUM
Real estate, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of
which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of those portions under a
declaration, or an amendment to a declaration, duly recorded pursuant to the Maine 
CHAPTER 230 § XX3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 196
Condominium Act, 33 M.R.S. §1601-101 et seq. Real estate is not a condominium unless
the undivided interests in the common elements are vested in the unit owners. Any real
estate development consisting exclusively of clustered, detached, single-family residences
is not a condominium, unless so designated in the declaration.
CONFORMING USE
A use of buildings, structures or land which complies with all applicable provisions of this
chapter.
CONTRACTOR OR TRADESPERSON
A business that provides building construction or similar services on a contract basis at a
client's site and in which all material or equipment storage at the place of business is
contained within a building or other screened area.
CONVENIENCE STORE
A retail business selling convenience merchandise, including but not limited to items such
as foodstuffs, nonprescription medical supplies, sanitary supplies, newspapers,
emergency home repair articles, household cleaners, toiletries, and other similar items
which may include the sale of motor vehicle fuels or electric vehicle charging stations on
premises, and which may include the sale of food for consumption on or off the premises
as an integrated part of the business operation.
CRAWL SPACE
The non-habitable area underneath a structure, where the clear height up to the joists
supporting the floor directly above is less than three feet.
CUTOFF FIXTURE
A lighting fixture or luminaire that controls glare by directing light well below the horizontal.
A cutoff fixture shall limit the direction of light so that a maximum of 2.5% of the total lamp
lumens shines above 90° or a line parallel to the surface of the ground and a maximum of
10% of the lamp lumens shines above 80° as shown in the following sketch. Refer to
Figure 6-1 of this Chapter.
DEVELOPED AREA
Any area on which a site improvement or change is made, including, but not limited to,
buildings, landscaping, parking areas, and streets.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS
The Director of the City's Department of Public Works or other person(s) designated by
the City.
DISTILLERY, SMALL
A distiller that produces spirits in an amount that does not exceed 50,000 gallons per year.
DISTURBED AREA
All land areas that are stripped, graded or grubbed at any time during the site preparation
for, or construction of, a project, unless the areas are returned to a condition with the same
drainage patterns and vegetative cover type that existed prior to the disturbance. Both
planting conducted to restore the previous cover type and restoration of any altered
drainage patterns must occur within one year of disturbance.
CHAPTER 230 § XX3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 197
DRIVE-THROUGH WINDOW SERVICE
A building opening, including windows, doors, or mechanical devices, through which
occupants of a motor vehicle receive or obtain a product or service.
DWELLING
Any building or structure or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for residential
purposes.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING
A structure containing only one dwelling unit for occupancy by not more than one
family.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING (ATTACHED)
A building containing single-family dwelling units, each with two (2) or more fire
separation walls, or one fire separation wall in case of a dwelling unit at the end of a
group of attached units; which have no dwelling units above or below them; and
which have no common hallways.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING
A building containing only two dwelling units, for occupation by not more than two
families.
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING
A building containing three or more dwelling units, such buildings being designed
exclusively for residential use and occupancy by three or more families living
independently of one another, with the number of families not exceeding the
number of dwelling units. The term also includes apartments located in structures
containing commercial uses as the principal first-floor use.
DWELLING UNIT
A room or suite of rooms containing independent living, sleeping, kitchen, and
bathroom facilities designed for and used or held ready for use as a permanent
residence by one family.
SEASONAL DWELLING
Certain single-family, two-family, and multi-family units situated east of Seaside
Avenue and Camp Ellis Avenue, and four hundred (400) feet west of the center line
of those streets which are rented for periods of six (6) days to four (4) months. The
rental of dwelling units as part of a house swap, and the renting of a dwelling units
for caretaking purposes at a rent that is substantially below the market rent, are not
to be construed as Seasonal Dwellings. See Chapter 173, Seasonal Property
Rental.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU)
A small apartment that is accessory to an owner-occupied single-family dwelling or
is located within a detached building accessory to an owner-occupied single-family
dwelling.
CARETAKER DWELLING UNIT
An accessory dwelling unit that is incorporated into, and is part of, a nonresidential 
CHAPTER 230 § XX3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 198
use and is occupied by an owner or an employee of the business occupying the
principal use, and having a gross floor area of less than 2,000 square feet.
EARTH REMOVAL
Any operation engaged in the removal of more than fifty (50) cubic yards, in any twelvemonth period, of topsoil, sand, gravel, clay, rock, peat or other like material from its natural
location and for transportation off lot within any twelve-month period, except as may be
exempted within the extractive industry performance standards in this chapter.
ELDER NON-CONGREGATE, DETACHED HOUSING
A residential development wherein at least one resident of each individual dwelling shall
be age fifty-five (55) or older, and no resident shall be under age eighteen (18).
Residences are not congregated but are detached and shall be manufactured housing or
traditional on-site built homes. Lots may be separately owned or owned by one person or
entity and leased. Public water and public sewer service shall be provided to all
residences. All such residences shall be year-round homes and may be sited within a
development serviced by private but paved streets. The development may include a
community center, an exercise and fitness center for development residents and their
guests only, management and sales offices, and temporary storage of mobile homes.
Permitted accessory uses and structures include, but are not limited to, stormwater
maintenance facilities, parking areas, utility services, site amenities and outside
recreational areas. Such a development is subject to both site plan and subdivision review.
ELDER/DISABILITY CARE FACILITY
A care facility that provides housing in dwelling units or other accommodations such as
suites or individual rooms for households in which a head of household is at least 55 years
old or for disabled persons regardless of age. In addition to residential facilities, the project
may include common facilities to provide services for residents. The use may include
facilities that are commonly referred to as retirement housing, congregate housing, nursing
care facilities, or independent living centers, with an average of 1.5 bedrooms per unit.
“Disabled” means having a physical or mental disability (including hearing, mobility and
visual impairments, chronic alcoholism, chronic mental illness, etc.) that substantially limits
one or more major life activities, and having a record of such disability or regarded as
having such a disability.
ELDER/DISABILITY HOUSING
A housing project or development that provides housing in dwelling units for households in
which a head of household is at least 55 years old or for disabled persons regardless of
age, with an average of 1.5 bedrooms per unit. “Disabled” means having a physical or
mental disability (including hearing, mobility and visual impairments, chronic alcoholism,
chronic mental illness, etc.) that substantially limits one or more major life activities, and
having a record of such disability or regarded as having such a disability.
ENCLOSED SPORTS FACILITY
A facility used for indoor sports, such as hockey, figure skating, basketball and soccer, as
well as social and business functions, such as conventions, dances, home shows and
similar events. This definition includes indoor recreation uses. The facility can include as
accessory uses eating and drinking places, a retail sales area for sports-related
merchandise, and other accessory uses if permitted in the district.
CHAPTER 230 § XX3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 199
ESSENTIAL SERVICES
The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public and private utilities or
municipal or other governmental agencies of gas, electrical, or communication facilities;
steam, fuel, electric power or water transmission or distribution lines, towers, and related
equipment; telephone cables or lines, poles and related equipment; gas, oil, water, slurry
or other similar pipelines; municipal sewage lines, collection or supply systems; and
associated tanks. Such systems may include public utility buildings, towers, poles, wires,
mains, drains, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarms, and police call boxes, traffic signals,
hydrants and similar accessories, but shall not include service drops or buildings which are
necessary for the furnishing of such services. Electrical power transmission lines which
carry or have the capacity to carry more than seventy thousand (70,000) volts are not
included within this definition but shall fall within the definition of "high-voltage
transmission lines" herein. Essential services do not include radio or TV transmission
towers or cellular communications towers. This definition includes equipment that
connects an electric vehicle (EV) to a source of electricity to recharge electric cars.
EXPANSION OF A STRUCTURE
An increase in the floor area or volume of a structure, including all extensions such as, but
not limited to, attached decks, garages, porches and greenhouses.
FAMILY
A group of individuals, not necessarily related by blood, marriage, adoption or
guardianship, living together in a dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit, sharing
common use and access to all living, eating, and bathroom areas.
FAMILY CHILD CARE PROVIDER
A person who provides day care in that person’s home on a regular basis, for
consideration, for 3 to 12 children under 13 years of age who are not the children of the
provider or who are not residing in the provider’s home. If a provider is caring for children
living in that provider’s home and is caring for no more than 2 other children, the provider
is not required to be certified as a family child care provider.
FARM STAND
An agricultural building or portion thereof, or a freestanding structure, for the retail sale of
agricultural products, foodstuffs, and handicrafts as part of a commercial agricultural
business.
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT
An establishment whose primary business is the sale of "fast food" for consumption on or
off the premises, and does not necessarily include drive-through window service. The term
"fast food" shall be interpreted as food which is:
CHAPTER 230 § XX3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 200
Primarily intended for immediate consumption;
Available upon a short waiting time; and
Prepackaged or presented in such a manner that it can be readily eaten off
the premises where it is sold.
FINANCIAL GUARANTEE
An irrevocable Letter of Credit (a non-lapsing irrevocable letter of credit issued by a
federally or state- chartered U.S. financial institution (a bank or credit union) in good
standing in the name of the City of Saco), or for an escrow, a deposit of money to a
federally or state-chartered U.S. financial institution (bank or credit union), or to the City of
Saco (for an escrow) to an escrow account shall be made by cash or a certified check
made out to the City, either of which is intended to secure completion and maintenance of
improvements, and to guarantee against defects.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION
Any building wherein the primary occupation is concerned with such federal or stateregulated businesses as banking, savings and loans, loan companies, and investment
companies.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION – DRIVE THROUGH WINDOW SERVICE
A Financial Institution that includes a building opening that features windows, doors, or
mechanical devices, through which occupants of a motor vehicle receive or obtain a
product or service.
FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAN
The final drawings on which the applicant's plan of subdivision is presented to the Planning
Board for approval and which, if approved, may be recorded at the Registry of Deeds.
FLAG LOT
A parcel that lies at the end of a long driveway.
FLEA MARKET
An outdoor market customarily involving tables or space rented to vendors selling
antiques, used household goods, curios, and the like, at a frequency of more than four
days in any six-month period.
FLOOR AREA
The sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a structure enclosed by exterior walls,
plus the horizontal area of any unenclosed portions of a structure, such as porches and
decks.
CHAPTER 230 § XX3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 201
FOOD AND DRINK
EATING ESTABLISHMENT
A business which sells prepared food, and which does not serve alcoholic
beverages.
DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT
A business or club where alcoholic beverages are consumed on the premises, such
as a tavern.
EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT
A business where food and alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the
premises, such as, but not limited to, a Class A restaurant. Eating and drinking
places shall offer a variety of meals at all hours they are open and shall be
equipped with a full commercial kitchen for the preparation of meals. A full
commercial kitchen includes a stove, a stovetop, refrigeration equipment, a
dishwasher, and numerous cooking utensils.
FOUNDATION
The supporting substructure of a building or other structure, excluding wooden sills and
post supports, but including basements, slabs, frost walls, or other base consisting of
concrete, block, brick or similar material.
FRESHWATER WETLAND
Freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas other than forested wetlands,
which are:
1. Of ten (10) or more contiguous acres; or of less than ten (10) contiguous
acres and adjacent to a surface water body, excluding any river, stream or
brook, such that, in a natural state, the combined surface area is in excess of
ten (10) acres; and
2. Inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and
for a duration sufficient to support, and which under normal circumstances do
support, a prevalence of wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soils.
Freshwater wetlands may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that
do not conform to the criteria of this definition.
FRONTAGE
The linear distance of the continuous line separating the lot from a public road or private
road.
FRONTAGE STREETS
A street that is parallel to arterial street and provides access to adjacent lots.
FUNERAL HOME
A building or part thereof used for human funeral services. Such building may contain
space and facilities for: embalming and the performance of other services used in
preparation of the dead for burial; the performance of autopsies; the storage of caskets,
funeral urns, and other related funeral supplies; the storage of funeral vehicles; and
funeral chapels. This definition shall not include facilities for cremation. 
CHAPTER 230 § XX3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 202
GLARE
Excessive brightness that makes it difficult to see or that causes discomfort. Glare
includes direct glare, disability glare, and discomfort glare as follows:
GLARE, DIRECT
Glare resulting from insufficiently shielded light sources or areas of excessive
luminance within the field of view.
GLARE, DISABILITY
The effect of stray light in the eye whereby visibility and visual performance are
reduced.
GLARE, DISCOMFORT
Glare producing discomfort. It does not necessarily interfere with visual
performance or visibility.
HAZARD TREE
A tree with a structural defect, combination of defects, or disease resulting in a structural
defect that, under the normal range of environmental conditions at the site, exhibits a high
probability of failure and loss of a major structural component of the tree in a manner that
will strike a target. A normal range of environmental conditions does not include
meteorological anomalies, such as, but not limited to hurricanes; hurricane-force winds;
tornadoes; microbursts; or significant ice storm events. Hazard trees also include those
trees that pose a serious and imminent risk to bank stability. A target is the area where
personal injury or property damage could occur if the tree or a portion of the tree fails.
Targets include roads, driveways, parking areas, structures, campsites, and any other
developed area where people frequently gather and linger.
HEALTH CLUB
A facility for use for a fee by the public, including uses such as game courts, gymnasiums,
exercise equipment, locker rooms, sauna baths, and swimming pools. Eating and drinking
establishments are permitted as an accessory use within such facilities.
HEAVY INDUSTRY
Uses engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or products
predominately from extracted or raw materials;
Uses or manufacturing processes making extensive use of flammable or explosive
materials (other than gas welding) or which involve commonly recognized offensive
conditions;
Uses involved in the storage of flammable or explosive or hazardous materials.
HEIGHT OF STRUCTURE
The vertical distance between the existing grade at the highest point around the footprint
of the existing or proposed structure and the highest point of the structure itself, excluding
chimneys, steeples, antennas, and similar appurtenances which have no floor area.
HENHOUSE
A structure for the sheltering of female chickens.
CHAPTER 230 § XX3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 203
HIGH INTENSITY SOIL SURVEY
A map prepared by a Certified Soil Scientist in accordance with the National Cooperative
Soil Survey that identifies the soil types down to one eight (1/8) acre or less at a scale
equivalent to the subdivision plan submitted. The map shall show the location of all test
pits used to identify the soils and shall be accompanied by a log of each sample point
identifying the textural classification and the depth to seasonal high water table or bedrock
at that point. Single soil test pits and their evaluation for suitability for subsurface
wastewater disposal systems shall not be considered to constitute high intensity soil
surveys.
HIGH-VOLTAGE TRANSMISSION LINES
Electrical power transmission lines which carry or handle more than seventy-thousand
(70,000) volts of electricity.
HOME OCCUPATION
An occupation or profession within a dwelling unit or structure accessory to a dwelling unit
by a member of the family residing in the dwelling unit which is clearly incidental and
secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes and which does not change
the character thereof; and which conforms with the requirements set forth in this chapter.
HOME-BASED RETAIL USE
A business in combination with an occupied residence, involving the sale of retail goods,
that has a low impact on neighboring properties and low volume of vehicular traffic relative
to other retail uses of the same size.
HOSPITAL
An institution providing, but not limited to, overnight health services, primarily for
inpatients, and medical or surgical care for the sick or injured, including as an integral part
of the institution such related facilities as laboratories, outpatient departments, training
facilities, central service facilities, and staff offices.
HOTEL OR MOTEL
A building containing guest rooms kept, used, maintained, or held out to the public as a
place where lodging alone or lodging and meals are provided to the general public. A hotel
or motel may include general kitchen and dining room facilities open to the public. The
hotel or motel may also contain accessory services and facilities such as newsstands, and
personal grooming facilities for the benefit of its guests, and only incidentally for the
general public.
IMPERVIOUS AREA
The area covered by:
1. Buildings and associated constructed facilities;
2. A low-permeability material such as asphalt or concrete; and/or
3. Gravel roads and parking areas that will be compacted through use or design
so as to reduce their permeability.
Common impervious areas include, by way of example, rooftops, walkways, patios,
driveways, parking lots, storage areas, concrete or asphalt paving, compacted 
CHAPTER 230 § XX3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 204
gravel, packed earthen materials, macadam, swimming pools, and other surfaces
that impede the natural infiltration of stormwater.
INDOOR RECREATION
Nonprofit, governmental, or for-profit facilities designed and equipped for the conduct of
indoor sports, leisure-time and recreational activities, and similar activities in which all
activity occurs within a building or fully enclosed structure. Indoor recreation includes, by
way of example only, skating rinks, bowling alleys, gymnasia, racquetball clubs and indoor
tennis facilities.
JUNKYARD
A yard, field, or other parcel of land used as a place for the disposal or long-term storage
of:
Discarded, worn-out or junked plumbing, heating supplies, electronic or industrial
equipment, household appliances, or furniture;
Discarded, scrap, and junked lumber; or
Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, rubber, and all scrap iron,
steel and other ferrous or nonferrous material, including motor vehicles.
KENNEL
Except as provided for in the definition of "pet care," the term "kennel" shall apply to five
(5) or more dogs or five (5) or more cats owned singly or jointly and living on a single
premises, for any purpose, including, but not limited to, breeding, hunting, show, training,
hobby, trails or exhibition purposes. The sale or exchange of one litter of puppies within a
12-month period alone does not constitute the operation of a kennel.
LARGE COMMERCIAL VEHICLE SALES AND SERVICE
An establishment primarily for the sale of new and used specialized vehicles all larger than
10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight rating, including but not limited to fire and rescue
apparatus, drivable RV’s, and semi-tractor trailer trucks. This use includes repair,
manufacturing, fabrication and assembly, but does not include the processing or storage
of raw materials or salvaging operations. This use will be allowed as a permitted use within
the City’s Business-Industrial (BI) Zoning District and is restricted to parcels over 10 acres.
LIGHT INDUSTRY
A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared materials, of
finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, packaging,
incidental storage, sales, and distribution of such products. The use includes, by way of
example only, the following: bakeries, breweries, bottling, distilleries, printing and
publishing, pharmaceutical, machine shops, precision instruments, wood products,
assembly of electrical components, tool and die shops, and the packaging of foods. Light
industrial uses do not include the processing of raw materials or salvaging operations.
LOT
A continuous area of land in single or joint ownership, described on a deed, plot plan, or
similar legal document and meeting the dimensional standards of the Chapter.
CHAPTER 230 § XX3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 205
LOT AREA
The area of land enclosed within the boundary lines of a lot, minus land below the normal
high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland and areas within rights-of-way
serving more than two (2) lots.
LOT COVERAGE
The percentage of the lot area covered or occupied by principal and accessory structures.
In the Shoreland Zone, lot coverage shall also include all non-vegetated areas, e.g.,
driveways, patios, and pools.
LOT LINES
The lines bounding a lot as defined below:
FRONT LOT LINE
The lot line separating the lot from a public road or private road.
REAR LOT LINE
The line opposite the front lot line, which, if extended in either direction, would not
cross the lot.
SIDE LOT LINE
Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD
A parcel of land, a legal description of which or the dimensions of which are recorded on a
document or map on file with the County Register of Deeds.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING
A structural unit or units designed for occupancy and constructed in a manufacturing
facility and transported, by the use of its own chassis or an independent chassis, to a
building site. The term includes any type of building that is constructed at a manufacturing
facility and transported to a building site where it is used for housing and may be
purchased or sold by a dealer in the interim. For purposes of this section, 2 types of
manufactured housing are included. Those 2 types are:
Those units constructed after June 15, 1976, commonly called "newer mobile
homes," that the manufacturer certifies are constructed in compliance with the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development standards, meaning
structures transportable in one or more sections, that in the traveling mode are 14
body feet or more in width and are 750 or more square feet, and that are built on a
permanent chassis and designed to be used as dwellings, with or without
permanent foundations, when connected to the required utilities including the
plumbing, heating, air conditioning or electrical systems contained in the unit. This
term also includes any structure that meets all the requirements of this
subparagraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the
manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the
standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and 
CHAPTER 230 § XX3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 206
Safety Standards Act of 1974, United States Code, Title 42, Section 5401, et seq.;
and
Those units commonly called "modular homes" that the manufacturer certifies are
constructed in compliance with Title 10, chapter 951, and rules adopted under that
chapter, meaning structures, transportable in one or more sections, that are not
constructed on a permanent chassis and are designed to be used as dwellings on
foundations when connected to required utilities, including the plumbing, heating,
air-conditioning or electrical systems contained in the unit.
MANUFACTURING
The making of goods and articles by hand or machinery. Manufacturing shall include
assembling, fabricating, finishing, packaging or processing, and reconditioning or
remanufacturing.
MASTER PLANNED DEVELOPMENT
A development project comprehensively planned that permits flexibility in building siting,
mixtures of land uses, usable open spaces and the preservation of significant natural
features. Planned development is also referred to as master planned development.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA CAREGIVER
A person or an assistant of that person that provides care for a qualifying patient in
accordance with Section 22 M.R.S. §2423-A, subsection 2.
MINERAL EXPLORATION
Hand sampling, test boring, or other methods of determining the nature or extent of
mineral resources which create minimal disturbance to the land, and which include
reasonable measures to restore the land to its original condition.
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH
The closest distance between the side lot lines of a lot.
MIXED-USE
DEVELOPMENT
A type of development or zoning that blends residential, commercial, cultural,
institutional, or entertainment uses into one space, where those functions are to
some degree physically and functionally integrated, and that provides pedestrian
connections.
STRUCTURE
A building in which both residential and commercial uses are located.
MOBILE HOME PARK
A parcel of land under unified ownership approved by the City and used for the placement
of three (3) or more mobile home units. Unified ownership does not include condominium
associations, homeowners' associations, or similar organizations.
MONUMENT
A permanent marker set by a land surveyor to mark or reference a point on a property, or
land line which is permanently marked.
CHAPTER 230 § XX3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 207
MOORING
A stationary underwater device, such as a granite block or mushroom anchor, which, with
chains, lines and mooring buoy, is intended to hold fast a vessel, aircraft, floating dock or
buoy.
MOTOR VEHICLE FUELING STATION
Buildings and premises where gasoline and/or other motor fuels such as compressed
natural gas (CNG), electricity, and hydrogen may be dispensed, and where oil, grease,
batteries, tires and automobile accessories may be sold at retail, and where repairs may
be made.
MULTI-UNIT RESIDENTIAL PROJECT
A residential development consisting of three or more dwelling units in which the buildings
are designed and constructed as part of the overall development. The distinguishing
characteristic of a multi-unit residential project is that it is designed and developed with a
common, consistent architectural style. The dwelling units in a multi-unit residential project
may be in single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, or multi-family dwellings, or any
combination thereof, and may be located on a single lot or on multiple lots.
MUNICIPAL USES
Facilities which are owned or operated by the City of Saco for the conduct of the City's
business, including, but not limited to, municipal office buildings, public schools, public
works garages and facilities, public safety buildings, parks and playgrounds, solid waste
disposal systems and sewerage facilities.
NEIGHBORHOOD CONVENIENCE STORE
A business that sells prepackaged food and beverages and/or food and beverages
prepared on the premises for consumption on the premises or for take-out, together with
sundries, household goods, and other convenience goods, primarily to residents or
occupants of a specific area, such as an employment center or residential neighborhood.
All activity shall occur within a fully enclosed building with no provisions for drive-through
service and/or the sale of motor fuels.
NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD
A single lot of record which, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter,
does not meet the lot area, lot area per dwelling unit, lot coverage, or frontage
requirements of the district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE
A structure that does not meet one or more of the space and bulk standards of the district
in which it is located, including those for setbacks and height.
NONCONFORMING USE
A use of premises that is not permitted in the district in which it is located but which is
allowed to remain solely because it was in lawful existence at the time this chapter or
subsequent amendments took effect.
OFFICIAL SUBMITTAL DATE
The date upon which the Planning Board issues a receipt indicating that a complete
application has been submitted.
CHAPTER 230 § XX3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 208
OUTDOOR RECREATIONAL FACILITY
A facility for outdoor recreational activity operated by an entity other than the City of Saco,
including cross country ski centers, riding stables, ballfields, parks and playgrounds, and
similar uses, but not including motorized rides and uses allowed as part of an amusement
park.
OUTDOOR SALES ASSOCIATED WITH PRINCIPAL USES
The regular display by a retailer of stock-in-trade outside of an enclosed structure. The
term includes, but is not necessarily limited to, businesses which involve an outside
parking or display area for the sale of cars, trucks, motorcycles, campers, farm equipment,
recreational vehicles, or mobile homes; businesses involved in the outdoor sale of used
merchandise, other than at flea markets, which is separately defined; and similar outdoor
sales activities. For purposes of this chapter, the serving of food by an eating and drinking
place at outside tables shall not constitute outdoor sales.
OUTDOOR STORAGE
Keeping of goods, material, vehicles, and any other equipment associated with the
principal use of a building outside.
OUTPATIENT CLINIC SERVICES
A building or portion of a building containing offices and facilities for providing medical,
dental, and psychiatric services for outpatients only.
PARKING LOT, COMMERCIAL
Any premises used for the storage of four (4) or more motor vehicles at any time and on or
in which no gasoline or automobile accessories sales or other business is located. Such
commercial lots shall be operated as private business ventures in and of themselves and
not accessory to another commercial enterprise, such as shopping centers and
restaurants.
PASSENGER TRANSPORTATION TERMINAL
A place or building adjacent to a railroad line which provides access to a train for
passengers and/or goods. This term also includes a bus station. A terminal may include
such uses as ticket counters, restaurant and coffee shops, travel agents, postal services,
retail uses, and other uses normally associated with transit stations.
PARTY WALL
A party wall is a dividing partition between two adjoining buildings that is shared by the
occupants of each residence or business.
PRIVATE ROAD
A category of road not intended to be dedicated to the City as a public street, but built to
City street standards.
PERMITTING AUTHORITY
Person or entity responsible for review of applications and issuance of particular approvals
under this chapter. The term, “permitting authority,” refers to the Code Enforcement
Officer, City Planner, or Planning Board, depending on the applicable ordinance section. 
CHAPTER 230 § XX3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 209
PERSON
An individual, corporation, governmental agency, municipality, trust, estate, partnership,
association, two or more individuals having a joint or common interest, or other legal
entity.
PERSONAL SERVICES
Establishments engaged in providing services involving the care of the person or personal
apparel, including but not limited to, barbershops, beauty shops and manicurists, tailors,
laundromats, shoe repair shops, tattoo parlors, massage therapists, and photographic
portrait studios.
PET CARE
Any place, building, tract of land, abode, or vehicle wherein or whereon privately owned
dogs or other pets, or both, are kept for their owners in return for a fee. This definition shall
also include the temporary keeping of animals for grooming purposes in return for a fee.
PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY OR ENTERTAINMENT
A commercial, nonprofit, or governmental use that provides a place for public gatherings
and events, such as theaters, concert halls, auditoriums, function halls, clubs, and similar
venues. A place of public assembly or entertainment may include facilities for the provision
or sale of food and beverages to people attending activities or events or the sale of related
merchandise, such as souvenirs, specialty apparel, or items related to the activities
occurring at the site.
PLACES OF WORSHIP
A building or structure, or groups of buildings or structures, that, by design, construction or
intent, are primarily intended for conducting organized religious services and associated
accessory uses. A place of worship may include but is not limited to a church, synagogue,
temple, mosque or other facility that is used for prayer by persons of similar beliefs.
PRINCIPAL USE
The primary use to which the premises are devoted, and the main purpose for which the
premises exist.
PUBLIC FACILITY
Any facility, including, but not limited to, buildings, property, recreation areas, and roads,
which is owned, leased, or otherwise operated, or funded by the governmental body or
public entity.
PUBLIC UTILITY BUILDING
A building necessary for the furnishing of essential services (as defined herein). This
building shall not be intended for personnel, but for such things as, but not limited to,
switching stations, relay stations and sewage pumping stations.
PUBLIC USE
A facility for a recognized public purpose, such as an auditorium, library, or park, which is
operated by a nonprofit organization or by a public agency other than the municipality.
CHAPTER 230 § XX3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 210
RECREATIONAL FACILITY
A place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure-time activities, and other
customary and usual indoor and outdoor recreational activities, excluding boat launching
facilities.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
A vehicle or vehicular attachment designed for temporary sleeping or living quarters for
one or more persons, which is not a dwelling, and which may include a pick-up camper,
travel trailer, tent trailer and motor home.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE ACCESSORY ENCLOSURE
A factory-manufactured rigid metal or vinyl enclosure, with the dimensions not exceeding
eight (8) feet in width nor the length of the recreational vehicle and designed for use with
recreational vehicles. The term shall not include decks, patios, awnings, awning tents,
screen panels or unenclosed roof projections.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE, PARK MODEL (CAMP MODEL)
A recreational vehicle containing no more than four hundred (400) square feet of floor
area, not counting recreational vehicle accessory enclosures.
RECYCLING CENTER
A facility for the collection and processing of recyclables, excluding sewage sludge, into
marketable resources. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, materials recovery
facilities and recycling drop-off centers. The term does not include incinerators, other
disposal facilities, or facilities that process general municipal solid waste.
REGISTERED DISPENSARY or DISPENSARIES
An entity registered under 22 M.R.S. §2425-A, that acquires, possesses, cultivates,
manufactures, delivers, transfers, transports, sells, supplies or dispenses marijuana plants
or harvested marijuana or related supplies and educational materials to qualifying patients
and the caregivers of those patients.
REPAIR SERVICES
A business providing for the repair of personal and business property, such as radios and
televisions; electrical and electronic equipment; computers; cell phones; watches, clocks,
and jewelry; furniture and upholstery; sporting equipment; musical instruments; small
engine repair, and similar items, but not including the repair of motor vehicles, boats, or
heavy equipment. Retail sales of parts and supplies shall be allowed, provided such sales
are accessory to the repair service.
RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT
A building or group of buildings in which are located facilities for scientific research,
investigation, testing, or experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of
products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.
RETAIL
The sale of goods and services to end users of the goods and services. For purposes of
this chapter, eating and drinking establishments do not constitute a retail use.
CHAPTER 230 § XX3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 211
RE-SUBDIVISION
The division of an existing subdivision or any change in the plan for an approved
subdivision which affects the lot lines, including land transactions by the applicant not
indicated on the approved plan.
REVERSE FRONTAGE
Frontage on a street other than an existing or proposed arterial street.
RIDING STABLE
An establishment where the public is permitted to ride horses. Horse riding lessons may
also be provided.
RIVER, STREAM or BROOK
A channel between defined banks. A channel is created by the action of surface
water and has two or more of the following characteristics:
1. It is depicted as a solid or broken blue line on the most-recent edition of the
United States Geological Survey 7.5-minute series topographic map or, if not
available, a fifteen-minute series topographic map;
2. It contains or is known to contain flowing water continuously for a period of at
least six months of the year in most years;
3. The channel bed is primarily composed of mineral material such as sand and
gravel, parent material or bedrock that has been deposited or scoured by
water;
4. The channel contains aquatic animals such as fish, aquatic insects or
mollusks in the water or, if no surface water is present, within the stream bed;
5. The channel contains aquatic vegetation and is essentially devoid of upland
vegetation.
River, stream or brook does not mean a ditch or other drainageway constructed, or
constructed and maintained, solely for the purpose of draining stormwater, or a
grassy swale.
ROAD
A route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil, gravel, asphalt, or other
surfacing material constructed for or created by the repeated passage of motorized
vehicles.
PUBLIC ROAD
Any road or street under the jurisdiction of and maintained by a public authority and
open to public travel.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY
Every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner
and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other
persons.
SCHOOLS
A. PUBLIC AND PRIVATE (INCLUDING PAROCHIAL SCHOOLS) 
CHAPTER 230 § XX3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 212
Institutions for education or instruction in any branch or branches of knowledge or a
place where knowledge is imparted, and which satisfies either of the following
requirements:
1. The school is not operated for a profit or as a gainful business; or
2. The school teaches courses of study which are sufficient to qualify attendance
there as compliance with state compulsory education requirements.
B. COMMERCIAL SCHOOLS
Schools or institutions which are commercial or profit-oriented. Examples thereof are
dancing, music, riding, correspondence, aquatic schools, driving or business.
C. NURSERY SCHOOL
A house, facility, or other place licensed by the state as a nursery school in which a
person or combination of persons maintains for consideration during the day a regular
program which provides care for three or more children under eight years of age.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY
A building or structure accommodating individual storage rooms or area leased or rented
to the public exclusively for the storage of personal or business-related property, such
rooms or areas being accessible though individual private entrances. This use does not
fall within "wholesale trade and warehousing" herein defined.
SERVICE DROP
Any utility line extension which does not cross or run beneath any portion of a water body
provided that in the case of electric service, the placement of wires and/or the installation
of utility poles is located entirely upon the premises of the customer requesting service or
upon a roadway right-of-way; and the total length of the extension is less than one
thousand (1,000) feet. In the case of telephone service, the extension, regardless of
length, will be made by the installation of telephone wires to existing utility poles, or the
extension requiring the installation of new utility poles or placement underground is less
than one thousand (1,000) feet in length.
SHADE TREE
A species of tree, typically deciduous, that provides shade, has a branch structure that
does not conflict with or obstruct vehicle sight distances or pedestrian circulation, and that
has a height at maturity in excess of thirty-five (35) feet.
SHED
An accessory detached structure used for residential storage.
SHORELINE
The normal high-water line or upland edge of a coastal or freshwater wetland.
SIGN
A device, structure, banner, fixture, inflatable, awning, or placard using graphics, symbols,
and/or written copy designed specifically for the purpose of communication, advertising, or
identifying products, goods, services, or activity. 
CHAPTER 230 § XX3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 213
FREESTANDING SIGN
A sign supported by pole(s), and permanently attached in the ground or attached to
something buried in the ground, and not supported by any building or structure.
Monument signs are included in this category.
LED SIGN
Light Emitting Diode sign.
OFF-PREMISE SIGN
A sign that is not located on the lot of which it is appurtenant.
OFF-PREMISE DIRECTIONAL SIGN
A sign designed to aid the traveling public in locating a business on another
property.
NONCONFORMING SIGN
A sign that does not entirely comply with the terms of this ordinance.
PROJECTING SIGN
A sign attached to the outside wall of a building and projecting therefrom at a 90-
degree angle.
ROOF SIGN
A sign erected above or on the roof of a building.
TEMPORARY SIGN
A sign not intended for long-term use, and that is not permanently attached to the
ground.
WALL SIGN
A sign painted on or attached to and erected parallel to the outside wall of any
building.
SIGNIFICANT WILDLIFE HABITAT
The following areas to the extent that they have been mapped by the Department of
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife or are within any other protected natural resource:
habitat, as defined by the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, for species
appearing on the official state or federal list of endangered or threatened animal
species; high and moderate value deer wintering areas and travel corridors as
defined by the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife; seabird nesting islands
as defined by the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife; and critical spawning
and nursery areas for Atlantic salmon as defined by the Department of Marine
Resources; and
Except for solely forest management activities, for which "significant wildlife habitat"
is as defined and mapped in accordance with section 480-I by the Department of
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, the following areas that are defined by the Department
of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife and are in conformance with criteria adopted by the 
CHAPTER 230 § XX3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 214
Department of Environmental Protection or are within any other protected natural
resource:
1. Significant vernal pool habitat;
2. High and moderate value waterfowl and wading bird habitat, including nesting
and feeding areas; and
3. Shorebird nesting, feeding and staging areas.
SMALL ENGINE REPAIR
A business that services and repairs small equipment, such as snow blowers,
lawnmowers, rototillers, chainsaws, trimmers, garden tractors, and similar equipment
powered by a gasoline engine or motor of less than twenty (20) horsepower or its
equivalent. Small engine repair includes the sales of parts, supplies, and accessories for
small equipment. Small engine repair does not include the repair or servicing of motor
vehicles, motorcycles, boats or marine engines, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs), or heavy
equipment.
SMALL ACCESSORY WIND ENERGY SYSTEM (SWES)
A structure consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion
electronics, and which is intended to primarily reduce the on-site consumption of utilitysupplied power. An SWES may also be mounted on an existing structure, such as a roof,
chimney, or wall of a building.
SOLAR COLLECTOR
A solar photovoltaic cell, panel, or array, or solar thermal collector device, that relies upon
solar radiation as an energy source for the generation electricity or transfer of stored heat.
COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM
Means a complete assembly consisting of one or more solar collectors and associated
mounting hardware or equipment that occupies more than 2,000 square feet of surface
area (surface area shall be measured by the total surface area of the solar collector at
maximum tilt that occupies a given space), intended to provide for the collection, storage
and distribution for sale or credit including, but not limited to, net energy billing, of solar
energy for heating or cooling, electricity generation, or solar/thermal hot water systems;
these may be ground-mounted systems.
SPAGHETTI LOT
A parcel of land with a lot depth to shore frontage ratio greater than five to one (5:1).
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES
Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation,
sexual intercourse, fellatio or sodomy; and fondling or other erotic touching of human
genitals, pubic regions, buttocks or female breast.
STABLE
A structure where two (2) or more animals are sheltered and fed. This definition includes
operations which chiefly board, train and show horses, but does not include riding stables
open to the public.
CHAPTER 230 § XX3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 215
STORMWATER
The part of precipitation including runoff from rain or melting ice and snow that flows
across the surface as sheet flow, shallow concentrated flow, or in drainageways.
“Stormwater” has the same meaning as “storm water.”
STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS)
Methods, techniques, designs, practices, and other means to control the quality and
quantity of stormwater that are approved by the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection. Stormwater BMPs are identified in "Stormwater Management in Maine: Best
Management Practices," which is published periodically by the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection.
STREET
A public or private way, including, but not limited to, alleys, avenues, boulevards,
highways, roads and streets.
STREET WALL
A "wall" that generally abuts the sidewalk and helps to define and enclose the street
corridor, creating a sense of activity, intensity and spatial containment. In Saco, Main
Street from the railroad tracks to Beach Street, and several other downtown streets,
provide examples of desirable street walls.
STRUCTURE
Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a fixed location on or in the
ground, or an attachment to something having a fixed location on the ground, including
buildings, billboards, signs, commercial park rides and games, carports, porches,
commercial swimming pools, and other building features, but not including sidewalks,
fences, driveways, parking lots and noncommercial swimming pools (whether
aboveground or in-ground).
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE
A structure that is customarily both incidental and subordinate to the principal
structure. The term "incidental," in reference to the principal structure, shall mean
both subordinate and minor in significance to the principal structure, and attendant
to the principal structure.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE
The building in which the principal use of the lot is conducted.
SUBDIVISION
Subdivision shall be defined as in the state subdivision law, 30-A M.R.S. §4401 et seq. as
amended from time-to-time.
SUBSTANTIAL CONSTRUCTION
For subdivisions which include roads, substantial construction shall mean the completion
of the road base. For subdivisions without roads the completion of one unit and the
issuance of an occupancy permit shall constitute substantial construction.
SUPPLY YARD
A commercial establishment storing or offering for sale building supplies, including, but not
limited to, lumber, raw earthen materials, steel supplies, coal, heavy equipment, feed and 
CHAPTER 230 § XX3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 216
grain, and similar goods. The term does not include the wrecking, salvaging, dismantling
or storage of automobiles and similar vehicles.
SUSTAINED SLOPE
A change in elevation where the referenced percent grade is substantially maintained or
exceeded throughout the measured area.
TECHNICAL DESIGN CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS MANUAL (TDCSM)
The City’s design manual, outlining design standards and specifications for certain
development infrastructure requirements.
TEEN CENTER
A club organized for teenagers.
TIMBER HARVESTING
The cutting and removal of trees from their growing site, and the attendant operating of
cutting and skidding machinery, but not the construction or creation of roads. Timber
harvesting does not include the clearing of land for approved construction.
TOWER
A vertical structure upon which can be located one or more antennas for the purpose of
transmitting or receiving telecommunications as authorized by the Federal
Communications Commission. The term includes radio and television transmission towers,
microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower
structures, and similar structures.
TOWER, SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM
The vertical component of a small wind energy system that elevates the wind turbine
generator and attached blades above the ground.
TRACT OR PARCEL OF LAND
These terms shall be defined as in 30-A M.R.S. §4401
TRUCK TERMINAL
Land or buildings used as a relay station for the transfer of a load from one vehicle to
another or one party to another. The terminal cannot be used for permanent or long-term
accessory storage for principal land uses at other locations. The terminal facility may
include facilities for the repair of those trucks associated with the terminal.
UNSEWERED
Lots not connected to the municipal sewer system.
UNUSUAL NATURAL AREA
Any land or water area, usually only a few acres in size, which is undeveloped, and which
contains natural features of unusual geological, botanical, zoological, ecological,
hydrological, other scientific, educational, scenic, or recreational significance. By way of
illustration, and not limitation, such areas may include: rare or exemplary plant
communities; individual plant species of unusual interest because of size, species or other
reasons; unusual or exemplary bogs; unusually important wildlife habitats, particularly
those of rare or endangered species; unusual landforms; fossils and other deposits of
importance to geologists; outstanding scenic areas; and others of similar character.
CHAPTER 230 § XX3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 217
VARIANCE
A relaxation of the dimensional standards as stated in §XVI4.
VOLUME OF A STRUCTURE
The volume of all portions of a structure enclosed by roof and fixed exterior walls as
measured from the exterior faces of these walls and roof.
WAREHOUSE AND DISTRIBUTION FACILITY
A building intended for the shipping and receiving of goods and articles, which may include
associated assembly, finishing, and packaging.
WASTE COMPOSTING CENTER
A building or area for the biological decomposition and stabilization of organic matter
under aerobic conditions of high temperature resulting in a humus-like product that can be
used as a soil amendment.
WATER BODY
Any pond, lake, river, stream, brook or tidal area, except that for purposes of Shoreland
Zoning, “water body” shall mean any great pond, river or stream.
WATER RECREATION
Uses related to docks, piers, wharves, relative to the recreational use of waters, for which
uses or structures a permit from the Department of Environmental Protection and/or the
permitting authority is required.
WATER STORAGE FACILITIES
Facilities that store water, such as reservoirs, fish hatcheries, sewage lagoons, and farm
ponds. This term does not include swimming pools.
WETLAND
Refer to Shoreland Zoning Article.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY
Any structure, antenna, tower or other device which provides radio/television transmission,
commercial mobile wireless services, unlicensed wireless services, cellular phone
services, specialized mobile radio communications (SMR), common-carrier wireless
exchange phone services, personal communications service (PCS) or pager services.
Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be considered a principal use.
YARD
The horizontal area of land on a lot not occupied by a structure. The three types of yards
are as below:
YARD, FRONT
The area of land between the front lot line and the nearest part of the principal
building, and the two side lot lines.
YARD, SIDE
The area of land between the side lot line and the nearest part of the principal
building. 
CHAPTER 230 § XX3 12.2.2020
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE 218
YARD, REAR
The area of land between the rear lot line and the nearest part of the principal
building, and the two (2) side lot lines.
YARD (OR GARAGE) SALE
A sale, conducted indoors or out-of-doors, of used household goods, curios, and the like.
Yard (or garage) sales, as distinguished from flea markets, shall be considered to be
accessory uses under this chapter and shall not be conducted more frequently than four
(4) days in any six (6)-month period.
100-YEAR FLOODPLAIN
The area that will be inundated by the flood event having a one (1) percent change of
occurring in any year, as identified on the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
230 Appendix A Zoning Map
City of Saco, ME ZONING ORDINANCE i
APPENDIX
Appendix 1 Official Zoning Map