TOWN OF WILTON
BUILDING AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE ORDINANCE



Section I. Purpose/Scope.



The purpose of this Ordinance is to set a minimum standard for the condition and maintenance of the exterior of all buildings and structures and the premises surrounding such buildings and structures in the Downtown Village, Commercial, and Residential I zoning areas of the Town of Wilton in order to protect the economic well-being of the town's inhabitants. The appearance of the town as an attractive, well kept, safe, clean community is extremely important to the economic health of its businesses and the corresponding employment opportunities for its residents.  Buildings which are not well maintained and which take on an unkempt, dilapidated appearance have a negative, blighting effect not only on the immediately surrounding properties but on the community as a whole and the town 's economy.  This ordinance is intended to require property owners to maintain their properties in good repair in order to preserve the community 's safety and welfare.

Section II. Definitions.

Terms used in this Ordinance shall be defined in the Town of Wilton 's Zoning Ordinance
and the NFPA Life Safety 101 Code.

Section III.  Maintenance  Required.

All buildings and structures and all parts thereof in the Downtown Village, Commercial and Residential I Zones shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and nonhazardous manner. All means of egress, devices, safeguards and equipment shall be kept in good working order. The exterior of all premises and the condition of all buildings, structures and components thereon shall be maintained so as to prevent and repair deterioration , so that the appearance thereof shall reflect a level of maintenance ensuring that the property itself may be preserved safely, and so that hazards to the public health and safety are avoided.

Section IV.  Maintenance Standards for Buildings and Structures.

a.	Each property owner shall keep all exterior components of every principal accessory structure in good repair, including but not limited to walls, roofs, chimneys, cornices, gutters, downspouts, drains, porches, steps, landings, fire escapes, exterior stairs, windows, shutters, doors and storefronts.
 
b.	All surfaces shall be maintained free from deterioration, including but not limited to broken glass; loose or missing shingles or siding; crumbling brick, stone and mortar.



Section V.  Maintenance Standards for Premises and Yard Areas.

a.	All premises and yard areas shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition , including but not limited to steps, walks, driveways, fences, retaining walls, trees, shrubs. If any such area or object constitutes a danger to health or safety, it shall be repaired , replaced or removed.

b.	All yards, courts or lots shall be kept free of accumulations of trash, garbage, refuse, junk or other noxious or offensive material which may cause a fire hazard or may act as a breeding place for vermin or insects, or create a negative impact on neighboring property values.

Section VI.  Maintenance After Casualty Damage.



Any building destroyed by fire or other causes shall be made secure immediately and a permit for demolition or reconstruction shall be obtained within ninety (90) days from the date of the fire or other casualty.  Work to either remove or restore a fire damaged building must begin no later than one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of the fire or other casualty.



Section VII.  Enforcement, Penalties & Appeals.



a.	This ordinance shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer (CEO), or his or her designee. The CEO shall notify the violator, serving a written notice by certified mail or by hand delivery. The notice shall explain the nature of the violation and require corrective action within thirty (30) calendar days from the date ofreceipt of the notice to correct the violation; or seven (7) days for a health and/or safety violation . Ifcommunity programs are available, i.e., paint bank programs, volunteer removal of materials, etc., CEO may recommend such programs in the notice.

b.	The CEO may offer one (1) special extension per person/per incident of up to 180 days to violators of this ordinance under certain hardship or extenuating circumstances.  If a violation is discovered during the winter months (November  I - April 1) and if winter weather prevents the timely correction of a violation, an extension may be granted.  Cases of disability or financial hardship shall also be grounds of an extension.  Violators requesting an extension for financial hardship shall be required to prove hardship through financial documentation .  These extensions for seasonal, disability, or financial hardship shall be at the discretion of
 
CEO.

c.	The violator may appeal the CEO's decision to the Town of Wilton 's Board of Selectmen. Appeals must be made within seven (7) days of notification by the CEO of a violation. In the case of an appeal, the thirty (30) days allowed to attain compliance shall start the day after the Selectmen have heard an unsuccessful appeal by the alleged violator .

d.	If a violation is not corrected within the time allowed the Town shall pursue all remedies and relief available by law and/or in equity for land use ordinances, including without limitation the remedies and relief provided in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452 currently including, without limitation, a minimum penalty of $100 per day for a specific violation , injunctive relief and reasonable attorney fees, expert witness fees and costs. The Town shall retain all penalties set forth in this ordinance.  The CEO may represent the Town in District Court with the written authorization of the Selectmen, pursuant to Rule 80-K. Should the services of the Town Attorney be required the CEO shall first review the case with the Selectmen.

Section VIII . Severability .

This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to 30-A MRSA §3001 and 30-A MRSA §3007(2).

Section IX.  Effective Date.

This Ordinance shall be effective upon adoption by the Town of Wilton and may be
amended in accordance with Town requirements for amending ordinances.



Enacted:	June 10, 3013



Signed	 

Diane Dunham , Town Clerk
 
TOWN OF WILTON DISORDERLY PROPERTY ORDINANCE

Section I.  Title.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Disorderly Property Ordinance of the Town of Wilton."

Section II.  Purpose and Findings.

A.	The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Town of Wilton by eliminating the proliferation  ofresidences harboring occupants who disturb the peace and tranquility of their neighborhoods.

B.	The Town of Wilton finds that:

(!)Chronic unlawful  or nuisance activity of various kinds on and near disorderly properties adversely affects the health, safety and welfare of citizens and diminishes the quality of life in neighborhoods where this chronic activity occurs. Chronic unlawful or nuisance activity constitutes a public nuisance and should be subject to abatement.

(2)	The Town has a substantial and compelling interest in protecting the health, safety and welfare of its citizens and the neighborhoods affected by chronic unlawful or nuisance activity.

(3)	The processes presently available do not adequately control chronic unlawful or nuisance activity or its detrimental effects on citizens and neighborhoods where such chronic activity occurs.

(4)	Establishing the proposed regulatory scheme will alleviate the problems created by chronic unlawful or nuisance activity through early intervention by the Chief of Police.



Section III. Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following tenns shall have the meanings indicated:

PROPERTY
Any building, dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, tent, camping trailer, camping site or other structure or place occupied either temporarily or permanently by human beings.


 
CHIEF
 


The Chief of Police of the Town of Wilton or his/her designee.
 

DISORDERLY  ACTIVITIES
Situations created within or in the immediate vicinity of a property by a property's owner, occupants, or tenants, or the invitees of an owner, tenant or occupant, which would have a tendency to disturb unreasonably the community, the neighborhood or an ordinary individual occupying property in the vicinity of the disorderly activity, including but not limited to loud music; boisterous parties; excessive loud noises; fights within the property or in its vicinity involving occupants of the building or their invitees; occupants of the property or their invitees being intoxicated outdoors in the vicinity of the property; the arrest of occupants or their invitees for activities which
constitute either a crime or civil infraction under either state or local law; and other similar activities in the property or outside the property itself.

DISORDERLY  EVENT
A complaint of a disorderly activity to which the Police Department responds and which the Police Department detennines to be substantiated. Multiple responses to a single prope1iy which occur within a twelve-hour period shall be counted as a single disorderly event. A subsequent disorderly event shall not be deemed to occur until the Police Department notifies or makes a good faith attempt to notify the owner, by telephone or as provided below, of the previous complaint and response.

DISORDERLY  PROPERTY
Any property at which the Police Department has substantiated four or more disorderly events in a thirty day time frame.

 
OWNER
 


The person or persons having the right oflegal title to or the beneficial interest in a building or parcel ofland, as their interest is recorded in the tax records of the Town of Wilton.
 

POLICE DEPARTMENT
The Police Deparhnent of the Town of Wilton.



Section IV.   Prohibition.

No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or allow another to occupy, as tenant, guest or invitee, a disorderly house or property.

Section V.  Documentation  of Complaints.

The Police Department shall document all responses to complaints of disorderly activities and classify each as either a substantiated disorderly event or unfounded complaint at the sole discretion of the Police Department.
 
Section VI. Notice Of Disorderly Property Designation.

(a)	Whenever a property has been identified as a disorderly property by the Town, it shall cause written notification of the events which form the basis for that designation to be given to the owner. If the owner has not registered with the Town in accordance with local ordinance, the police may send notice  to  the address listed on the Town's tax rolls. Such notice shall be sufficient for all legal purposes. The notice shall require the owner to meet with representatives of the Town (including the Police Department) within  five business days from the date of the written notification, or such other time as is agreed upon by the Police Chief or his or her designee, to identify ways in which the problems which have been identified will be eliminated.




(b)	At the time of said meeting, the owner shall be obligated to provide to the Town the following documentation:

(1)	A copy of the names of all tenants  or other persons authorized to reside or presently residing in the property and the units they occupy.

(2)	Copies of all leases with tenants residing in the property.

(3)	Contracts  with  any  property  manager  or  other  person  responsible  for  the orderly operation of the property.




(c)	The owner shall agree to take effective measures to address the disorderly property, which measures shall be memorialized in a written agreement at the conclusion of the meeting with the Town and shall be implemented within one week of said  meeting unless another date is agreed upon by the  Police Department. Failure to enter into such an agreement at the conclusion of the meeting will be deemed a violation of this division, and the Town may file a complaint in the district court seeking all compensatory and equitable relief permitted by law.




Section VII.  Enforcement.

If the owner a) refuses to agree to take effective measures to address the  disorderly property, b) takes ineffective measures to address the disorderly property as determined by the Town, or c) fails to implement the agreement reached  with the Town to address the disorderly property, the Town may file a legal action against the owner seeking any and all damages and remedies to which it is entitled pursuant to state and local laws.
 

Section VIII. Cost Of Service For Responses To Disorderly Properties.

(a)	Whenever the Police Department is required to respond to a situation at  a disorderly property, which constitutes the fourth or greater response in any thirty-day period, the owner of the disorderly property shall pay the cost of service for each such response as follows:

For each such response for service the owner shall pay $50, which shall be in   addition   to   any   penalty   to   which   the   owner   may   be   subject.

(b)	Failure to pay the cost of service within 30 days after demand therefore shall subject the owner to the penalties provided by state and local laws.

(c)	Charges which become payable hereunder shall be treated as liens on the property in question and shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of state and local laws.

Section IX.  Violations.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or failing or neglecting or refusing to obey any order or notice of the Police Department issued hereunder shall be subject to penalties as provided by state and local laws.




Effective on the date of adoption by the Town of Wilton Enacted:	June 10, 2013


Signed             

Diane Dunham, Town Clerk
 








TOWN OF WILTON





Dog Control Ordinance





Enacted:	June 16, 2014


Replaces Town of Wilton Dog Ordinance - March 13, 1972 as amended Amended:








 
Certified by:
 


Name - Diane Dunham


Town Clerk	Affix Seal
 
Town of Wilton Table of Contents


Town of Wilton

Dog Control Ordinance



Article 1.  Purpose and Definitions Sec. 1.1. Title
This Ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as the Town of Wilton Dog Control
Ordinance and will be referred to herein as "this Ordinance". This ordinance repeals and replaces the Town of Wilton Dog Ordinance adopted on March 13, 1972 as amended .

Sec. 1.2.  Authority

This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the Home Rule Authority granted to the Town of W ilton in accordance with the provision of 30-A MRSA §3001 and 7 MRSA §3950.

Sec. 1.3. Purpose

The purpose of this ordinance is to protect the health, safety and welfare of Wilton residents by holding dog owners accountable for the acts of their animals without imposing unreasonable restrictions on owners and dogs in their normal activities.

Sec. 1.4.  Administration and Enforcement

The Municipal Officers , Animal Control Officer , Police Officers , or any other duly appointed agent(s) of the Municipal Officers, shall administer and enforce this Ordinance.

Sec. 1.5.  Definitions

A.	At Large. "At large" shall be intended to mean off the premises of the dog owner, and not under the control of the owner or a member of his immediate family either by leash, cord, chain, at "heel", or under command .

B.	Dangerous Dog.  "Dangerous dog" means a dog as defined in 7 MRSA §3907(12- D), as amended .

C.	Dog.  "Dog" means a member of the genus and species known as canis familia ris or any canine, regardless of generation , resulting from the interbreeding of a member of
 
canis familiaris with a wolf hybrid as defined below. For the purpose of this ordinance ,
the meaning of "Dog" shall include those animals meeting the definition of "Wolf hybrid."

D.	Domesticated Animal.  "Domesticated animal" means a dog, cat or other animal commonly kept as a companion, and also includes livestock as defined in 7 MRSA,
§3907 , Subsection 18-A.

E.  Owner.  "Owner" means any person or persons, firm, association, partnership, corporation or other legal entity amendable to civil process, owning, keeping, harboring, in possession of, or having control of  a dog or dogs.

F.	Owner's Premises. "Owner's premises" means the residence or residences,
including buildings and land and motor vehicles belonging to the owner of the dog.

G.	Nuisance. "Nuisance" means excessive and/or habitual barking, howling , or yelping by any dog or dogs.

H.	Secure Enclosure.  "Secure enclosure" means a fence or structure of at least six feet in height forming or making an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of children
and suitable to confine a dangerous dog in conjunction with other measures that may be
taken by the owner , such as tethering the dangerous dog.  The secure enclosure must be locked, be designed with a secure top , bottom and sides, and be designed to prevent the animal from escaping from or reaching through the enclosure .  Any fencing material used in the construction of the secure enclosure shall have openings of no more than two inches.

I.	Transfer. "Transfer" means to sell, give or otherwise convey ownership or possession of a dog to another person, or to cause a dog to be moved beyond the municipal boundaries .

J.	Wolf Hybrid.  "Wolf hybrid" means a mammal that is the offspring of the reproduction between a species of wild canid or wild canid hybrid and a domesticated dog or wild canid hybrid.  Wolf hybrid includes a mammal that is represented by its owner to be a wolf hybrid, coyote hybrid, coydog or any other kind of wild canid hybrid.  Wolf hybrids must also be registered with the Maine Warden Service.



Article 2  Dogs

Sec. 2.1.  Disturbing the Peace Prohibited

It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dog to cause or permit such dog to disturb the peace of any person by biting, chasing, or continued barking or howling or in any other manner, or destroy the property of any person.
 
Sec. 2.2 Running at Large Prohibited

No owner shall cause or permit any dog owned or kept by him, or in his possession or under his control, to run at large within the Town limits. Dogs while on any public way or place shall be under restraint, , which is defined as: controlled by a leash, at "heel", beside a competent person and obedient to that person's commands, within a vehicle
being driven or parked on the streets, or within the property limits of its owner or keeper .
Nothing in the Ordinance shall be held to require the leashing of any dog while on private premises. A leash shall not be more than eight feet long.

When dogs are found running at large and their ownership is known, such dogs need not be impounded but the Town , through its duly authorized agents, may, at its discretion , cite the owners of such dogs to appear in court to answer charges of this Ordinance .

Sec. 2.3.  lmpoundment:  Dogs found running at large and the owners are unknown, shall be taken and impounded in a shelter or kennel designated by the Town and there confined in a humane manner according to shelter policy.

Sec. 2.4.  Duty to Dispose of Feces

It shall be a violation of this article for any person who owns, possesses, or controls a dog to fail immediately to remove and dispose of any feces left by his or her dog on any street, sidewalk, publicly owned property or private property of another.

Sec. 2.5.  Violations and penalties

A person who violates any provision of this Article shall be fined and subject to a civil penalty of at least $50.00 but not more than $250.00 for a first violation and not less than $100 nor more than $500 for 2 or more violations , pursuant to 7 M.R.S.A. § 3914 as amended.  Each day of violation shall constitute a separate violation . All fines shall be paid to the Town.  The Municipal Clerk shall deposit any fees and court fines
Colle,....erU1 '"'UI..sualnl •L+o thIl•sr'1..rI1:...aln\ "e .l.l.l...,... a sepa'"1 a•e a\"J"\J"VUnIt p• ''"IS' ·lal ...+L..,... 7 M R S,A , §
3945. In addition to paying the minimum fine set forth above, the owner shall also be responsible for the Town of Wilton's attorney's fees and costs incurred by the Town in conjunction with the enforcement of any provisions of this ordinance .




Article 3.  Dog Barking Sec. 3.1.  Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to regulate dog barking within the Town and to address the
problems caused by excessive dog barking.
 
Sec. 3.2.  Barking Dogs

No owner or person having custody of any dog or dogs within the legal limits of the Town shall keep or maintain a dog or dogs which create a nuisance by as defined under Section 1.5(G) of this Ordinance.

An owner who keeps or maintains a dog or dogs whose barking, howling, or yelping sustained for one hour or more, can be heard beyond the boundary of the property on which the dog(s) is(are) located, violates this section .

Sec . 3.3. Complaint

A written complaint from a person or persons disturbed by a barking dog or dogs shall include the date the disturbance began, the description of the disturbance , and the length of time of the disturbance.  The complaint must be signed and sworn to the Town's Animal Control Officer and/or any Police Officer representing the Town.  Any of the above authorities may investigate and may give written warning to the owner of the violation of this Article , and order that said violation must cease. The written warning shall be made part of the complaint.  See attached barking/howling log/statement forms.

Sec. 3.4.  Violations and penalties

A person who violates any provision of this Article shall be fined and subject to a civil penalty of at least $50.00 but not more than $250.00 for a first violation and not less than $100 nor more than $500 for 2 or more violations, pursuant to 7 M.R.S .A. § 3914 as amended.  Each day of violation shall constitute a separate violation.  All fines shall be paid to the Town.  The Municipal Clerk shall deposit any fees and court fines collected pursuant to this Ordinance into a separate account pursuant to 7 M.R.S.A. § 3945.

An owner who allows a dog or dogs to bark, howl, or yelp in violation of this Article, between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. shall be subject to double penalties.

The Municipal Officers, the Animal Control Officer, a Police Officer, or any other duly appointed agent(s) of the Municipal Officers, at their exclusive discretion, may limit the number of violation citations issued within a twenty-four hour period if they determine that the means to abate the dog barking, howling, and/or yelping is beyond the ability or control of the owner to enable them to voluntarily comply in a timely manner within that period.

In addition to paying the minimum fine set forth above, the owner shall also be responsible for the Town of Wilton's attorney's fees and costs incurred by the Town in conjunction with the enforcement of any provisions of this ordinance .
 
Sec. 3.5.  Exemptions

At the exclusive discretion of the Municipal Officers , the Animal Control Officer, a Police Officer, or any other duly appointed agent(s) of the Municipal Officers, the barking of certain dogs may be exempted from this Article , only on an incident by incident basis, including but not limited to: dogs in kennels licensed by the State of Maine under 7
M.R.S.A. §3923-C , livestock guardian dogs, guide dogs, service dogs, herding dogs,
rescue dogs, training dogs, therapy dogs, sled dogs , and hunting dogs, if the complaint was filed by a property owner who was previously duly informed through disclosure per section 4-2 .12 of this Article or who obtained through other means that equivalent information prior to purchasing the property.  Such discretion is intended to give the above authorities the latitude necessary to determine if and when dog barking associated with kennels and the customary uses and behaviors of specialized dogs is a nuisance.



Article 4.  Dangerous Dogs

Sec. 4.1.  It shall be unlawful to own or possess a dangerous dog as defined in Section 1.5(8) of this Ordinance, except as otherwise ordered by a Court.  An owner who is given written notice by the town's Animal Control Officer or any duly authorized law enforcement official that the owner's dog is a dangerous dog shall not without further written authorization, sell, give or otherwise convey the ownership or possession of that dog, or cause it to be moved beyond the boundaries of the town, except to or under the care of a licensed veterinarian, animal control officer or law enforcement officer .  An owner receiving such notice shall immediately place the dog under confinement for a period of at least ten days and shall promptly obey all rabies detection and control directions of any of the above officials concerning that dog. An owner receiving such notice shall comply with all applicable regulations of the Maine Department of Agriculture and Maine Department of Health and Human Services concerning rabies detection and control.

Sec. 4.2. Special Restraint of Dangerous Dogs

Any dog that has been determined by a court to be a dangerous dog shall be confined to a secure enclosure on the owner's premises . The secure enclosure shall conform to all building setbacks contained within the Town of Wilton Building Ordinance, and shall be subject to inspection by the town's Code Enforcement Officer. The secure .enclosure shall in no event encroach any closer than three feet to any mail receptacle or entrance or exit to a house or other building, or driveway, walkway, stoop or stairs leading to a building, home fill pipe or utility meter.

Sec. 4.3.  Insurance Provision

The owner of any dog that has been determined by a court to be a dangerous dog shall be required to obtain liability insurance in an amount not less than $300,000.00 covering
 
bodily injury or death of any person or animal, or for property damages , resulting from the keeping of the dangerous dog. Coverage shall be obtained within five business
days of a court's finding that a dog is dangerous .  Proof of coverage must be provided to the town's Animal Control Officer and/or Code Enforcement Officer , and such policy must provide for notification to the town in the event of cancellation or non-renewal for any reason.  If the town is notified that coverage has lapsed, the owner shall have
twenty-four hours, after notice by the town , to provide evidence of renewal or
replacement coverage.

Sec. 4.4. Enforcement and Penalties

Article 4 shall be enforced by the town's Animal Control Officer and/or Code Enforcement Officer, or any other duly authorized law enforcement official.  Any owner found in violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of a civil violation and shall be assessed the following minimum financial penalty:

First offense : $500.00 Second offense: $750.00 Third offense : $1,000 .00

Subsequent offenses(s):  $1,000 per offense

Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.

In addition to paying the minimum fine set forth above, the owner shall also be responsible for the Town of Wilton's attorney 's fees and costs incurred by the Town in conjunction with the enforcement of any provisions of this ordinance.



Article 5. Severability

Should any portion of these Articles be found invalid for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, then all portions not found invalid shall remain unaffected and continue in full force and effect.



Article 6. Mediation

In cases where citation(s) under this Article involve disputes between abutter(s) and/or or neighbor(s) and the cited individual(s) regarding violations , these parties are advised to retain the services of a mediator listed by the Court Alternative Dispute Resolution Service (CADRES) at their expense to avoid the possibility of lengthy and costly litigation.
 
Article 7.  Kennels

Any owner(s) who must obtain and maintain licensing by the State of Maine as a kennel under 7 M.R.S.A. §3923-C, must comply with the Town Zoning Ordinance, which regulates where kennels may be located, and the Town Site Review Ordinance , which regulates approvals for such operations . Those who possess kennel licenses and are in compliance with the Town's Zoning Ordinance are not held harmless and are fully subject to this Article .




Article 8. Effective Date

The effective date of this Ordinance is June 16, 2014.
 

EXHIBIT 1:	Sustained Barking or Howling for One Hour or More



Date	Time barking	Time barking	Number of	Names of corroborating or howling	or howling	participating		witnesses if any, with
began	ended	dogs	addresses
and phone numbers
 

TOWN OF WILTON CONSUMER FIREWORKS ORDINANCE


REGULATING THE USE OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS IN WILTON, MAINE
(Governing directive - Maine Revised Statute Title 8, Chapter 9-A, Sections 221-237)


Section I. Purpose.

This ordinance governs the use of consumer fireworks to ensure the safety of the residents and property owners of the Town of Wilton and of the general public.

Section II. Title and authority.

This ordinance shall be known as the "Town of Wilton Consumer Fireworks Ordinance." It is
adopted pursuant to the enabling provisions of the Maine Constitution, the provisions of 30-A
M.R.S.A	§ 3001, and the provisions of P.L. 2011, ch. 416, § 5 (effective Jan . 1, 2012),
codified at 8 M.R.S.A § 223-A.

Section Ill. Definitions.
As used in this ordinance, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms have the following meanings:

Consumer fireworks. "Consumer fireworks" has the same meaning as in 27 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 555.11 or subsequent provision , but includes only products that are tested and certified by a 3rd-party testing laboratory as conforming with United States Consumer Product Safety Commission standards, in accordance with 15 United States Code, Chapter47.

"Consumer fireworks" excludes:
(1). Missile-type rockets, as defined by the State Fire Marshal by rule;
(2). Helicopters and aerial spinners, as defined by the State Fire Marshal by rule; and
(3). Sky rockets and bottle rockets . For purposes of this paragraph, "sky rockets and bottle rockets" means cylindrical tubes containing not more than 20 grams of chemical composition, as defined by the State Fire Marshal by rule, with a wooden stick attached for guidance and stability that rise into the air upon ignition and that may produce a burst of color or sound at or near the height of flight.

Section IV. Use of Consumer Fireworks.

A.	No person shall use, display, fire, or cause to be exploded consumer fireworks within the Town of Wilton except on Class I (low) and Class II (moderate) National Fire Danger Rating System Days, as designated by the Maine Forest Service.
 
B.	No person shall use, display, fire, or cause to be exploded consumer fireworks within the Town of Wilton on Class III (high) National Fire Danger Rating System Days, as designated by the Maine Forest Service without a permit from the Wilton Fire Department.

C.	No person shall use, display, fire, or cause to be exploded consumer fireworks within the Town of Wilton on Class IV (very high) and Class V (extreme) National Fire Danger Rating System Days, as designated by the Maine Forest Service.

D.  No person shall use, display , fire or cause to be exploded consumer fireworks within the Downtown Village Zone or the Residential I Zone.

E.  No person shall use, display, fire, or cause to be exploded consumer fireworks on public property without a permit from the Town of Wilton.

F.  Unless otherwise stipulated in this Ordinance, all use of consumer fireworks shall be in accordance with the provisions of 8 M.R.S.A. § 221-237 and any revisions thereto.

Section V. Seizure, Forfeiture and Disposal of Consumer Fireworks.

The Town may seize consumer fireworks that the Town has probable cause to believe are used in violation of this Ordinance and shall forfeit seized consumer fireworks to the State for disposal. Fireworks may not be disposed of at the Wilton Transfer Station.



Section VI. Conflicts with Other Rules, Regulations or Laws.

Whenever the requirements of this Ordinance are in conflict with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted Federal , State, or Local law, rule or ordinance, the requirements of the most restrictive or higher standard shall govern, unless, the provisions of the local ordinance are preempted by Federal or State laws or regulations.

Section VII. Severability.

In the event that any section, subsection, or any provision of this Ordinance shall be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction  to be invalid for any reason, such decision shall not be deemed to affect the validity of any other section, sub-section , or other portion of this ordinance. To that end, the provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared severable.

Section VIII.  Penalties.

Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance or the permit issued by the Town of Wilton for the use of consumer fireworks, commits a civil violation for which a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500 .00) may be imposed for each day such offense continues and the Town's reasonable fees and
 
expenses, including attorneys fees. Each day such violation occurs or continues to occur shall constitute a separate violation. Any violation of this ordinance may be deemed a nuisance.



Section IX.  Effective Date.

This Ordinance shall become effective on the date of adoption by the Town of Wilton .



Enacted:	June 10, 2013


 
Signed:
 


Diane Dunham, Town Clerk
 

Mailbox Policy for the Municipality of Wilton



For convenience and practicality, mailbox installations have been allowed within the right-of-way of Maine’s public highways; however it is important to recognize that such installations have two very important conditions:

1)	The mailbox must be installed in accordance with applicable standards to ensure that mail can be delivered and that the mailbox does not create an obstacle or safety hazard to those that use or maintain the highway, and

2)	The mailbox is installed entirely at the owner’s risk. In other words, if the mailbox incurs damage during any sort of highway operations or maintenance, the property owner is not entitled to replacement or compensation. In fact, if the mailbox was not installed in accordance with the applicable standards as stated above, the owner may even be held liable for injuries or damages that may have been incurred as a result.

Mailbox design and installation standards are available from several sources, and mailbox owners are expected to consult this information prior to undertaking any mailbox installation or replacement. The following standards have nationwide relevance and were developed in cooperation with one another:

•	The United States Postal Service (USPS) Mailbox Guidelines. The USPS defines the standards for mailbox construction, as well as the placement tolerance that must be met to accommodate postal operations. Specifics may be obtained from your local post office or online at: https://www.usps.com/manage/know-mailbox- guidelines.htm?

•	American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Roadside Design Guide. The AASHTO Roadside Design Guide, Chapter 11: Erecting Mailboxes on Streets and Highways deals with the safety and construction of privately owned mailboxes, mailbox supports, and mailbox turnout designs and is less focused on postal operations. This publication may be obtained online through the AASHTO Bookstore at: https://bookstore.transportation.org/Item_details.aspx?id=1807

This municipality has developed this policy to promote compliance with these national standards and to help further clarify the expectations and responsibilities of Maine mailbox owners to improve the safety of our roads. The following pages further specify the details associated with the mailbox height, location, offset, and post type to minimize the potential hazards associated with mailbox installations and to reduce the opportunities for damage to mailboxes.
 

Mailbox Installation Standards

General Location:

Whenever possible, your mailbox should be located after your driveway opening. This location placement improves visibility, minimizes the amount of snow that comes off of the snow plow, and improves the approach for your mail carrier. The diagram below further clarifies this preferred placement:

 



Mailbox Support Design:

It is best to use an extended arm type of post with a free-swinging suspended mailbox. This allows snowplows to sweep near or under boxes without damage to supports and provides easy access to the boxes by carrier and customers. The following picture shows a free-swinging suspended mailbox:
 
Offset:
 


Mailboxes should be set back from the edge of the shoulder – regardless of whether the
 
shoulder is gravel or paved. In other words, the face of the mailbox should be at least one foot (1’) back from the edge of the normally plowed surface of the highway or the face of curb. Greater offset distances are encouraged whenever possible to allow the mail carrier to get further out of traffic and to further minimize potential damage to your mailbox. The following picture shows a mailbox with a reasonable offset:

























Height:
According to USPS standards, a mailbox must be installed with the bottom of the
mailbox located between 41” and 45” high above the surface of the highway shoulder. We recommend that this height be closer to the 45” measurement to minimize conflict with the height of the plow truck wing when snow is being pushed back during, or between, winter storms. The following picture further clarifies the height considerations:

 
 
Post Size, Type and Embedment:

Mailbox posts must be sturdy enough to hold up the mailbox in all types of weather conditions, however they cannot be so rugged that they present a hazard to vehicles that inadvertently leave the road. If a mailbox support is struck by a vehicle, it must easily break away. Therefore, the following types of posts are deemed acceptable:
•	4” x 4” wooden posts embedded 2 feet into the ground. Larger wooden posts may be used only if the post is drilled through with an appropriate spade bit to create a shear plane that is no higher than 6” above the surface of the surrounding ground. The number and size of the drilled holes depends upon what is necessary to bring the cross- section of the larger post down to the equivalent cross-sectional area of a standard 4” x 4” post. (MaineDOT Standard Specification 606.06)
•	1” to 2” round diameter steel or aluminum pipe or standard U-channel post embedded 2 feet into the ground.
•	Unacceptable mailbox supports include: anything that is filled with concrete, masonry and stone structures, heavy steel structures, and most objects that were intended for other uses (e.g. antique plows, I-beams, and various other household tools and objects).

NOTICE: Mailboxes, attachments or support systems not consistent with this policy are considered “Deadly Fixed Objects” (aka. “DFOs”) and are in violation of 23 MRSA §1401- A on state and state aid roads. On local roads, they can be considered as “obstructions” and a number of statutes relate to these obstructions. As such, when these installations are recognized by the municipality, the owner will be informed of the hazard and immediate removal will be requested. If the property owner does not comply with this request, the municipality may elect to remove the installation and seek reimbursement from the property owner for all costs incurred.
 
TOWN OF WILTON
PARKING AND TRAFFIC ORDINANCE



Article I.	Title: This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Parking and Traffic Ordinance of the Town of Wilton, Maine.

Article II	Authority:  This ordinance is adopted pursuant to Title 30-A Section 3009 of the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated.

Article  III		Purpose:  This ordinance is designed to update existing parking and traffic regulations, thereby allowing better control over vehicle use patterns  in Wilton, Maine.

Article  IV		Administration : the Selectmen of Wilton, Maine shall maintain in said Town suitable parking signs and markings indicating time, manner, and place of parking motor vehicles in accordance with the ordinance, and such additional signs and markings as they may deem necessary to control and direct traffic and parking within the municipal boundaries.   Ticketing and ynforcement shall be carried out by any duly authorized law enforcement officer.

The parking and traffic signs and markings provided for by this ordinance and appearing in any street or way in this Town shall be prima facie evidence that such signs and markings were erected in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, and by authority of the Selectmen.

The Board of Selectmen, in responding to parking or traffic problems may establish parking time or motor vehicle size limitations in any area or zone after notice and hearing. Signs shall be posted in areas so limited in such a manner as to notify the public of the limitation .

Article V	Definitions:
1.	The designation of Municipal Officers shall mean a majority of the Board of Selectmen.
2.	The word "Parked" as used in this ordinance shall mean allowing a motor vehicle to remain stationary in or on a highway, public way, street, or other public property whether attended or unattended .
3.	Motor vehicle:   Shall mean any self-propelled vehicle not operated exclusively on tracks, including motorcycles, but not including snowmobiles as defined in  12 M.R.S.A. § 1971.
4.	Motorcycle:  Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than 3 wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a farm tractor and a parking control vehicle.
 
5.	Authorized Emergency Vehicle: Shall mean vehicles of the fire department, police vehicles and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized
by the Commissioner of Transportation.
6.	The times stated in this Ordinance shall be construed to mean Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Savings Time according to which time is in force in the Town at the time of an alleged violation.
7.	Public Ways: Town or State maintained or owned roads, sidewalks or land.

 
Article VI
 
General Regulations:
Sec. 1. No motor vehicle shall be parked:

Within ten (10) feet either side of any fire hydrant.

During specified times in any areas marked as loading zones, other than vehicles
servicing the business(es) immediately adjacent to the loading zone(s).

On any highway, public way, street, or other public property between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. year round without written permission from a local law enforcement officer. Exception listed below .

Exception: Weld Road (Rt. 156) from the intersection of Main Street and Weld Road up to the point where the Wilton Town Office is located (158 Weld Road), where parking ofregistered vehicles will be allowed between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. from April 16 to November 14. Registered vehicles will not be allowed to be parked for any more than four consecutive days in a given spot on the Weld Road, constituting a "storage" of vehicles. There will be no parking between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. from November 15 to April 15 on the Weld Road from the intersection of Main Street and Weld Road to the Wilton Town Office.

Within ten (10) feet of an intersection or junction of any street, highway, crosswalk, driveway, right of way, and public ways, except as otherwise may be indicated. Property owners· private driveways are exempted from the ten foot stipulation.

Fully or pruiially on any sidewalk.

On any street between any NOP ARKING signs.

No person, when parking a vehicle, shall park with the curb on the driver's left side. Exception:  Parking with the curb on the driver's left side is allowed on Church Street and Cross Street in East Wilton.

In any space designated  for use by handicapped persons, including such spaces within any private parking lot, unless the motor vehicle bears a handicapped plate or placard issued in accordance with 20 MRSA, § 242, 252-A or 252-C.
 

In any area marked "Fire Lane", including such areas within any privately owned parking lot, unless said motor vehicle is an Authorized Emergency Vehicle, or is operated by a member of the Wilton Fire Department responding to a fire alarm.

Sec. 2  Motorcycles may, at the owners risk, be parked singly or 2 to 3 to a marked parking space, provided that no part of the cycles extend outside of the space markings; in which case the owner of the cycle in violation may be summoned for improper parking.

Sec. 3 Motor vehicles parked parallel with the curb shall be parked within eighteen inches thereof, and within designated parking lines when lines are present.

Sec. 4  Only parking parallel with the course of the street shall be allowed on the streets of Wilton, Dryden, East Wilton, and East Dixfield, except where street markings shall provide for diagonal parking .

Sec. 5 There shall be no double parking of motor vehicles, except that delivery vehicles may, at the discretion of the law enforcement officer on duty, double park only for so long as is necessary for them to be unloaded or loaded or both. Parking of motor vehicles so that either right hand wheel shall be more than two feet from the curb or street edge shall be considered double parking. This provision shall not apply to vehicles properly diagonally parked .

Sec.6  Any motor vehicle parked contrary to the prohibitions listed in this article or contrary to any other section of this ordinance shall be subject to removal by the authority of a duly appointed law enforcement officer and placed in a suitable parking space, or at the tow company facilities, at the expense of the owner of such vehicle. Neither the Town nor the officer shall be liable for any damage which may be caused by such removal.

Sec. 7. No motor vehicle shall be operated contrary to the posted directions and regulations for entering or exiting municipal parking lots, or private parking lots to which the public has access, or parked contrary to said directions or regulations .

Sec. 8 No U Turns allowed on Main Street from the bridge at Prospect St. to the Weld Road intersection.

Sec. 9 Any person or vehicle owner who is issued any parking ticket in violation of this Ordinance may choose to contest the violation by coming to the Police department and requesting a review.  Ifthe person or vehicle owner is not satisfied with the review, then that person can be issued a Civil Citation for a District Court Judge to hear. The person or vehicle owner may be adjudicated a fine of up to $100.00, plus costs, plus the cost of the original parking ticket.
 
Sec. 10 No left turn from High Street onto Main Street allowed. Vehicles are to tum right only. Vehicles may go around the monwnent to reverse direction on Main Street.




Article VII	Specific Regulations

 
Sec. 1  BASS PARK
Bass Park.
 
No motor vehicle shall be parked on the grass at
 

Sec. 2 LAK.EFRONT	No motor vehicle shall be parked in Bass Park or the area between the Lake Road parking area to and including the public boat landing and Canal Street parking area between the hours of 10:00 p.m . and 6:00
a.m. No motor vehicle or recreational vehicle shall be parked at the Pond Road
Boat launch between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. without authorization of the Wilton Police.

Sec. 3  MAIN STREET No motor vehicle shall be parked on either side of the Main Street from its junction with Lake Road to and including the bridge at Prospect Street.

Sec. 4  MAIN STREET	Except as further limited by this ordinance, parking by motor vehicles shall be limited to three hours durati on along Main Street in Wilton village from the bridge by Prospect St. to the Goodspeed Bridge, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday.

Sec. 5. WILSON STREAM MUNICIPAL PARKING LOT	No long term
storage of vehicles shall be allowed. No parking or storage ofrecreational vehicles including but not limited to ATV's Snowmobiles, Boats; including storage or parking on the grass area within the Parking Lot area. Winter Parking Rules for plowing purposes shall be approved annually by Selectmen.

Sec. 6  POST OFFICE AND MONUMENT	Motor vehicles may be parked in front of the Wilton Post Office, conforming to sign and street markings in each case, for fifteen minutes only, during the periods when parking by vehicles on Main Street is limited to three hours.
No parking adjacent to the Civil War memorial monument.

 
Sec. 7 PROSPECT STREET
side of Prospect Street.
 
No motor vehicle shall be parked on either
 

Sec. 8  HIGH STREET	No motor vehicle shall be parked on either side of High Street from its intersection with Main Street to a point 250 feet south of the Church. Also, no motor vehicle shall be parked next to the sidewalk in the area of Kineowath a Park at any time, or on the opposite side of High Street in the area of Kineowatha Park between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m .
 
Sec. 9 HIGH STREET MUNICIPAL PARKING LOT	No motor vehicle shall be parked in the High Street Municipal Parking Lot between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. No long term storage of vehicles shall be allowed. No parking or storage of recreational vehicles including, but not limited to, ATV's Snowmobiles, Boats; including storage or parking on the grass area within the Parking Lot area. Winter Parking Rules for plowing purposes shall be approved annually by Selectmen.

Sec. 10 CANAL STREET PARKING LOT
No motor vehicle shall be parked in the Canal Street Municipal Parking Lot
between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. No long term storage of vehicles shall be allowed.  No parking or storage ofrecreational vehicles including, but not limited to, ATV's Snowmobiles, Boats; including storage or parking on the grass area within the Parking Lot area. Winter Parking Rules for plowing purposes shall be approved annually by Selectmen.

Sec. 11	KINEOWATHA PARK	No motor vehicle shall be parked along any roadway within Kineowatha Park, except in those areas designated for that purpose.

Sec. 12	DEPOT STREET	No motor vehicle shall be parked on either side of Depot Street from its junction with Main Street to Rt. 2 &4.

Sec. 13	ROUTE 2 & 4	No motor vehicle shall be parked in the breakdown lane on either side of Route 2 and 4 within 250 feet of its intersection with the Munson Road, except in emergency situations.



Article VIII	Illegal Parking Prohibited:

No person shall park motor vehicles contrary to this ordinance and related signs and/or markings.  The fact that a vehicle is unlawfully parked shall be prima facie evidence of the unlawful parking of such vehicle by the person in whose name such vehicle is registered.

Article IX	Traffic Regulations

Sec. I . NO THRU TRUCKS   Lake Road, from Main Street to US Route 2. Commercial size trucks greater than 10,000 GVW are not allowed except: when making deliveries to neighborhood properties, maintaining the road and utilities, and/or responding to emergencies.



McCrillis Comer Road from US Rt. 2 to Rt. 156.To ensure proper use and prevent abuse, the Board of Selectmen may authorize McCrillis Corner Road to be posted temporarily at a limit of 26,000 lbs, effective August 2, 2011 until further notice. (29-A M.R.S.A. § 2395). Selectmen will authorize the Road Commissioner to post the road on an as-needed basis.
 





Article X	Penalty:

ILLEGAL PARKING	Any person who parks a motor vehicle contrary to this ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not less that $20.00 nor more than $100.
DEFACING SIGNS  Any person who removes, destroys, damages or defaces
any sign or signal erected by or under the direction of the Town of Wilton shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, an upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$100.00 plus costs. This section does not preclude the Town of Wilton to pursue criminal
charges under Title 17A, Section 806, M.R .S.A., in which there may be fines and jail penalties
imposed under guidelines set out in Title 17A M.R.S.A.



Any person violating any of the foregoing provisions of this ordinance shall, if they desire to avoid court action, pay the appropriate fees set forth below, by mail or in person to the Wilton Town Office:

 
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
 
Exceeding Time Limit
Parking with 15 ft.of a corner or crosswalk Parking in a no parking zone
Double parking
Parking left wheel to curb
Obstructing driveway, sidewalk or crosswalk Improper Parking
Overnight parking Improper Entry or Exit Prohibited Zone or Place
Within 10 ft. of fire hydrant Parking in an Handicap Area
 
$20.00
$20.00
$20.00
$20.00
$20.00
$20.00
$20.00
$20.00
$20.00
$20.00
$50.00
$50.00
 

Any person who receives a ticket for a violation of this ordinance and who does not pay the designated fee within 10 days of said violation will be summoned to court for said violation . Payment of the fee within the time allotted obviates comt action. Inthe event of non-payment of said fee a court summons shall be obtained and anyone convicted of a violation of any portion of this ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00.

Article XI	Seprability:	The invalidity of any provision or portion of this ordinance shall
not invalidate any other part.

Article XII Prior Ordinances Repealed:  Parking and traffic ordinance adopted in the years 1951, 1960, 1968, and 1992 and other Town ordinances and amendments pertaining to motor vehicle traffic and parking are hereby repealed and superseded by this ordinance.

Article XII	Exemptions:   Authori zed Emergency vehicles shall be exempt from the provisions
of this Parking and Traffic Ordinance, in accordance with 29 MRSA § 946-C.
 





Article XIV	Effective Date: The effective date of this ordinance shall be June 28, 2011. Amended Date: August 2, 2011 -Article IX Traffic Regulations
Amended Date: October 15, 2013 - Article VI General Regulations, Sec. 10 (added)





A TRUE COPY OF ORIGINAL:

Attest:\)'X
Town Clerk	DianeDUnham
 
 
 
Sand Policy

The Town of Wilton has sand available for Wilton residents throughout the winter months, November to March. Sand will be located at the Transfer Station, Munson Road, on Tuesday, Saturday and Sunday from 8 a.m. to 2 pm. and Wednesday from 10 a.m. to 5
p.m.	Sand will also be located at the Town Office during daylight hours only, during extreme storm conditions if necessary.

Each resident is allowed four buckets of five gallons per day.  You must bring your own buckets and a shovel.


Please remember that sand is for residents only. No contractors will be allowed.
 
TOWN OF WILTON
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT/RECYCLING  ORDINANCE



Section I. Authority.

1.	This ordinance is adopted pursuant to Home Rule powers as granted in Article VII-A of Maine Constitution and Title 30-A, M.R.S.A. Section 3001

2. This ordinance shall be known as the Town of Wilton, Maine, Solid Waste Management/ Recycling Ordinance adopted and effective by vote of the Town Meeting on June 10, 2013. It shall replace the Landfill Recycling Ordinance which was originally adopted on March 7, 1983, and June 22, 1998, and subsequently amended .

Section II.  Purpose.

The purposes of this ordinance are to: 1) continue the Solid Waste and_ Recycling Advisory Committee to aid the Selectmen on the matters pertaining to solid waste management;
2)	encourage the recycling of solid wastes to the maximum extent practicable; and 3) establish user fees for wastes which are difficult and/or costly to dispose of or recycle.

Section III. Administration.

The Selectmen of the Town of Wilton will administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance.

Section IV.  Applicability.

This ordinance shall apply to all users of the Wilton Transfer Station/Recycling Facility including residents, property owners, commerciaVindustrial establishments, and commercial haulers.

Section V.  Solid Waste and Recycling Advisory Committee.

1.	Purpose:  The purpose of the Advisory Committee will be to encourage recycling, educate the public and students, and aid the selectmen in matters relating to solid waste management and recycling.  The Committee shall provide a report on the past year's activities to the Selectmen annually, at least 60 days prior to Town Meeting.

2.	Appointment:  The Selectmen shall appoint at least seven (7) citizens from the Town of Wilton to the Advisory Committee to serve at the will of the Selectmen. The Selectmen shall fill any vacancy that may occur, as necessary to maintain a minimum of seven (7) members.

Section VI.  Permits.

All residents, property owners, and businesses must have a vehicle permit for each vehicle delivering all wastes, including recyclable materials, to the Wilton Transfer Station &
 
Recycling Center.  Permits must be displayed as requested by the management at the Transfer Station.  The Selectmen may determine, following a public hearing, whether there will be a charge for the permits .  Permit holders may only dispose of wastes at the Transfer Station that are generated within the Town of Wilton.

Section VII. Separation .

A.	The Selectmen may determine, based on recommendations  of the Advisory Committee and town management, the wastes which will be recycled.  Recyclable wastes may include newspapers, corrugated cardboard, plastics, tin, aluminum, clean mixed paper products ,
including white paper, colored paper, food packaging, etc., and glass bottles. In addition, various
other items such as metals, white goods, shingles, wood wastes, and leaf and yard wastes may be included.

B.	Wastes, including recyclable materials, shall be deposited in the appropriate location at the facility. The Selectmen, upon recommendation of the Advisory Committee and management, may also determine the manner in which wastes and recyclables shall be prepared for deposit at the facility.

Section VIII.  Fees for Failure to Separate Materials:

Non-separation ofrecyclable materials from regular waste materials creates additional disposal costs. The Selectmen may set fees, following a public hearing, for the deposition of wastes which contain unseparated designated recyclables.

Section IX.  User Fees.

The Selectmen may establish fees to be charged for the disposal of various items.  The Selectmen shall hold a public hearing on the fees prior to implementation.

Section X.  Collection of Fees.

1.	The Attendant shall collect any and all fees for waste disposal or recycling established
by the Selectmen pursuant to this Ordinance.

2.	The Attendant shall report weekly the amount of fees collected and deposit such fees with the Town Manager.

Section XI. Wastes Prohibited.

No commercial hauler, resident, property owner, or non-resident shall dispose of any
wastes at the Wilton Transfer Station that were collected outside of the town of Wilton .

Section XII. Enforcement.

The Attendant, Transfer Station Manager , Public Works Director or Town Manager shall have the authority to refuse the use of the facility to any person, corporation , or other user who does not conform to the provisions of this ordinance.
 

Section XIII. Penalties .

Any person or corporation convicted of violating any provision of this ordinance shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for each violation.

Section XIV. Variances and Waivers.

1.	Where the Board of Selectmen finds that extraordinary and unnecessary hardship may result from the strict application of the provisions of this ordinance, it may waive such provisions so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest served.

2.	In granting waivers, the Board of Selectmen shall require such conditions as will, in its judgement , substantially secure the objectives of this ordinance.

Section XV. Separability.

Ifany section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction,  such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision , and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.

Section XVI. Appeals.

An appeal may be taken within 30 days from the Board of Selectmen's decision by any party to Superior Court in accordance with Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.

Section XVII. Amendments.

This ordinance may be amended by a majority vote of Town Meeting.  Amendments may be initiated by a majority vote of the Board of Selectmen upon the recommendation  of the Advisory Committee or on petition of 10% of the votes cast in the last gubernatorial election in the Town.  The Board of Selectmen shall conduct a public hearing on any proposed amendment.

Section XVIII. Definitions.

In general , words and terms used in the Ordinance shall have their customary dictionary meaning.  More specifically, certain words and terms used herein are defined as follows:

1.	Commercial Hauler: Any user, either individual or company, which hauls
materials to the landfill site for others for a fee.

2.	Attendant and Transfer Station Manager: the Selectmen of the Town of Wilton, or the Town employees or agents authorized by said Selectmen, to act in their stead at the Transfer Station/Recycling Facility .

3.	Newspaper:  Clean dry new paper.
 
4.	Corrugated paper:  Clean, dry, flattened corrugated cardboard boxes and brown paper bags.

5.	Glass: Clean glass bottles, jars, jug , etc. Glass, in this instance, does not include
window glass, light bulbs, drinking glasses, porcelain items, mirrors, etc.

6.	White Goods:  Household appliances including, but not limited to, washing machines, clothes dryers, stoves, and refrigerators.

7.	Plastics:  Plastic containers which are further identified according to the industry standards.

8.	Tin:  Clean cans and other containers made of tin or steel.

9.	Aluminum:  Clean cans, pie plates, and other containers made of aluminum.

10.	Paper products:  clean mixed paper products, such as computer paper, stationery, copy paper, colored paper, food packaging, paper tubes, etc.






Effective on the date of adoption by the Town of Wilton

Enacted:	June 10, 2013



Signed	 

Diane Dunham, Town Clerk
 



,.,
 
11.	J'JLl'(ULU   uvr L    J ,J'   LVV;J
WILTON TOWN MEETING
 



TOWN OF WILTON, MAlNE STREET STANDARDS ORDINANCE

SECTION I. Statement of Purpose

The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the health, safety, and public welfure of the residents of Wilton through establishing minimwn  construction standards for streets.

SECTION II.  Authority, Administration, and Effective Date

A.	Authority:  This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to and consistent with Article Vlll-A of the State of Maine Constitution and Title 30-A, M.R.S.A. Section 3001.

B.	Administration:  This Ordinance shall be administered by the Planning Board.

C.	Effective Date:  The effective date of this Ordinance is its adoption at town meeting on  June 18, 2001.
Adoption of this Ordinance shall repeal the previously adopted Town of Wilton Road Standards Ordinance. This shall not prevent enforcement of the repealed Ordinance with respect to the time period in which it was in effect.

SECTION III.  Applicability

A.		New Construction:  This Ordinance shall apply to the construction of all new streets within the Town, whether public or private,  No street whether newly constructed or existing shall be accepted as a town way unless it meets the provisions of this Ordinance for public streets.

B.		Reconstruction: Reconstruction of a private street shall be consistent with Section VJ and Section VII only if it is to be accepted as a town way. When a street is reconstructed by or for the Town of Wilton the standards contained in Section VI and VII may be altered with approval of the Road Commissioner when it is found that it is not practical to comply with one or more of the standards. In making a determination ofnot  practical the Road Commissioner shall consider existing conditions, the impact oftbe quality of  the reconstruction ofnot complying with the standard or standards and the long term benefit in relation to additional  cost

C.		Higher Design and Construction Standard: Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to prevent the design and construction of streets that meet higher standards, use improved materials, or higher quality materials.

SECTION IV.  Application Procedures

Prior to the construction of any new street or the lengthening of an existing street, the applicant shall request to be placed on the Planning Board's agenda. The completed application form, required fees, and required plans and related information shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer, no less than fourteen (14) days prior to the meeting, who shall forward it to the Chairman of the Planning Board.

In addition, one (l) copy of the plan(s) and all accompanying information shall be mailed by the applicant to each Board ember and one (1) copy and all accompanying information shall be mailed by the applicant to the Code Enforcement Officer, Fire Department, and Road Commissioner, no less than fourteen (14) days prior to the meeting. Before granting final approval the Board shall solicit comments from the Code Enforcement Officer, Fire Department and Road Commissioner.

A.	Submission  Requirements

 
L	The name(s) of the applicant(s);
2.	The name(s) of the owner(s)
!
 


ord of the land upon which the proposed street is to be located;
 
A   TRUE   COPY:
 

A.r- n• e.n>d'" e/C·;I.-,
 
uc; i ., '7 (.)I)"
 
ATTEST:
 
··-'I···	.1
 

3.	A statement of any legal encumbrances of the land upon which the proposed street is to be located;

4.	The anticipated starting and completion dares of each major phase of street construction; and

5.	A statement indicating the nature and volume of traffic expressed in Average Daily Traffic expected to use the proposed street.

6.	Comments from the Code Enforcement Officer, Fire Department and Road Commissioner.

B.	Plans:  The plans and illustrations submitted as part of the application shall be prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor or Professional Engineer to include the following information.

1.	The scale of the plan.  (All streets and roadway plan and profile drawings shall be drawn to a scale
l 11  = 50' horizontal and 1" = 5' vertical;

2.	The direction of magnetic north;

3.	A plan profile showing existing grade, fmished grade, cross culvert in\'erts, and typical cross section view of the proposed street;

4.	The starting and ending point with relation to established roads, streets, or ways and any planned or anticipated future extensions of the streets. (All terminal points and the center line alignment shall be identified by survey stationing.);

5.	The roadway and roadway lilrjts with relation to existing buildings and established landmarks:

6.	Dimensions, both lineal and angular, necessary for locating boundaries and necessary for locating subdivisions,  lots, easements,  and building lines;

7.	The lots, if any, as laid out and numbered on said street showing the names of all owners of
abutting property,

8.		All natural waterways and watercourses in or contiguous to the proposed street that will be affected by the street;

9.		The kind, size, location, profile, and cross-section of all existing and proposed drainage·ways and strucrures and their relationship to existing natural waterways;

I 0.  A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan showing interim and fma] control provisions using Best Management Practices;

11.	Curve data for all horizontal and vertical curves shall be the center line radius. central angle, and beginning and end of curve points;

12.	All center line gradients shall be shown and expressed as a percent;

13.	All curve and property line radii of intersections;

14.	The limits and location of any proposed sidewalks and curbing;

15.	The location of all existing and proposed overhead and underground utilities to include, but not limited to, the following:  (Note:  When a location, in the case of any underground utility, is an approximate, it shall be noted on the plan as such. No underground utilities shall be located within the right of way unless approved by the Selectmen.)



2
I
 
..



a.	Storm drains;
b.	Telephone line poles or underground vaults;
c.	Cable (telecommunication)  lines	·
d.	Electrical power line poles or underground vaults;
e.	Street lights.

16.	The name(s) of each proposed new street.

17.	Lines or dots in the center line of the proposed street at intervals of every fifty (50) feet beginning
at the centerline  intersection  with the existing street.

C.	Submission Waivers:  Where the Board makes written findings of fact that there are special
circumstances of a particular application it may waive portions of the submission requirements, unless
otherwise indicated by this Ordinance, provided that the applicant has demonstrated that  the standards of this Ordinance have been or will be met, the public health, safety, and welfare are protected, and
provided that the waivers do not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the
Comprehensive Plan and  this Ordinance.

D.	Streets Names:  Streets names shal! be proposed to the Planning Board by the applicant and approved by the Town of Wilton. Streets that are continuations of existing streets shall be given the same name of the existing street. Names of new streets shall not duplicate nor bear the phonetic resemblance of the names of existing streets within the Town.  No street name shall be given the common name of a person. The developer shall reimburse the Municipality for the costs of installing street name, traffic safety, and control signs.  Street lighting shall be installed as approved by the Board of Selectmen.

E.	Application Fee: An application fee of $75.00 shall be paid to the Town of Wilton upon submission of an application. Inaddition to the application fee, the Planning Board may require the applicant to pay a revie¥.: fee to cover the costs associated with the review of the application and the inspection of the construction by a professional engineer and/or planner.  The Selectmen shall have the authority to review and revise the application fee. The application fee shall be waived if the street is being reviewed as an element of a subdivision  application.

F.	Application Review

!.		Complete Application:  Within thirty (30) days from the date ofreceipt by the Planning Board, the Board shall notify the applicant in writing either that the application is complete, or if incomplete, the specific additional material needed to make it complete.  Determination by the Board that the application is complete in no way commits or binds the Board as to the adequacy of the application to meet the requirements of this Ordinance.

2.	Application Approval:  The Board shall, within thirty (30) days ofa public hearing or within sixty
(60) days of having received the completed application or within such other time limit as may be mutually agreed to, deny or grant approval on such terms and conditions as it may deem advisable to satisfy this Ordinance and to preserve the public health, safety, and general welfare.  In all instances, the burden of proof shall be upon the applicant.  In issuing its decision, the Board shall make a written fmding of fact establishing that the application does or does not meet the provisions of this Ordinance.

3.	Public Hearing:  The Board may hold such public hearing within thirty (30) days of having notified the applicant in writing that a complete application has been received and shall cause notice of the date, time, and place of such hearing to be given to the applicant, all property owners abutting the proposed street, and published in a newspaper of general circulation in Wilton at least two (2)  times; the date of the first publication shall be at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing.





3
 

SECTION V.   Public Acceptance of Streets

The approval by the Planning Board of a proposed public street shall not be deemed to constitute or be  evidence of any acceptance by the Municipality  of the street.  Final acceptance of a proposed public street shall be by an affirmative vote at a town meeting. No street shall be accepted as a town way unless it meets the provisions of this Ordinance relating to public streets.

SECTION VI.  Street Design Standards

A.	The Board shall not approve any subdivision plan unless proposed streets are designed in accordance with the specifications contained in this Ordinance.

B.	These design standards shall be met by all streets and shall control the roadway, shoulders, curbs,
sidewalks, drainage systems, culverts, and other appurtenances.

C.	Streets shall be designed to discourage through traffic within a residential subdivision.

D.	The character, extent, width, and grade of all streets shall be considered in their relation to existing or planned  streets.

E.		\Vb.en a proposed street or the reconstruction of an existing street will pass a scenic view location as identifted in the Town of Wilton Comprehensive Plan, street design shall provide shoulders of suitable width or tum-outs to allow vehicles to safely le.ave the travelway at the scenic view location.

F.	Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow street (not meeting the width requirements of the standards for streets in this ordinance), or when the Comprehensive Plan indicates plans for realignment or widening of a street that would require use of some of the land in the subdivision, the plan shall indicate reserved areas for widening or realigning the street marked "Reserved for Street Realignment (Widening) Purposes." Land reserved for such purposes may not be included in computing lot area or setback requirements.

G.	Where a major subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, no residential lot may have vehicular access directly on to the arterial street. This requirement shall be noted on the plan and in the deeds of any lot with frontage on the arterial street.

H.	Any street serving 20 dwelling units or more shall have at least two street connections with existing public streets or streets on a subdivision plan for which performance guarantees have been filed and accepted. The Board may waive this requirement to allow for open space development.

I.	A privately-owned street shall not require pavement.

J.	Drainage easements for existing water courses or proposed drainage ways shall be provided at least 30 feet wide, conforming substantially with the lines of existing natural drainage.















4
 

K.	The following design standards apply according to street classification:

	
Description	
Collector	
Minor	
Privately Owned Street'	
Industrial/ Commercial	
Mobile
						Home
Park
	Minimum right-of-way
width'	60 feet	50 feet	50 feet	60 feet	23 feet
	
Minimum pavement
width/travelway width	24 feet	20 feet	20 feet (if paved)	30 feet	20 feet
	Minimum pavement radii
at intersections/travelway	25 feet	25 feet	25 feet (if
paved)	25 feet	NIA
						
Sidewalk width	5 feet	5 feet	NIA	8 feet	NIA
Minimum grade	.5 percent	.5 percent	.5 percent	
.5 percent	.5 percent
Maximum grade'	6 percent	12 percent	12 percent	5 percent	IO
percent
Minimum  centerline  radius	200 feet	150 feet	150 feet	800 feet	150 feet

Minimum tangent between curves of reverse alignment	200 feet	100 feet	100 feet	300 feet	100 feet	
Roadway crown	"/ft.	v.i"/ft.	!1.i"/ft.	"/ft.	114 11/ft.	
Minimum angle of street
intersections	90 degrees	90 degrees	90 degrees	90 degrees	90
degrees	
Maximum grade within 75
feet of intersection	2 percent	2 percent	2 percent	2 percent	2 percent	
MIDimum r-o-w radii at
intersections	10 feet	10 feet	10 feet	20 feet	10 feet	
Minimum width of shoulders (each side)	3 feet	2 feet	2 feet	5 feet	NIA	


1 Standards for Privately-owned streets in Open Space Subdivisions shall not be required to meet minimum right-of-way width or minimum pavement width/travel way width contained herein.

,A five(S) foot snow and utility easement may he required on each side of a fifty foot right of way.

3  Maximum street grade may equal 15 percent for a distance for not more than 200 feet in any 1,000 ofroad.

L.	The centerline of the roadway shall be the centerline of the right-of-way.

M.	Dead End Streets:  In addition to the design standards above, dead-end streets shall be constructed to provide a c_ircular tum-around, which shall have a min.imum inside diameter of 80 feet from outside edge of shoulder to outside edge of shoulder. The use of a hammer-head tum-around may be permitted as an alternative to a cul-de-sac tum-around.  In the case of a hammer-head tum-around, the width shall be 30 feet wide and 80 feet long/measured from the center line of the abutting street and shall be located at least 50 feet from the end of the travel way.  The Board may require the reservation ofa 20-foot easement in line with the street to provide continuation of pedestrian traffic  or utilities to the next street


5
 

The Board may also require the reservation of a 60-foot easement in line with the street to provide
continuation of the street where future subdivision is possible.

N.	Grades, Intersections, and Sight Distances

l.		Grades of all streets shall conform in general to the terrain so that cut and fill are minimized while maintaining the grade standards above.

2.	All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves to provide for the minimum sight distances below.

3.		Where new street intersections or driveway curb-cuts are proposed, sight distances, as measured along the  street  onto which  traffic will be  turning,  shall be based  upon  the posted  speed  limit  and conform  to the table below.

Posted Speed Limit (MPH)  25	30	35	40	45	50	55
Sight Distance 	250	300	350	400	450	500	550

Where necessary, comer lots shall be cleared of all growth and sight obstructions including ground
excavation to achieve the required visibility.

4.	Cross (four-cornered) street intersections shall be avoided insofar as possible except as shown on
the Comprehensive Plan or at other important traffic intersections. A minimum distance of 125 feet shall be maintained between the centerlines of minor streets and 200 feet between collectors or a collector  and minor  street.

O.	Sidewalks:  Where the Planning Board requires the installation of sidewalks, they shall meet these
minimum requirements.

I.	Bituminous Sidewalks

a.	The gravel aggregate sub-base course shall be no less than 305mm (12 inches) thick after
compaction.

b.	The crushed aggregate base course shall be no less than 5Imm (2 inches) thick after
compaction.

c.	The hot bituminous pavement surface course shall be no less than 5!mm (2 inches) after
compaction.

2.	Portland Cement Concrete Sidewalks

a.	The sand base shall be not less than 6 inches thick after compaction.

b.	The Portland Cement concrete shall be reinforced with 6 inch square, number 10 wire mesh and shall be no less than 4 inches thick.

P.	Driveway Entrances:

Entrances shall comply with the provisions of Article 5.20 of the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Wilton







6
 
..	"   .,..
 



Q.	Common  Driveways:

I.	Common driveways may serve tow single-family dwelling units.   The Code Enforcement Officer shall review and approve all plans for common driveways.

2.	The following design and construction standards shall apply to common driveways.
 

 
Minimum travel width
Minimum angle of street intersections Maximum grade with 30 feet of intersections
 
12 feet
75 degrees
2%
 

3.	Erosion and Sedimentation Control:  Adequate provisions shall be undertaken to.minimize  erosion and sedimentation.

4.	Common driveway entrances shall comply with Section N.3 above to the greatest extent practical as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer.

R. Street Openings:

No street openings for underground utilities shall be permitted for a period of five (5) years from the date a public street is paved with a hot bituminous asphalt, except in the case of an emergency as determined by the Road Commissioner.

S.	Manholes:

Manholes shall be not less than thirty by thirty (30x30) inches and be of concrete construction. Covers shall be level with the finished grade.

T.	Culverts:

Culverts shall be of aluminized Type II steel construction; have a minimum gauge of 16, and a minimum diameter of 15 inches; or Shall be of polyethylene double wall (n-12) corrugated outside with
smooth interior and a minimum diameter of 12 inches. All culverts shall have a minimum length of 30 feet for all uses or for any parcel of land on which a new structure will be built; shall be installed so as not to interfere with the existing road drainage; and shall be covered with an amount of gravel equal to or exceeding the diameter of the installed culvert. Culverts shall be sized based on the 25 year storm.
Amended 6/13/2005



7
 

Section VII. Street Construction Standards

A.	Minimum thic!mess of material after compaction:

 
Collector
 
Minor	Privately      Industrial       Mobile Owned	Commercial   Home Street		Parks
 

Aggregate  Sub-base Course	•  24"	18"	18"	24"	18" (max.  sized  stone  6")

 
Crushed Aggregate Base Coi.lrse	76mm
 
76mm
 
76mm	IOl.4 mm	76mm
 
(3")	(3")	(3")	(4")	(3")

Hot Bituminous Pavement
Total Thickness	89mm	89mm	NA	89mm	NA
(3 1/2")	(3 1/2")	(3 1/2")

Surface Course	38mm	38mm	NA	3Bmm	NA
(I 1/2")	(I 112")	(I 1/2")

Base Course	5lrnm	Slmm	NA	Simm	NA
(2")	(2")	(2")



B.	Preparation

1.	Before any clearing has started on the right-of-way, the centerline and cut and fill lines of the new street shall be staked or flagged at 50-foot intervals.

2.	Before grading is started, the entire right-of-way width necessary for travelway, shoulders, sidewalks, drainageways, and utilities shall be cleared of all stumps, roots, brush, and other objectionable material. All shallow ledge, large boulders, and tree stumps shall be removed from the travelway, shoulders, sidewalks, and drainageways.

3.	All organic materials shall be removed to a depth of 2 feet below the subgrade of the roadway.
Rocks and boulders shall also be removed to a depth of2 feet below the subgrade of the roadway. On soils which have been identified as not suitable for roadways,  the subsoil shall be removed from the street site to a depth of two feet below the subgrade and replaced with material meeting the specifications for gravel aggregate sub-base in Section VII. C. below.

4.	Side slopes shall be no steeper than a slope of 3 feet horizontal to l foot  vertical and shall be graded, limed, fertilized, and seeded according to the specifications of the erosion and sedimentation control plan.

C.	Bases and Pavement

1.	Bases

a.	The Aggregate Sub-base Course shall be sand or gravel of hard durable particles free from vegetative matter, lumps, or balls of clay and other deleterious substances meeting the MDOT Standard Specification [703.06(b) Type DJ. Should the amount of 4"' stones in the gravel not allow for fme grading a 3" layer of crushed base gravel meeting the MDOT Standard Specification [703.06(a) Type A] shall be required.
 

2.	Pavement Joints:  Vlhere pavement joins an existing pavement, the existing pavement shall be cut along a smooth line and form a neat, even, vertical joint.

3.	Curbs and Gutters

a.	Street curbs and gutters shall be installed as required by the Board.

b.	Curbs shall be vertical except when sloped curbs are specifica!ly a!Iowed by the Board.

4.	Pavements

a.	Pavement shall be MDOT HMA (Hot Mix Pavement)as specified in Section 401 of the latest revisions of the Maine Department of Transportation, Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges, or,

b.	The base layer of pavement shall be the MDOT specifications for plant mix grade B with an aggregate size no more than 3/4 inch maximum and the surface layer of pavement sha!I meet the MDOT specifications for !2.5mm HMA with an aggregate size no more than \!,-inch maximum.

c.	The Road commissioner shall have the discretion to determine the proper mix.

Section VIII. Additional Improvements and Requirements

A.	Erosion Control: The procedures outlined in the erosion and sedimentation control plan sha!I be
implemented during the site preparation, construction, and clean-up stages.

B.	Cleanup:  Following street construction, the developer or contractor shall conduct a thorough clean-up of stumps and other debris from the entire street right-of-way.  If on-site disposal  of the stumps and debris  is proposed, the site shall be indicated on the Plan and be suitably covered with fill and topsoil, limed, fertilized, and seeded.

C.	All underground utilities, mcluding those intended to service individual lots, shall be installed prior to paving.  Longitudinal runs of water and sewer mains shall be laid outside the street bed and clear of any present or designated sidewalks. Utility poles shall be so placed that any present or designated sidewalk may be contained within the boundaries of the street without obstruction by poles or appurtenances.

D.	Monuments:  Monuments shall be set at all street intersections and points of curvature, but no further than 750 feet apart along street lines without curves or intersections or as required by the Board of Selectmen. Monuments shall be of granite or concrete not less than four (4) inches square in width or iron reinforcement rods at least 5/8 inches across the top and at least four (4) feet in the ground.

SECTION IX.   Certification of Construction

Upon completion of street construction and prior to a vote by the Municipal Officers to submit a proposed public way to the legislative body, a written certification signed by a professional engineer registered in the State of Maine shall be submitted to the Municipal Officers at the expense of the applicant certifying that the proposed way meets or exceeds the design and construction requirements of these regulations.  "As built" plans sha!I be submitted to the Municipal Officers.
 

SECTION X.   Performance Guarantees

A.	Types of Guarantees:   With submittal of the application for a stteet approval, the applicant shall provide one of the following performance guarantees for an amount adequate to cover the total construction costs taking into account the tirne-sp.an of the construction schedule and the inflation rate for construction
costs.

!.	A certified check payable to the Town or a savings account or certificate of deposit naming the
Town as owner for the establishment of an escrow account; or

2.	A performance bond payable to the Town issued by a surety company approved by the Municipal Officers; or

3.	An irrevocable letter of credit, approved by the Municipal Officers, from a financial institution establishing funding for the construction from which the Town may draw if construction is inadequate; or

4.	An offer of conditional approval limiting the number of units built or lots sold until all required
improvements have been constructed.

The conditions and amount of performance guarantee shall be determined by the Board with the advice of the Road Commissioner and Municipal Officers.

B.	Contents of Guarantee:  The performance guarantee shall contain a construction schedule, cost estimates for each major phase of construction taldng into account inflation, provisions for inspections of each phase of construction, provisions for the release of part or all of the performance guarantee to the developer, and a date after which the developer will be in default, and the Town shall have access to the funds to finish construction and/or stabilize as deemed necessary.

C.	Release of Guarantee: Prior to the release of any part of the performance guarantee, the Board shall determine to its satisfaction that the proposed improvements meet or exceed the design and construction requirements for that portion of the improvements for which the release is requested.

D.	Default: If,upon inspection, the inspector :fmds that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications filed as part of the application, the inspector who shall inform the Code Enforcement Officer shall so report in writing to the Municipal Officers, the Board, and the subdivider or builder.  The Municipal Officers shall take any steps necessary to preserve the Town's rights.

E.	The Road Commissioner may in review of plans and accompanying information determine that the complexity of the construction the services of a professional engineer to inspect construction.

F.	Privately-Owned Roads: Where streets are to remain privately-owned roads, the following words shall appear on the recorded plan.

"All roads shall remain private roads to be maintained by the developer or the lot owners and shall not be accepted or maintained by the Town."

Privately owned roads are not subject to inspection by the Town during construction but must comply with the standards contained in Section VT and Section VIL
 
 

..'



SECTION XI.   Inspection

A.	Notification of Construction:  At least five (5) days prior to commencing street construction or alteration ofroads, the applicant shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer in writing of the time when he proposes to commence construction so that the municipal officers can cause inspection to be made to assure that all municipal specifications and requirements shall be met during the construction.

B.	Noncompliance With Plan:  If it is found upon inspection that the improvements are not being or have not been constructed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications, the inspector shall so report to the Municipal Officers and Planning Board.  The Municipal Officers shall then notify the applicant, and, if necessary, the bonding company, and take all necessary steps to preserve the municipality's rights under the guarantee, security, or bond.

C.	Modification During Construction:  If at any time before or during the construction of the street, it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the appointed inspector that unforeseen conditions make it necessary
or preferable to modify the location or design of the street, the appointed inspector may, upon approval of the Board, authorize modifications provided these modifications are within the spirit and intent of the Board's approval.  The appointed inspector shall issue any authorization under this section in writing and shall transmit a copy of such authorization to the Board at its next regular meeting.

D.	Inspection Fee:  The Board may assess the applicant a fee to cover the costs of construction inspection. SECTION XII.     Waivers
A.	Where the Board makes written findings of fact that the applicant will suffer an undue economic or other
hardship ifthe requirements of this Ordinance are strictly applied, it may waive the necessity for strict compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance in order to provide relief from the hardship in question and to permit a more practical and economical development provided, however, that the public health, safety, and welfare will not be compromised and further provided that the waivers in question will not have the intent of nullifying the effect of this Ordinance.

B.	In granting waivers to any provision of this Ordinance in accordance with Section XII.A., the Board shall require such conditions as will assure.that the objectives of this Ordinance are met.

SECTION XIII.  Separability

If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction,  such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.

SECTION XIV.   Appeals

An appeal may be taken within 30 days from the Board's decision on the application, by any party to the Board of Appeals.

SECTION XV.   Amendments

A.	Initiation of Amendments:  An amendment to this Ordinance may be initiated by:

I.	The Planning Board, provided a majority of the Board has so voted;

2.	Request of the Municipal Officers; or





11
 
,,..





3.	Written petition of a number of voters equal to at least 10 percent of the number of votes cast in the municipality at the last gubernatorial election.

B.	The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment. Notification of the hearing shall be posted and advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing.

C.	Adoption of Amendment:  An amendment of this Ordinance shall be adopted by a majority vote of the Town Meeting.

SECTION XVI.  Definitions

Inthis Ordinance, the following terms have the following meanings unless a contrary meaning is required by the context or is specifically prescribed.  Terms not defined shall have their customary dictionary meaning.

Arterial Street: A major thoroughfare which serves as a major traffic way for travel between and through the municipality, such as US Route 2 East and West, Weld Road, Depot Street, US Route 4, Route 133.

Average Daily Traffic· The average number of vehicles per day that travel over a specific section of a street or
street.

Collector Street: A street servicing at least twenty lots or dwelling units, or street which serves as feeder to arterial streets and collector of traffic from minor streets.

Common Driveway:  A vehicle access way serving two dwelling units

Existing Public Street: Streets which are maintained by the Town of Wilton and/or the State of Maine.

Industrial or Commercial Street:  A street servicing industrial or commercial uses. Inspector: Road Commissioner,  Road Foreman,  or Professional Engineer.
Major Subdivision: A subdivisions with five or more lots or units or any subdivision with a proposed road. Minor Street: A street servicing less than twenty lots or dwelling units.
Minor Subdivision- A subdivision with less than five lots or units.

Privately Owned Street: A street which is not intended to be dedicated as a townway serving three (3) or more dwelling units.

Reconstructed:  Reconstructed means the rebuilding of a street or section of a street to improve its serviceability or the rebuilding, including new sub base on more than half the project length, base, pavement, shoulders and ditched of a street or section of a street.

Repair:  Repair means to take necessary action to :fix normal damage or storm damage.
Reserve Frontage Street: A street which provides residential frontage other than that on a through traffic street. Street: Public and private ways such as alleys, avenues, highways, roads and other rights-of-way, as well as
areas on a subdivision plans designated  as rights-of-ways for vehicular access, other than driveways, farm     · roads  or  logging  roads.
 


,' .
 
...,
 
,.	;1



Water Course:  Any natural or artificial stream, river, brook, ditch, culvert or drain in which \\'ater flows in a
definite direction or course, either continuously  or intermittently.





















JUNE 16, 2005 WILTON, MAINE

A   TRUE COP¥Y
ATTEST:






















STREET.ORD.615101
 
,\'	'•.
 
TOWN OF WILTON SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
June 16, 2003, Amended June 19,2006, Amended June 4, 2012

ARTICLE I. PURPOSES
The purposes of this Ordinance are to assure the comfort, convenience, safety, health and welfare of the people of the Town of Wilton, to protect the environment and to promote the development of an economically sound and stable community. To this end, in approving subdivisions within the Town of Wilton, Maine, the Planning Board shall consider the following criteria and before granting approval shall make findings of fact that the provisions of this Ordinance have been met and that the proposed subdivision will meet the requirements set forth in the State Subdivision Law.

ARTICLE II. AUTHORITY, ADMINISTRATION, EFFECTIVE DATE REPEAL OF EXISTING ORDINANCE

2.1	Authority
A.	This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to Home Rule Powers as provided for in Article VIII-A of the Maine Constitution and Title 30-A, M.R.S.A. Section 3001.
B.	These standards have been prepared in accordance with the provisions of Title 30-A MRSA Section 4403.
C.	These standards shall be known and may be cited as "Subdivision Ordinance of the Town of Wilton, Maine."

2.2	Administration
A.	The Planning Board of the Town of Wilton, hereinafter called the Board, shall administer these standards.
B.	The provisions of these standards shall pertain to all land proposed for subdivision, as defined by this Ordinance, within the Town of Wilton.

2.3	Effective Date
The effective date of this Ordinance is	.

2.4	Repeal of Existing Subdivision Ordinance
Adoption of this Ordinance shall repeal any and all previous subdivision ordinances and regulations. This shall not prevent the enforcement of repealed ordinances or regulations with respect to the time periods in which they were in effect.

2.5	Conflict with Other Ordinances
A. This Ordinance shall not be construed to repeal any existing bylaws or ordinances, other than those specifically identified, or to impair the provisions of private restrictions placed upon property, provided, however, that where this Ordinance imposes greater restrictions, its provisions shall control.

2.6	Validity and Severability
 
A. Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by any court to be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision.

ARTICLE III. ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE

3.1	In order to establish an orderly, equitable and expeditious procedure for reviewing subdivisions and to avoid unnecessary delays in processing applications for subdivision review, the board shall prepare a written agenda for each regularly scheduled meeting. The agenda shall be prepared no less than one week in advance of the meeting, distributed to the Board members and any applicants appearing on the agenda, and posted at the municipal offices. Applicants shall request to be placed on the boards agenda at least seven days in advance of a regularly scheduled meeting be contacting the code enforcement officer. Applicants who attend a meeting but who are not on the Boards agenda may be heard only after all agenda items have been completed, and then only if a majority of the Board so votes. However, the Board shall take no action on any application not appearing on the Boards written agenda.

3.2	Joint Meetings. If any portion of the proposed subdivision crosses the boundary of an adjacent municipality or area under the jurisdiction of the Land Use Regulation Commission, the Board shall meet jointly with that municipality's planning board or the Land Use Regulation Commission to discuss the application.

ARTICLE IV. PREAPPLICATION FOR SUBDIVISIONS

4.1	Submission
The Pre-application Sketch Plan shall show, in simple sketch form, the proposed layout of streets, lots, and other features in relation to existing conditions. The sketch plan, which may be a free-hand penciled sketch, should be supplemented with general information to describe or outline the existing conditions of the site and the proposed development. It is recommended that the sketch plan be superimposed on or accompanied by a copy of the assessor's map(s) of the property proposed for subdivision. The sketch plan shall be accompanied by a copy of a portion of the
U.S.G.S. topographic map of the area showing the outline of the proposed subdivision, unless the proposed subdivision is less than ten acres in size.

4.2	Contour Interval and On-Site Inspection
Within thirty days of the Pre-application meeting, the Board shall hold an onsite inspection of the property and inform the applicant in writing of the required contour interval on the Preliminary Plan. The applicant shall place “flagging” at the center line of any proposed streets and at the approximate intersections of the street center lines and lot corners, prior to the onsite inspection. The Board shall not conduct on site  inspections when there is more than one foot of snow on the ground.

4.3	Ownership Interest
The applicant shall furnish to the Board written evidence showing his interest (option, contract for sale, etc.) in the property to be subdivided.
 

4.4	Rights not Vested.
The pre-application meeting, the submittal or review of the sketch plan or the on-site inspection shall not be considered the initiation of the review process for the purposes of bringing the plan under the protection of Title 1 M.R.S.A., 302.

4.5	Establishment of File.
Following the pre-application meeting the Board shall establish a file for the proposed subdivision. All correspondence and submissions regarding the pre-application shall be maintained in the file.

ARTICLE V. REPEALED


ARTICLE VI. PRELIMINARY PLAN FOR SUBDIVISION

6.1	Procedure

A.	Within six months after the on-site inspection by the Board, the applicant shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer an application for approval of a Preliminary Plan at least seven (7) days prior to a scheduled meeting of the Board. Failure to submit an application within six months of the on-site inspection shall require resubmission of the Sketch Plan to the Board. The Preliminary Plan should approximate the layout shown  on the Sketch Plan and recommendations made by the Board. The Board shall provide the applicant with a dated receipt of a Preliminary Plan application at the Board meeting where the Preliminary Plan application is first presented and heard by the Board.

B.	All applications for final plan approval for a Subdivision shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee of $25 per lot or dwelling unit, payable by check to the municipality. In addition, the applicant shall pay a fee of $50 per lot or dwelling unit to be deposited in a special account designated for that subdivision application, to be used by the Board for hiring independent consulting services to review the application, if necessary. If the balance in the special account is drawn down by
75%, the Board shall notify the applicant, and require that an additional $25 per lot or dwelling unit be deposited by the applicant. The Board shall continue to notify the applicant and require an additional $25 per lot or dwelling unit be deposited as necessary whenever the balance of the account is drawn down by 75% of the original deposit. Any balance in the account remaining after a decision on the final application by the Board shall be returned to the applicant. An additional fee may be required to cover the cost of advertising for a public hearing.

C.	The applicant, or the applicant’s duly authorized representative, shall attend the meeting of the Board to present the final plan. Failure to attend the meeting to present the final plan shall result in a delay of the Boards receipt of the plan until the next meeting which the applicant attends.
 
D.	Upon receipt of an application for preliminary plan approval of a subdivision, the Board shall notify in writing all owners of abutting property to the proposed subdivision.

E.	Within thirty (30) days of the Board issuing a receipt of a Preliminary Plan application form and fee, the Board shall notify the applicant in writing whether or not the  application is complete, and what, if any, additional submissions are required for a complete application.

F.	The Board shall hold a public hearing on the preliminary plan application within thirty
(30) of receipt of a complete application, and shall publish notice of the date, time and place of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least two times, the date of the first publication to be at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to all abutters of the proposed subdivision seven (7) days prior to the hearing by the Town of Wilton.

G.	The Board shall, within sixty days of a public hearing, or within another time limit as may be otherwise mutually agreed upon by the Board and the applicant, make findings of fact on the application, and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the preliminary plan. The Board shall specify in writing its findings of facts and reasons for any conditions or denial.

H.	When granting approval to a preliminary plan, the Board shall state the conditions of such approval, if any, with respect to:

1.	The specific changes which it will require in the Final Plan;

2.	The character and extent of the required improvements for which waivers may have been requested and which, in the Board's opinion, may be waived without jeopardy to the public health, safety, and general welfare; and

3.	The amount and type of all performance guarantees which it will require as prerequisite to the approval of the Final Plan.

I. Approval of a preliminary plan shall not constitute approval of the Final Plan or intent to approve the final plan, but rather it shall be deemed an expression of approval of the design of the preliminary plan as a guide to the preparation of the final plan.
The final plan shall be submitted for approval of the Board upon fulfillment of the requirements of this Ordinance and the conditions of preliminary approval, if any. Prior to the approval of the Final Plan, as a result of the further study of
the proposed subdivision or as a result of additional information received, the Board  may require additional changes deemed necessary or other conditions to be met so that the final plan will satisfies all of the approval criteria set forth in this
Ordinance or in 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 4404 for subdivision approval.
 
6.2	Submissions

A.	Location Map: The preliminary plan shall be accompanied by a location map adequately showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to the adjacent properties. This will allow the Board
to locate the subdivision within the municipality. The location map shall show:

1.	Locations and names of existing and proposed streets.

2.	Boundaries and designations of any zoning districts.

3.	An outline of the proposed subdivision and any remaining portion of the owner's property if the preliminary plan submitted cover only a portion of the owner's entire contiguous holding.
B.	Preliminary Plan: The Preliminary Plan shall be submitted in four copies of one or more maps or drawings which may be printed or reproduced on paper, with all dimensions shown in feet or decimals of a foot. The preliminary plan shall be drawn to a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch. The Board may allow plans for subdivision containing more than 100 acres to be drawn at a scale of not more than 200 feet to the inch provided all necessary detail can easily be read. In addition, one copy of the   plan(s) which may be reduced to a size of 8 ½ by 11 inches, and all accompanying information shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer so that copies can be mailed by the Code Enforcement Officer to each Board member. Upon the finding of a complete application the applicant shall provide the Code Enforcement Officer with copies of the reduced size plan to be provided to the Fire Department, Police Department, Rescue Chief, Road Commissioner, Sewer and Water Departments, Public Works Department and Superintendent of Schools for their comments and/or suggestions. The following information shall either be shown on the Preliminary Plan or accompany the application for preliminary approval:

1.	Proposed name of the subdivision or identifying title and the name of the municipality, in which it is located, plus the tax assessor's map and lot numbers.

2.	An actual field survey of the boundary lines of the tract, giving complete descriptive data by bearings and distances, made and certified by a licensed land surveyor. The corners of the tract shall be located on the ground and marked by monuments. The plan shall indicate the type of monument set or found at each lot corner.

3.	A copy of the deed from which the survey was based and proof of right, title or interest. A copy of all covenants or deed restrictions, easements, rights-of-way, or other encumbrances currently affecting the property.

4.	A copy of any proposed deed restrictions, covenants or agreements intended to cover all or part of the lots in the subdivision.
 
5.	Indication of the type of sewage disposal to be used in the subdivision.

a.	When sewage disposal is to be accomplished by subsurface sewage disposal systems, test pit analyses, prepared by a licensed site evaluator and in compliance the Maine Subsurface Waste Water Disposal Rules shall be provided. A map showing the location of all test pits dug on the site shall be submitted.

b.	When sewage disposal is to be accomplished by connection to the Town of Wilton sewer system, a written statement from the Sewer Department stating it has the capacity to collect the wastewater shall be provided.

c.	A hydrogeologic assessment prepared by a Certified Geologist or Registered Professional Engineer, experienced in hydrogeology, when the subdivision is not served by public sewer and any part of the subdivision is located over a sand and gravel   aquifer identified as a Significant Sand and Gravel Aquifer by the Maine Geological Survey.

6.	Indication of the type of water supply system(s) to be used in the subdivision.

a.	When water is to be supplied by private wells, evidence of adequate ground water supply and quality shall be submitted by a well driller or a hydrogeologist familiar with the area.

b.	When water is to be supplied by public water supply, a written statement from the Water Department Superintendent shall be submitted indicating there is adequate supply and pressure for the subdivision and that the department approves the plans for extensions where necessary. Where the department’s supply line is to be extended, a written statement from the fire chief, stating approval of the location of fire hydrants if any, and a written statement from the water department superintendent approving the design of the extension shall be submitted.

7.	The date the plan was prepared, magnetic north point, graphic map scale, names and addresses of the record owner, sub divider, and individual or company who prepared the plan. The plan(s) shall be stamped or sealed by a professional engineer, surveyor or planner, or all of them, as the case may be.

8.	A copy of that portion of the county soil survey covering the subdivision along with  soil descriptions and interpretations. When the county soil survey shows soils which are generally unsuitable for the uses proposed, the Board may require the submission of a report by a registered soil scientist indicating the suitability of soil conditions for those uses.

9.	Contour lines at the interval specified by the Planning Board, showing elevations in relation to mean sea level.
 
10.	If any portion of the subdivision is in a flood-prone area, the boundaries of any flood hazard areas and the 100-year flood elevation shall be delineated on the plan.

11.	A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan which employs the Best Management Practices as contained in the Maine Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Construction.

12.	A plan for the disposal of surface waters prepared by a qualified professional knowledgeable in surface drainage.

13.	The location of any fresh water wetlands.

14.	The location of river, stream or brook within or abutting the proposed subdivision.

15.	The location and nature of significant wildlife habitat identified by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife.

16.	Any portion of the subdivision which is located within the watershed of a lake or pond shall be identified.

17.	If the proposed subdivision is in the direct watershed of a great pond a phosphorous control plan is needed, as described in section 10.9.

18.	The location of any zoning districts affecting the subdivision.

19.	The location of known archaeological resources.

20.	Identification of documented rare and endangered species identified by the state or federal governments and measures to protect them.

21.	The location of documented historic buildings and sites on or adjacent to the site and measures, which will be taken to minimize impacts upon the buildings and sites.

22.	The location of scenic sites or views as identified in the Town of Wilton Comprehensive Plan.

23.	Statement of the applicant’s technical and financial capacity to carry out the project as proposed.

24.	The number of acres within the proposed subdivision, location of property lines, existing buildings, watercourses, vegetative cover type, and other essential existing physical features shall be shown on the plan.

25.	The location and size of existing and proposed sewers, water mains, culverts, and drainage way on or adjacent to the property to be subdivided.
 
26.	The location, names and present widths of existing and proposed streets, highways, easements, building lines, parks and other open spaces on or adjacent to the subdivision.

27.	The proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions and lot areas.

28.	All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and the conditions of such dedication.

29.	The location of any open space to be preserved and a description of proposed ownership, improvement and management.

30.	A traffic impact analysis prepared by a Professional Engineer when required by the Board.

31.	The names and addresses of owners of record of adjacent property, including any property directly across an existing public street from the subdivision.

ARTICLE VII. FINAL PLAN FOR SUBDIVISION

7.1	Procedure

A.	The applicant shall, within 12 months after the approval of the preliminary plan, file with the Code Enforcement Officer an application for approval of the final plan. If the application for the final plan is not submitted within 12 months after preliminary plan approval, the Board may refuse without prejudice to act on the final plan, and require resubmission of the preliminary plan. The final plan shall approximate the layout shown on the preliminary plan, plus recommendations made by the Board. The Board shall provide the applicant with a dated receipt of a final plan application at the Board meeting where the final plan application is first presented and heard by the Board.

B.	The applicant, or the applicant’s authorized representative, shall attend the meeting of the Board to present the final plan. Failure to attend the meeting to present the final plan shall result in a delay of the boards’ receipt of the plan until the next meeting which the applicant attends.

C.	Within thirty (30) days of the Board issuing a dated receipt of a Final Plan application form, the Board shall notify the applicant in writing as to whether or not the application is complete, and what, if any, additional submissions are required for a complete application.

D.	The Board shall hold a hearing within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete application, and shall publish notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least two times, the date of   the first publication to be at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing and the notice of
the hearing shall be posted in at least three prominent places at least seven days prior
 
to the hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to all abutters of the proposed subdivision seven (7) days prior to the hearing by the Town of Wilton.

E.	Before the Board grants approval of the final plan, the applicant shall meet the performance guarantee requirements contained in Article XII.

F.	Within sixty days from the public hearing the Board shall make findings of fact, and conclusions relative to the standards contained in Title 30-A M.R.S.A. §4404 and in this Ordinance. If the Board finds that all standards of the Statute and this
Ordinance have been met, they shall approve the final plan. If the Board finds that any  of the standards of the Statute and this Ordinance have not been met, the Board shall either deny the application or approve the application with conditions to ensure all of the standards will be met by the subdivision. The reasons for any conditions shall be stated in the records of the Board.

7.2	Submissions

A.	The Final Plan shall consist of two reproducible, stable-based transparent originals embossed with the seal of the professional who prepared the plan. One will be recorded at the Registry of Deeds, the other will be filed at the Municipal Office and four copies of one or more maps or drawings drawn to a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch shall be provided to the Board. Plans for subdivisions containing more than 100 acres may be drawn at a scale of not more than 200 feet to the inch provided all necessary detail can easily be read. Plans shall be no larger than 24 by 36 inches in size, and shall have a margin of one half inch along all sides. Space shall be provided for endorsement by the Board. Four copies of all information accompanying the plan shall be submitted.  In addition, one copy of the plan(s) which may be reduced to a size of 8 ½ by 11 inches, and all accompanying information shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer  so that copies can be mailed by the Code Enforcement Officer to each Board member. Upon the finding of a complete application the applicant shall provide the Code Enforcement Officer with copies of the reduced size plan to be provided to the Fire Department, Police Department, Rescue Chief, Road Commissioner, Sewer and Water Departments, Public Works Department and Superintendent of Schools for their comments and/or suggestions.

B.	The application for approval of the Final Plan shall include the following information.

1.	Proposed name of the subdivision or identifying title and the name of the municipality in which it is located, along with the assessor's map and not numbers.

2.	An actual field survey of the boundary lines of the tract, giving complete descriptive data by bearings and distances, and made and certified by a licensed land surveyor. The corners of the tract shall be located on the ground and marked by monuments. The plan shall indicate the type of monument set or found at each lot corner.
 
3.	The number of acres within the proposed subdivision, location of property lines, existing buildings, watercourses, vegetative cover type, and other essential existing physical features shall be shown on the plan.

4.	A copy of any proposed deed restrictions, covenants or agreements intended to cover all or part of the lots in the subdivision.

5.	Indication of the type of sewage disposal to be used in the subdivision. When sewage disposal is to be accomplished by connection to the public sewer system, a written statement from the Sewer Department indicating the Department has reviewed and approved the sewage design shall be submitted.

6.	Indication of the type of water supply system(s) to be used in the subdivision.
a.	When water is to be supplied by the Town of Wilton, a written statement from the Water Department shall be submitted indicating the Department has reviewed and approved the water system design.

7.	The date the plan was prepared, magnetic and true north point, graphic map scale, names and addresses of the record owner, sub divider, and individual or company who prepared the plan. The plan(s) shall be stamped or sealed by a professional engineer, surveyor, or planner, or all of them, as the case may be.

8.	The location of any zoning boundaries affecting the subdivision.

9.	The location and size of existing and proposed sewers, water mains, culverts, and drainage ways on or adjacent to the property to be subdivided.

10.	The location, names and present widths of existing and proposed streets, highways, easements, building lines, parks and other open spaces in the subdivision. The plan shall contain sufficient data to allow the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line, and boundary line to be readily determined and be reproduced upon the ground. These lines shall be tied to reference points previously established.

11.	All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and the conditions of such dedication. Written offers of cession to the municipality of all public open spaces shown on the plan, and copies of agreements or other documents showing the manner in  which open spaces to be retained by the developer or lot owners are to be maintained shall be submitted. If open space or other land is to be offered to the municipality,  written evidence that the Municipal Officers are satisfied with the legal sufficiency of the written offer of cession shall be included.

12.	If any portion of the subdivision is in a flood-prone area, the boundaries of any flood hazard areas and the 100-year flood elevation shall be delineated on the plan.
 
13.	A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan which employs the Best Management Practices as contained in the Maine Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Construction.

14.	A plan for the disposal of surface waters prepared by a qualified professional knowledgeable in surface drainage.

15.	If the proposed subdivision is in the direct watershed of a great pond a phosphorous control plan is needed.

ARTICLE XIII FINAL APPROVAL AND FILING

A.	Upon findings of fact and determination that all standards in Title 30-A, M.R.S.A.
§4404, and this Ordinance have been met, and upon voting to approve the subdivision, the Board shall sign the final plan. The Board shall specify in writing its findings of
facts and reasons for any conditions or denial. One copy of the signed plan shall be retained by the Board as part of its permanent records. One copy of the signed plan shall be forwarded to the tax assessor. Any subdivision not recorded in the Registry of Deeds by the sub divider within ninety days of the date upon which the plan is approved and signed by the Board shall become null and void.

B.	At the time the Board grants final plan approval, it may permit the plan to be divided into two or more sections subject to any conditions the Board deems necessary in order to insure the orderly development of the plan.

C.	No change, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be made in any final plan after approval has been given by the Board and endorsed in writing on the plan, unless the revised final Plan is first submitted and the Board approves any modifications, except in accordance with Article 8.1.C. The Board shall make findings that the revised plan meets the standards of Title 30-A, M.R.S.A.§4404, and this Ordinance. In the event that a plan is recorded without complying with this requirement, it shall be considered
null and void, and the Board shall institute proceedings to have the plan stricken from the records of the Registry of Deeds.

D.	The approval by the Board of a subdivision plan shall not be deemed to constitute or be evidence of any acceptance by the municipality of any street, easement, or other open space shown on such plan. When a park, playground, or other recreation area  shall have been shown on the plan to be dedicated to the municipality, approval of the plan shall not constitute an acceptance by the municipality of such areas. The Board shall require the plan to contain appropriate notes to this effect. The Board may also require the filing of a written agreement between the applicant and the municipal officers covering future deed and title, dedication, and provision for the cost of grading, development, equipment, and maintenance of any such dedicated area.

E.	Failure to commence substantial construction of the necessary improvements in the subdivision within two years of the date of approval and signing of the plan shall render
 
the plan null and void. Upon determining that a subdivision's approval has expired under this paragraph, the Board shall have a notice placed in the Registry of Deeds to that effect.

ARTICLE IX. ENFORCEMENT

9.1	Inspection of Required Improvements

A.	At least ten days prior to commencing each major phase of construction of required improvements, the sub divider or contractor shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer in writing as to when construction of improvements will begin. The municipal officers shall cause inspection to be made to assure that all municipal specifications and  requirements shall be met during the construction of required improvements, and to assure the satisfactory completion of improvements and utilities required by the Board.

B.	If the inspecting official finds, upon inspection of the improvements, that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications filed by the sub divider, he shall so report in writing to the municipal officers, Board, and the sub divider or builder. The municipal officers shall take any steps necessary to assure compliance with the approved plans.

C.	If at any time before or during the construction of the required improvements, it appears to be necessary or desirable to modify the required improvements, the inspecting official is authorized to approve minor modifications due to unforeseen circumstances, such as encounters with hidden outcrops of bedrock, natural springs, etc. The inspecting official shall issue any approval under this section in writing and  shall transmit a copy of the approval to the Board. Revised plans shall be filed with the Town. For major modifications, such as relocation of rights-of-way, property boundaries, changes of grade by more than 1%, etc., the sub divider shall obtain permission to modify the plans from the Board.

D.	For those subdivisions in which construction activity will cease for the winter season, at the close of each summer construction season, the town shall have the site inspected by the Code Enforcement Officer. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that additional inspection is necessary, then a qualified individual will conduct the inspection, at the expense of the sub divider. By November 1 of each year during which  construction was done on the site, the Code Enforcement Officer or inspector shall submit a report to the Board based on that inspection, addressing whether storm water and erosion control measures (both temporary and permanent) are in place, are  properly installed, and appear adequate to do the job for which they were designed for and whether the measures are sufficient to prevent erosion and storm water pollution during the time that construction is suspended. The report shall also include a discussion and recommendations on any problems which were encountered.
 
E.	Prior to the sale of any lot, the sub divider shall provide the Board with a letter from a registered land surveyor, stating that all monuments shown on the plan have been installed.

F.	Upon completion of street construction and prior to a vote by the municipal officers to submit a proposed town way to a town meeting, a written certification signed by a professional engineer registered in the State of Maine may be required by the municipal officers at the expense of the applicant, certifying that the proposed town way meets or exceeds the design and construction requirements. If there are any underground utilities the servicing utility shall certify in writing that they have been installed in a manner acceptable to the utility. “As built” plans shall be submitted to the municipal officers.

G.	The sub divider or builder shall be required to maintain all improvements and provide for snow removal on streets and sidewalks and maintenance unless the improvements are accepted by the municipality or control is placed with a lot owners association.

9.2	Violations and Enforcement

A.	No plan of a division of land within the municipality which would constitute a subdivision shall be recorded in the Registry of Deeds until a final plan has been approved by the Board in accordance with this Ordinance.

B.	No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity may convey, offer or agree to convey any land in a subdivision which has not been approved by the Board and recorded in the Registry of Deeds.

C.	No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity may convey any land in an approved subdivision which is not shown on the final plan as a separate lot.

D.	Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity who conveys, offers or agrees to convey any land in a subdivision which has not been approved as required by these regulations shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100, and not more than $2,500 for each such conveyance, offering or agreement. The Town may institute proceedings to enjoin the violation of this section, and may collect attorney's fees and court costs if it is the prevailing party.

E.	No public utility or any utility company of any kind shall serve any lot in a subdivision for which a Final Plan has not been approved by the Board.

F.	No person shall establish or develop a subdivision without first having a final plan thereof approved by the Board, and recorded in the registry of deeds. "Develop" shall include grading or construction of roads, grading of land or lots, or construction of any buildings.
 
G.	No lot in a subdivision may be sold, leased, or otherwise conveyed before the street upon which the lot fronts is completed in accordance with these regulations up to and including the entire frontage of the lot. No unit in a multifamily development shall be occupied before the street upon which the unit is accessed is completed in accordance with these regulations.



ARTICLE X. GENERAL STANDARDS

In reviewing applications for a subdivision, the Board shall consider the following general standards and make findings that each, in addition to standards contained in Title 30-A, M.R.S.A., Section 4404, has been met prior to the approval of a final plan. In all instances, the burden of proof shall be upon the applicant.

10.1	Conformance with Comprehensive Plan.

All proposed subdivisions shall be in conformity with the Comprehensive Plan and with the provisions of all pertinent state and local codes and ordinances.

10.2	Open Space/Buffer Provisions

A.	The Board may require that a proposed subdivision design include a landscape plan that will show the preservation of existing trees, the replacement of trees and vegetation, graded contours, streams and the preservation of scenic, historic, trail corridors or environmentally desirable areas.

B.	The Board may require that the sub divider reserve an area equal to ten percent of his total land as an open space and/or recreational area for use by property owners in the subdivision.

1.	If such an area is reserved, the final plan shall provide how title to the reserved land shall be held and how costs of development, maintenance and taxes shall be met.

2.	Included in the instrument of conveyance to each property owner of the subdivision shall be a statement of:
a)	The manner of providing for the cost of development and maintenance and for property taxes of the reserved land.
b)	If appropriate, the individual property owner's pro rata share of development costs, maintenance cost and property taxes of the reserved land.
c)	Land designed for public use shall not be subdivided for any other purpose. This prohibition does not apply to land areas designed for later development if the subdivision plan includes provision for development in discrete stages.
d)	Any area designated for common use shall be so arranged that each property owner has access to it.
 
C.	Land reserved for open space purposes shall be of a character, configuration and location suitable for the particular use intended.

D.	Reserved land acceptable to the Board and sub divider may be dedicated to the municipality as a condition of approval.

E.	The Board may require a natural buffer of up to 200 feet between dwellings located in a subdivision and land utilized for agricultural purposes.

10.3	Land Not Suitable for Development.

The following lands shall not be included in the calculations of building density for the purpose of meeting the requirements of multi-family developments of three or more units.

A.	Land which is located within the 100-year frequency floodplain as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the Department of Housing and Urban Development, Flood Insurance Administration, unless the sub divider shows proof through the submission of materials prepared by a registered land surveyor which show that the property in question lies above the 100 year flood level. The elevation of filled or made land shall not be considered.

B.	Land which is part of a right-of-way, or easement, including utility easements.

C.	Land that has been created by filling or draining a pond or wetland.

10.4	Blocks.

Where street lengths exceed 1,000 feet between intersections with other streets, the Board may require a utility/pedestrian easement, at least 20 feet in width, to provide for underground utility crossings and/or a pedestrian pathway of at least five feet in width. Maintenance obligations of the easement shall be included in the written description of the easement.

10.5	Lots

A.	All lots shall meet the minimum requirements of the Town of Wilton Zoning Ordinance.

B.	Lot configuration and area shall be designed to provide for adequate off-street parking and service facilities based upon the type of development contemplated.

C.	Lots with multiple frontages shall be avoided wherever possible. When lots do have frontage on two or more roads, the plan, and deed restrictions shall indicate vehicular access shall be located only on the less traveled way.
 
D.	Wherever possible, side lot lines shall be perpendicular to the street.

E.	The subdivision of tracts into parcels with more than twice the required minimum lot size shall be laid out in such a manner as to either provide for or preclude future resubdivision.

F.	When a proposed subdivision is located on soils identified as "prime farmland" the location of structures should be arranged to maximize the maintenance of such soils.]

G.	The Board may require subdivisions located in the Farm and Forest District as identified in the Town of Wilton Zoning Ordinance to
limit areas of individual lots to be developed for structures, driveways and lawns to 40 percent of the lot area.

H.	Within the Farm and Forest District as identified in the Town of Wilton Zoning Ordinance the location of structures should be arranged to avoid tops of ridge lines and fields. When ever possible and feasible the designated area for the placement of structures shall be on the edges of fields.

I.	Within the Farm and Forest District as identified in the Town of Wilton Zoning Ordinance each lot shall contain a development area containing a minimum of 20,000 square feet of land area which does not include 100- year flood plain, slopes greater than 20 percent
or Class I, II or III wetlands as identified under the Natural Resource Protection Act.

10.6	Utilities

A.	Underground utilities shall be installed prior to the installation of the final gravel base of the road. All underground utilities shall be properly marked to avoid damage by future excavations.

B.	The size, type and location of street lights, electric lines, telephone, and other utilities shall be shown on the plan.

10.7	Required Improvements

The following improvements are required for all subdivisions unless waived by the Board in accordance with provisions of this Ordinance.

A.	Monuments: Monuments of granite or concrete not less than four (4) inches square in width or iron reinforcement rods at least 5/8 inches across the top and at least four (4) feet in the ground shall be installed as follows:
 

1.	Monuments shall be set at all street intersections and points of curvature, but no further than 750 feet apart along street lines having no curves or intersections.

2.	Monuments shall be set at all corners and angle points of the subdivision boundaries and all lot boundary corners and angle points.

B.	Water Supply

1.	If a central water supply system is provided by the sub divider, the location and protection of the source, and the design, construction and operation of the system shall conform to the standards of the State of Maine Rules of the Department of Human Services Relating to Drinking Water (10-144 A.C.M.R. 231).

2.	When the subdivision is to be served by the public water system, the complete supply system within the subdivision, including fire hydrants, shall be installed at the expense   of the sub divider. The size and location of mains, gate valves, hydrants and service connections shall be reviewed and approved in writing by the Water Department. In addition, the Water Department shall determine if sufficient pressure exists and if it does not, and then identify steps to be taken in order to insure sufficient pressure.

C.	Sewage Disposal

1.	The developer shall submit evidence of soil suitability for subsurface sewage disposal prepared by a licensed site evaluator in full compliance with the requirements of the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.

2.	When the subdivision is proposed to be served by the public sewer system, the complete collection system within the subdivision, including manholes and pump stations, shall be installed at the expense of the sub divider. The Sewer Department shall review and approve all manholes, size and location of sewer lines and service connections and certify that providing service to the proposed subdivision is within the capacity of the system's existing collection and treatment system or improvements planned to be completed prior to the construction of the subdivision.

D.	Surface Drainage

1.	Where a subdivision is traversed by a stream, river, or surface water drainage way, or where the Board has determined that surface water runoff to be created by the subdivision should be controlled, there shall be provided easements or drainage rights- of-way with swales, culverts, catch basins or other means of channeling surface water within the subdivision and over other properties. This storm water management system shall be designed by a qualified professional knowledgeable in surface drainage.
 
2.	Drainage easements for existing watercourses or proposed drainage ways at least thirty (30) feet wide shall be provided for and indicated on the plan, conforming substantially to the lines of existing natural drainage.

3.	The applicant shall provide a statement from the designing professional that the proposed subdivision will not create erosion, drainage or runoff problems either in the subdivision or with respect to adjoining properties. Where the peak runoff from the subdivision onto abutting properties is increased either in volume or duration, easements allowing such additional discharge shall be obtained from abutting property owners.

4.	A storm water drainage plan, showing ditching, culverts, storm drains, easements, and other proposed improvements meeting the standards of Article 11. 2 shall be submitted.

10.8	Land Features

A.	Topsoil shall be considered part of the subdivision and except for surplus topsoil from roads, parking areas, and building excavations, shall not be removed from the site.

B.	The Board shall require the applicant to take measures as contained in the Maine Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Construction to correct and prevent soil erosion in the proposed subdivision.

C.	Neither structures nor roads shall be located in areas of one (1) or more contiguous acres of sustained slopes in excess of 20 percent.

D.	The Board may require additional studies and measures when structural development, including roads, is proposed in areas of one (1) or more contiguous acres of sustained slopes of between 10 and 20 percent.

10.9	Phosphorous Export

Projects proposed within the direct watershed of a lake or pond listed below shall be designed to limit phosphorous runoff to the levels defined below. The Board shall keep an accurate record of permits issued by watershed using an appropriate record keeping system, and
shall review actual development rates and recommend adjustments to the table at five year intervals, subject to a reasonable appropriation by
the Town to conduct such a reassessment, or the availability of adequate State or regional grant programs or technical assistance programs. Adjustments may be made without amendment of this Ordinance or the Comprehensive Plan.
 
Lake Protection Level
	LPL	Phosphorus
Loads	Per Acre
Phosphorus load (pounds)
Pease Pond	Medium	7.96	0.106
Varnum Pond	High	11.79	1.072
Wilson Lake	High	72.10	0.06
Bonney Bog Pond	Medium	2.98	0.045

a.	Phosphorous export from a proposed development shall be calculated according to the procedures defined in "Phosphorous Control inLake Watersheds: A Technical Guide for Evaluating New Development” (Maine DEP et.al., September 1989 with revision in 1992 and as may be amended). Upon request, copies of all worksheets and  calculations shall be made available to the Board.
b.	Phosphorous control measures shall meet the design criteria contained in "Phosphorus Control in Lake Watersheds: A Technical Guide for Reviewing Development” (Maine DEP et al., September 1989 with revisions in 1992 or as may be amended). The Board shall require the reasonable use of vegetative buffers, limits on clearing, and minimizing road lengths, and shall encourage the use of other non- structural measures prior to allowing the use of high-maintenance structural measures, such as infiltration systems and wet ponds.]




10.10	Construction in Flood Hazard Areas

When any part of a subdivision is located in a special flood hazard area as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the plan shall indicate that all principle structures on lots in the subdivision shall be constructed with their lowest floor, including the basement, at least one foot above the 100-year flood elevation. Such a restriction shall be included in the deed to any lot which is included or partially included in the flood hazard area.

10.11	State Permits

Copies of all applicable State approvals and permits, provided, however, that the Board may approve site plans subject to the issuance of special State licenses and permits in cases where it determines that it is not feasible for the applicant to obtain them at the time of plan review.






10.12	Municipal Services
 
When the Board finds, based upon the recommendation of department heads, that municipal services do not have sufficient capacity to service the proposed subdivision, the Board may:

1.	Require phasing of the subdivision to allow for the development of expanded municipal services

2.	Require the applicant to assist in upgrading municipal services, or

3.	Deny the application

10.13	Open Space Subdivisions

1.	It is the policy of the Town of Wilton to encourage the development of open space subdivisions in order to preserve a sense of space, provide for agricultural, forestry, and recreational land uses, preserve other resources identified in the Town of Wilton Comprehensive Plan, and blend new development with the traditional open and  wooded, agricultural and village landscapes of Wilton.
This standard is intended to implement that policy by providing incentives that afford flexibility in road and lot layout and design and road frontage requirements to the landowner. It also allows the Board to waive or reduce certain otherwise applicable standards and provisions of this Ordinance and the Town of Wilton Zoning Ordinance if such landowners commit to the permanent preservation of important open space resources. These incentives are designed to encourage greater flexibility and more innovative approaches to housing development and environmental design which
will promote the most appropriate use of land, preservation of permanent open space, agricultural or forest land, important natural features, wildlife habitat, water resources, ecological systems, and historic and scenic areas for the benefit of present and future residents will be accomplished.

2.	An open space subdivision achieves the purposes of this performance standard by reducing the lot size, frontage and setback requirements as contained in the Town of Wilton Zoning Ordinance. It locates housing and accompanying uses in those areas where they have the smallest impact on identified environmental, wildlife, agricultural, forest, and other open space resources. These resources are then permanently preserved by the use of covenants and restrictions or conservation easements.
To qualify as an open space subdivision, a subdivision must achieve those of the following purposes that the Board determines to be applicable to its specific circumstances:
a.	Long-term protection and preservation of existing natural and other resources and landscapes identified in the Town of Wilton Comprehensive Plan, including, but not limited to:
i. State-defined critical areas and unique features and areas identified in the Comprehensive Plan;
ii Historic land use patterns and historic structures;
 
iii.	Points of visual access to or from water bodies and scenic vistas as identified in the Comprehensive Plan and points of access to water bodies;
iv.	Forest land
v.	Agricultural land
vi.	Wildlife habitat
b.	Maintenance or establishment of compatibility with surrounding land uses and the overall character of the town as defined by the comprehensive plan;
c.	Provision of adequate buffers for adjoining properties where needed;
d.	Contribution to town wide open space planning by creating a system of permanently preserved open spaces throughout the town and encouraging linkage of open space areas.
e.	Preservation of land suitable for agricultural and forestry uses, particularly where the open space subdivision borders active agricultural or forestry land or land suitable for the same;
f.	Preservation of traditional land uses;
g.	Provision for recreation facilities, including active and passive recreational space, in the most suitable locations for use consistent with the other purposes of this performance standard.

3.	An individual may apply for approval of an open space subdivision either after pre application review of a conventional subdivision or by initially filing an application for an open space subdivision. In either case, the Board shall review the application in accordance with Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 4404 and this Ordinance.
a.	Pre-application Procedure
i.	Any applicant for a subdivision with open space is encouraged, but not required, to submit at the pre-application stage a complete build out plan for the entire parcel.
ii.	After review of the pre-application, if the Board determines that the proposed subdivision with open space meets the purposes set forth in subparagraph 2.a.i-vi which are applicable to the proposed subdivision as well as other applicable provisions of this subsection, this Ordinance, the zoning ordinance and the comprehensive plan, the  Board shall permit the applicant to proceed with an application for an open space subdivision.
b.	Application Procedure
i. Required Plans: The submissions for a subdivision with open space shall include all plans and materials required for a conventional subdivision under this Ordinance.
c.	General Requirements
In Board review and approval of a subdivision with open space, the following requirements shall apply and shall supersede any inconsistent or more restrictive provisions of this Ordinance and the zoning ordinance.
i.	Use and District Requirements
(a) All subdivisions with open space shall meet the use standards of the districts in which they are located.
ii.	A lot for a dwelling unit created as part of a subdivision with open space shall not be further subdivided.

4.	Layout and Siting Standards
 
In planning the location and sitting of residential structures in a subdivision with open space, priority should be given to the preservation of the open space for its natural resource value. Human habitation activity located and sited on the least valuable natural resource portion of a parcel, taking into account the contours of the land and the steepness of slopes. The building lots on a parcel shall be laid out and the residential structures shall be sited according to the following principles. The Board in its discretion shall resolve conflicts between these principles as applied to a particular site.
a.	Upon soils least suitable for agricultural use and in a manner which maximizes the useable area remaining for the designated open space use. Where agricultural, forestry, or recreational, whether existing or future uses, are particularly targeted for  preservation;
b.	Within woodlands, or along the far edges of open agricultural fields adjacent to any woodland in order to reduce encroachment upon agricultural soils and to enable new residential development to be visually absorbed by natural landscape features;
c.	In such manner that the boundaries between residential lots and active agricultural use, commercial forest land, and/or wildlife habitat are well-buffered by vegetation, topography, roads or other barriers in order to minimize potential conflict between residential and agricultural and forestry uses;
d.	In locations where buildings may be oriented with respect to scenic vistas, natural landscape features, topography and natural drainage areas, in accordance with an overall plan for site development;

5.	Space Standards
a.	Shore frontage and shore setback requirements shall not be reduced below the minimum shore frontage or shore setback required in the Town of Wilton Zoning Ordinance.
b.	The required minimum land area per dwelling unit for the building envelope may be reduced to 20,000 square feet. The building envelope shall contain a minimum of  20,000 square feet of land area which does not include 100 year floodplains, areas of two or more acres of sustained slopes greater than 20 percent, or wetlands as defined by the Natural Resource Protection Act. If the lot area is reduced, the total open space  in the development shall equal or exceed the sum of the areas by which the building lots are reduced below the minimum lot area normally required in the district.
c.	Minimum road frontage requirements contained in the zoning ordinance may be waived or modified by the Board provided that:
I.	Any applicable provisions regarding roads in Subsection 7. below are satisfied; and
ii. Adequate access and turn-around to and from all parcels by emergency vehicles can be ensured by private roads and/or common driveways.
d.	A reduction of required setback distances may be allowed at the discretion of the Board, based upon the public benefits to be achieved from the design,
provided that the front and rear setbacks shall be no less than 25 feet, or that required for the applicable district, whichever shall be less. For the perimeter of an open space development, overall development setback shall not be reduced below the minimum front, side and rear setbacks required in the zoning district unless the Board determines that a more effective design of the project can better accomplish the purposes of this performance standard.
 

6.	Utilities
At the discretion of the Board, in order to achieve the most appropriate design and layout of lots and open space, utilities, including individual wells and septic systems, may be located on designated portions of the open space, if necessary, provided they shall not unreasonably interfere with the open space purposes or uses to be achieved under this section and for the particular parcel(s).

7.	Roads
The Planning Board shall require private roads and common driveways to comply with the design standards set forth in Town of Wilton Street Standard Ordinance.

8.	Open Space Requirements
In Board review and approval of a subdivision with open space, the following requirements shall apply and shall supersede any inconsistent or more restrictive provision of this Ordinance or the Town of Wilton Zoning Ordinance.
a.	Open Space Uses. On all parcels, open space uses shall be appropriate to the site. Open space should include natural features located on the parcel(s) such as, but not limited to, stream beds, agricultural land, forested acreage, wildlife habitat, rock outcroppings and historic features and sites. Open space shall be preserved and maintained subject to the following, as applicable:
i.	On parcels that contain significant portions of land suited to agriculture or commercial forestry, open space shall be preserved for agricultural or forestry, other compatible open space uses such as wildlife habitat, recreation (active or passive), and resource conservation.
ii.	When the principal purpose of preserving portions of the open space is the protection of natural resources such as wetlands, aquifers, steep slopes, wildlife and plant habitats, and stream corridors, open space uses in those portions may be limited to those which are no more intensive than passive recreation.
b.	Notations on Plan. Open space, common lands, roads or facilities must be clearly labeled on the final plan as to its use or uses with respect to the portions of
the open space that such use or uses apply, ownership, management, method of preservation, and the rights, if any, of the owners in the subdivision to such land or portions thereof. The plan shall clearly show that the open space land is permanently reserved for open space purposes, and shall contain a notation indicating the book and page of any conservation easements or deed restrictions required to be recorded
to implement such reservations.
c.	Ownership of Open Space Land. Open space land may be held in private ownership; or owned in common by a Homeowners' Association (HOA); transferred to a nonprofit organization such as a conservation trust, or association, acceptable to the Board; or held in such other form of ownership as the Board finds adequate to achieve the purposes set forth in subparagraph 2.a.ivi and under the other requirements of this article. The Board shall, in its review, require as a condition of approval provisions for the ongoing maintenance and associated costs for such maintenance of the open space.
d.	Maintenance Standards
 
i.	Ongoing maintenance standards, where appropriate, shall be established, enforceable by the town against the owner(s) of common land, including open space land, roads and other facilities as a condition of subdivision approval. Such maintenance standards may include conditions, obligations, or costs to maintain the use, facilities and/or scenic character.
ii.	If a HOA or an agreement of owners of the lots or units is to be used, until 51% of all lots and/or units have been sold, and a homeowners association has been formally organized, the applicant for such development shall be responsible for maintenance of the common lands and facilities.

9.	Homeowners' Associations or Agreements.
Where any portion of a subdivision is proposed or required to be held in common by owners of lots, or owned in common by a Homeowners' Association (HOA) or similar entity, covenants for mandatory membership in the association setting forth the owners' rights, interest, privileges, responsibilities for maintenance, and obligations in the association and the common land, road or open space shall be approved by the Board and included in the deed for each lot.

10.14	Traffic Conditions

A.	No individual lot or dwelling unit shall have direct vehicular access onto a public road existing at the time of development.

B.	A residential subdivision which will have lot access from a street which has a peak hour volume of 200 vehicle trips or greater shall be limited to two (2) access points.

C.	Where a lot has frontage on two or more streets, the access to the lot shall, where practical, be provided to the lot across the frontage and from the street where there is lesser potential for traffic congestion and hazards to traffic and pedestrians.

10.15	Ground Water Quality

A.	When a hydrogeologic assessment is submitted, by request of the Board, the assessment shall contain at least the following information:
1.	A map showing the basic soils types.
2.	The depth to the water table at representative points throughout the subdivision.
3.	Drainage conditions throughout the subdivision.
4.	Data on the existing ground water quality, either from test wells in the subdivision or from existing wells on neighboring properties.
5.	An analysis and evaluation of the effect of the subdivision on ground water resources. In the case of residential developments, the evaluation shall, at a minimum, include a projection of post development nitrate-nitrogen concentrations at any wells within
the subdivision, or at the subdivision boundaries; or at a distance of 1000 feet from potential contamination sources, whichever is a shorter distance.
6.	A map showing the location of any subsurface wastewater disposal systems and drinking water wells within the subdivision and within 100 feet of the
 
subdivision boundaries.
B.	The subdivision will not result in the existing ground water quality becoming inferior to the physical, biological, chemical, and radiological levels for raw and untreated
drinking water supply sources specified in the Maine State Drinking Water Regulations, pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A., Section 601.
C.	If ground water contains contaminants in excess of the primary standards, and the subdivision is to be served by on-site ground water supplies, the applicant shall demonstrate how water quality will be improved or treated.
D.	If ground water contains contaminants in excess of the secondary standards, the subdivision shall not cause the concentration of the parameters in question to exceed 150% of the ambient concentration.
E.	Subsurface waste water disposal systems and drinking water wells shall be constructed as shown on the map submitted with the assessment. If construction standards for drinking water wells or other measures to reduce ground water contamination and protect drinking water supplies are recommended in the assessment, those standards shall be included as a note on the final plan, and as restrictions in
the deeds to the affected lots.

10.16	Protection of Significant Wildlife Habitat

Applicants proposing to subdivide land in or within 75 feet of wildlife resources identified by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife shall consult with a recognized wildlife or fisheries consultant or the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife and provide their written comments to the Board.

10.17	Scenic Locations

The Board shall consider the existence of a scenic site or view location as identified in the Town of Wilton Comprehensive Plan and the impact of the proposed subdivision on such a site or view. The Board may require the placement or visual qualities of structures on lots in such locations so to minimize the negative impacts of the subdivision on such sites and views.

10.18	Archaeological Sites

Any proposed subdivision activity involving structural development or soil disturbance on, or adjacent to, sites listed on, or eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic Places, as determined by the permitting authority, shall be submitted by the applicant to the Maine Historic Preservation Commission for review and comment at least 20 days prior to final approval in the case of a minor subdivision or preliminary approval of a major subdivision by the Board. The Board shall consider comments received from the Commission prior to rendering a decision on the application.

10.19	Solid Waste

All solid waste shall be disposed of at a Department of Environmental
 
Protection licensed facility.



ARTICLE XI. STREET AND STORM DRAINAGE DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS

11.1	Street Standards
A.	All streets proposed as an element of a subdivision shall comply with the Town of Wilton, Maine, Street Standards Ordinance, and zoning ordinance, except as provided for within this Ordinance.
B.	All street designs and submissions as required by the Town of Wilton, Maine, Street Standards Ordinance, and zoning ordinance, shall be submitted as an element of the subdivision application as required by this Ordinance.
C.	Street names shall be proposed by the applicant and approved by the town of Wilton and must comply with the Town of Wilton Street Naming and Property Numbering Ordinance. Streets that are continuations of existing streets shall be given the same name as the existing street. Names of new streets shall not duplicate nor bear the phonetic resemblance of the names of existing streets within the town.
D.	Approval of the Final Plan shall not constitute or be evidence of any acceptance by the Town of Wilton of any street or easement.

11.2	Storm Water Management Design Standards
A.	Adequate provision shall be made for disposal of all storm water generated within the subdivision, and any drained ground water through a management system of ditches, swales, culverts, under drains, and/or storm drains. The storm water management system shall be designed to conduct storm water flows to existing watercourses or  storm drains.
1.	All components of the storm water management system shall be designed to meet the criteria of a 25-year storm.
B.	The storm water management system shall be designed to accommodate upstream drainage, taking into account existing conditions and approved or planned developments not yet built and shall include a surplus design capacity factor of 25% for potential increase in upstream runoff.
C.	Downstream drainage requirements shall be studied to determine the effect of the proposed subdivision. The storm drainage shall not overload existing or future planned storm drainage systems downstream from the subdivision. The sub divider shall be responsible for financing any improvements to existing drainage systems required to handle the increased storm flows.

ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES

12.1	Types of Guarantees. With submission of the application for final plan approval, the applicant shall provide one of the following performance guarantees for an amount adequate to cover the total construction costs of all required improvements, taking into account the time-span of the construction schedule and the inflation rate for construction costs:
 

A.	A certified check payable to the town, or a savings account or certificate of deposit naming the town as owner, for the establishment of an escrow account; or

B.	A performance bond issued by a surety company payable to the town and approved by the municipal officers; or

C.	An irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution establishing funding for the construction of the subdivision, from which the town may draw if construction is inadequate, approved by the municipal officers; or

D.	An offer of conditional approval limiting the number of units built or lots sold until all required improvements have been constructed.
The conditions and amount of performance guarantee shall be determined by the Board with the advice of any engineer retained by the Board, road commissioner and  municipal officers.

12.2	Contents of Guarantee. The performance guarantee shall contain construction schedule, cost estimates for each major phase of construction taking inflation into account, provisions for inspections of each phase of construction, provisions for the release of part or all of the performance guarantee to the developer, and a date after which the developer will be in default. The guarantee shall state that the town shall have access to the funds to finish construction.

12.3	Phasing of Development. The Board may approve plans to develop a major subdivision in separate and distinct phases. This may be accomplished by limiting final approval to those lots abutting that section of the proposed subdivision street which is covered by a performance guarantee. When development is phased, road construction shall commence from an existing public way. Final approval of lots in subsequent  phases shall be given only upon satisfactory completion of all requirements pertaining to previous phases.

12.4	Release of Guarantee. Prior to the release of any part of the performance guarantee, the Board shall determine to its satisfaction that the proposed improvements meet or exceed the design and construction requirements for that portion of the improvements for which the release is requested.

12.5	Default. If, upon inspection, it is found that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications filed as part of the application, the Code Enforcement Officer shall so report in writing to the municipal officers, the Board, and the sub divider or contractor. The municipal officers shall take any steps necessary to preserve the Town's rights.

12.6	Privately-Owned Roads. Where the subdivision streets are to remain privately- owned roads, the following words shall appear on the recorded plan.
 
"All roads in this subdivision shall remain private roads to be maintained by the developer or the lot owners and shall not be accepted or maintained by the Town."

ARTICLE XIII. WAIVERS

13.1	Where the Board makes written findings of fact that the applicant will suffer an undue economic or other hardship if the requirements of this Ordinance are strictly applied, it may waive the necessity for strict compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance in order to provide relief from the hardship in question and to permit a more practical and economical development. However, this shall not compromise the public health, safety, and welfare and the waivers in question shall not have the effect of nullifying the effect of this Ordinance or the comprehensive plan.

13.2	Where the Board makes written findings of fact that, due to special circumstances regarding a particular lot proposed for inclusion in the subdivision, an undue economic or other hardship will be caused, it may waive strict compliance with those requirements of this Ordinance causing such hardship in order to permit a more practical or economically viable development, provided that the public health, safety, and welfare  will be not compromised.

13.3	In granting waivers to any of these regulations in accordance with Sections 13.1 and 13.2, the Board shall require such conditions as that will assure the objectives of these regulations are met.

13.4	When the Board grants a waiver to any of the improvements required by this ordinance, the final plan, to be recorded at the Registry of Deeds, shall indicate the waivers granted and the date which they were granted.

ARTICLE XIV. ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS

14.1	Initiation of Amendments. An amendment to this Ordinance may be initiated by:

A.	The Planning Board provided a majority of the Board has so voted;

B.	Request of the municipal officers; or

C.	Written petition of a number of voters equal to at least 10% of the number of votes cast in the municipality at the last gubernatorial election.

14.2	The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment. Notification of the hearing shall be posted and advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least seven days prior to the hearing.

14.3	Adoption of Amendment. An amendment to this Ordinance may be adopted by a majority vote of the Town Meeting.
 
ARTICLE XV. APPEALS

15.1 An aggrieved party may appeal any decision of the Board under this Ordinance to the Board of Appeals within 30 days of the date the Board issues a written order of its decision.

ARTICLE XVI. SUBDIVISION PLAN AMENDMENT FEES
The following fees shall be shall be paid to the town for amendments to approved subdivision plans. The selectmen shall have the authority to revise these fees after conducting a public hearing.
A.	The fee for any amendment when the number of lots remains the same, and there is no substantial change to roads or drainage systems, shall be $25.
B.	The fee for any amendment, when three or less new lots are created, shall be a $50 publishing and notice fee and $100 for the first new lot created and $50 for each additional lot.
C.	The fee for amendment, when there are substantial changes to roads and drainage systems or more than three lots are created, shall be equal to that required by a new application.

ARTICLE XVII. DEFINITIONS
In general, words and terms used in these regulations shall have their customary dictionary meanings. More specifically, certain words and terms used herein are defined as follows:
Arterial Street: A major thoroughfare which serves as a major traffic way for travel between and through
the municipality.
Collector Street: A street servicing at least twenty (20) lots or dwelling units, or street which serves as feeder to arterial streets and collector of traffic from minor streets.
Common Driveway: A vehicle access way serving two dwelling units
Complete Application: An application shall be considered complete upon submission of the required fee and all information required by these regulations for a Final Plan, or by a vote by the Board to waive the submission of required information. The Board shall issue a receipt to the applicant upon its determination that an application is complete.
Developed Area: Any area on which a site improvement or change is made, including buildings,
landscaping, parking areas, and streets.
Direct Watershed: That portion of the watershed that does not first drain through an upstream lake.
Existing Public Street: Roads which are maintained by the Town of Wilton and/or the State of Maine.
Final Plan: The final drawings, on which the applicant's plan of subdivision is presented to the Board for approval and which, if approved, may be recorded at the Registry of Deeds.
Fresh Water Wetland: Means fresh water swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas which are:
a.	Inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for a duration sufficient to support, and which under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils; and
b.	Not considered part of great pond, coastal wetland, river, stream or brook. These areas may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that do not conform to the criteria.
High Intensity Soil Survey: A soil survey conducted by a certified soil scientist, meeting the standards of
the National Cooperative Soil Survey, which identifies soil types down to 1/10 acre or less at a scale equivalent to the subdivision plan submitted. The mapping units shall be the soil series. Single soil test pits and their evaluation shall not be considered to constitute high intensity soil surveys.
100 Year Flood: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Industrial or Commercial Street: A street servicing industrial or commercial uses.
Industrial Park or Development: A subdivision developed exclusively for industrial uses, or a subdivision planned for industrial uses and developed and managed as a unit, usually with provision for common services for the users.
 
Manufactured Housing: A structural unit or units designed for occupancy, constructed in a manufacturing facility, and transported, by the use of its own chassis or an independent chassis, to a building site. The term includes any type of building which is constructed at a manufacturing facility and transported to a building site where it is used for housing. It may be purchased or sold by a dealer in the interim. For purposes of this section, two types of manufactured housing are included. Those two types are:
1.	Those units constructed after June 15, 1976, commonly called "newer mobile homes", which the manufacturer certifies are constructed in compliance with the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development standards. These are structures
transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, are 14 body feet or more in width and are 750 or more square feet in area, and are built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as dwellings, with or without permanent foundations, when connected to the required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air conditioning or electrical systems contained in the unit;
a.	This term also includes any structure which meets all the requirements of this subparagraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by
the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the
standards established
under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, United States Code, Title 42, Section 5401, et.seq.; and
2.	Those units commonly called "modular homes" which the manufacturer certifies are constructed in compliance with Title 10, Chapter 957, and rules adopted under that chapter. These structures transportable in one or more sections which are not constructed on a permanent chassis, and are designed to be used as dwellings on foundations when connected to required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air conditioning or electrical systems contained in the unit.
Minor Street: A street servicing less than twenty lots or dwelling units.
Mobile Home Park: A parcel of land under unified ownership for the placement of three (3) or more manufactured homes.
Mobile Home Park Lot: Mobile home park lot means the area of land on which
an individual home is situated within a mobile home park and which is reserved for use by the occupants of that home. A municipality shall require a lot to be designated on a mobile home park plan.
Multi-Unit Residential: A residential structure containing three (3) or more residential dwelling units. Net Residential Acreage: The total acreage available for the subdivision, and shown on the proposed subdivision plan, after subtracting the area for streets or access and areas which are unsuitable for development.
Net Residential Density: The average number of dwelling units per net residential acre.
Official Submission Date: The date upon which the Board issues a receipt indicating a complete application has been submitted.
Open Space Subdivision: A subdivision in which the lot sizes are reduced below those normally
required in return for the provision of permanent open space owned in common by lot/unit owners, the town, or a land conservation organization. Clustering shall not be used to increase the overall net residential density of the development.
Person: Includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation, as well as
an individual.
Preliminary Subdivision Plan: The preliminary drawings indicating the proposed layout of the
subdivision to be submitted to the Board for its consideration.
Privately-Owned Street: A street which is not intended to be dedicated as a town way.
Recording Plan: A copy of the final plan which is recorded at the Registry of Deeds and which need not show information irrelevant to the transfer of an interest in the property, such as sewer and water line locations and sizes, culverts, and building lines.
Re-subdivision: The division of an existing subdivision or any change in the plan for an approved
subdivision which affects the lot lines, including land transactions by the sub divider not indicated on the approved plan.
Significant Scenic View Locations: Point where scenic views can be accessed as identified in the
Wilton Comprehensive Plan.
Stream, River or Brook: River, stream or brook means a channel between defined banks created by the action of surface water, and which has two (2) or more of the following characteristics.
 
A.	It is depicted as a solid or broken blue line on the most recent edition of the U.S. Geological Survey 7.5 minute series topographic map.
B.	It contains or is known to contain flowing water continuously for a period of at least three (3) months of the year in most years.
C.	The channel of the bed is primarily composed of mineral material such as sand and gravel, parent material, or bedrock that has been deposited or scoured by water.
D.	The channel contains aquatic animals such as fish, aquatic insects or mollusks in the water or, if no water is present, within the stream bed.
E.	The channel contains aquatic vegetation and is essentially devoid of upland vegetation.
Street: Public and private ways such as alleys, avenues, highways, roads and other rights-of-ways, as
well as areas on a subdivision plans designated as rights-of-ways for vehicular access, other than driveways, farm roads or logging roads.
Subdivision: Subdivision is defined in Title 30-A M.R.S.A., section 4401.4 as the same may be from time
to time amended.
Substantial Construction: The completion of any of the improvement(s) to the total property or individual lots and any infrastructure improvements which is equivalent to 30 percent of the total cost to the developer of such improvements.
Tract, or Parcel, of Land: All contiguous land in the same ownership, whether or not the tract is
separated at any point by: an intermittent or non-navigable stream, tidal waters where there is no flow at low tide, or a private road established by the abutting landowners.
 





ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE
TOWN OF WILTON



Amended June 17, 2019




 













1
 






TABLE OF CONTENTS

 
TABLE OF CONTENTS	2
ARTICLE 1.	GENERAL	4
1.1	Authority 	4
1.2	Purpose 	4
1.3	Basic Requirements 	4
1.4	Validity and Severability 	5
1.5	Conflict With Other Ordinances 	5
1.6	Amendments 	6
1.7	Ordinance Review 	7
ARTICLE 2.	NONCONFORMANCE	8
2.1	Definition 	8
2.2	Land Use Requirements 	8
2.3	Nonconformance 	8
ARTICLE 3.	ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES 	13
3.1	Zones 	13
3.2	Zone Boundaries 	13
3.3	Lots in Two or More Zones 	13
ARTICLE 4.	ZONING DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS 	14
4.1	Basic Requirements 	14
4.2	Resource Protection Zone 	14
4.3	Limited Residential & Recreational Zone 	16
4.4	Residential I Zone 	16
4.5	Residential II Zone 	16
4.6	Farm and Forest Zone 	16
4.7	Commercial Zone 	18
4.8	Industrial Zone 	18
4.9	Watershed Overlay District 	19
4.10	Downtown/Village Zone 	20
4.11	Stream Protection District 	20
ARTICLE 5.	PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 	21
5.1	Introduction 	21
5.2	Special Considerations for the Shoreland Zone 	21
5.3	Conversion of Dwellings 	30
5.4	Entrances and Exits to Public Ways 	30
5.5	Off-Street Parking and Loading 	30
5.6	Removal of Topsoil 	31
5.7	Removal of Stone, Sand, Gravel & Minerals 	31
5.8	Public Service Corporations 	33
Page 2
5.9	Signs 	34
5.10	Hazardous Waste 	37
5.11	Cluster, or Open Space Development 	37
5.12	Transmission Towers, Windmills, and Wind Energy Systems 	37
5.13	Construction Standards 	41
5.14	New Street Construction and Driveway Entrances 	41
5.15	Water and Sewer Lines 	42
5.16	Animal Raising 	42
5.17	Recreational Vehicles, Campers/Camper Trailers 	43
5.18	Elder Cottage Housing Opportunity (ECHO) Units 	43
5.19	Soils 	44
5.20	Small Enterprises, Home Occupations and In-Home Offices 	44
5.21	Rear Lots 	45
5.22	Lots Served by Nonconforming Rights-of-way 	46
5.23	Corner Lots 	47
5.24	On-site Disposal of Demolition Debris 	47
5.25	Automobile Recycling Business Permits 	48
5.26	Mobile Home Requirements 	48
5.27	Building Demolition Permit Standards 	48
ARTICLE 6.	SITE PLAN REVIEW 	50
6.1	Purpose 	50
6.2	Applicability 	50
6.3	Administration 	50
6.4	Submission Requirements 	51
6.5	Criteria and Standards 	53
6.6	Conditions of Approval 	60
ARTICLE 7.	ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT 	62
7.1	Code Enforcement Officer 	62
7.2	Building Permit 	62
7.3	Fee for Permits 	63
7.4	Plot Plan 	63
7.5	Expiration of Permits 	63
7.6	Appeal 	63
7.7	Administrative and Variance Appeals to the Board of Appeals 	64
7.8	Violations 	67
7.9	Penalty for Violation 	67
ARTICLE 8.	DEFINITIONS 	68
ARTICLE 9.	TABLES 	82
TABLE A.	PERMITTED USES BY CATEGORY AND ZONE 	83
TABLE A1.	RESIDENTIAL USES 	83
TABLE A2.	COMMMERCIAL USES 	85
TABLE A3.	INDUSTRIAL USES 	88
TABLE A4.	OUTDOOR RESOURCE BASE USES 	89
TABLE A5.	EDUCATIONAL, INSTITUTIONAL, AND PUBLIC USES 	91
TABLE B.	SPACE & BULK STANDARDS 	92
 
 
ARTICLE 1.	GENERAL
1.1	Authority
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to Article VIII, Part 2, Section 1 of the Maine Constitution and Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 3001 and Title 38 M.R.S.A. Sections 435 et seq. and shall be known and may be cited as the “Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Wilton.”
1.2	Purpose

The purpose of this Ordinance, pursuant to the Wilton, Maine, Comprehensive Plan, is to  promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the Town; to encourage the most appropriate use of the land throughout the Town; to promote traffic safety, to provide safety from fire and other elements; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent overcrowding of real estate; to promote a wholesome home environment; to prevent housing development in  unsanitary areas; to provide an adequate street system; to promote the coordinated development  of unbuilt areas; to encourage the formation of community units; to provide allotment of land  area in new developments sufficient for all the requirements of community life; to conserve natural resources; to provide for adequate public services; to prevent and control water pollution; to protect spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life, birds, other wildlife habitat; to conserve the shore cover and to enhance visual and actual points of access to inland waters, retain natural beauty, to protect archaeological and historic resources.

1.3	Basic Requirements
(Amended June 18, 2001 and June 19, 2006)

A.	A building permit is not required if the project is normal maintenance, as defined. A building permit is also not required if the project enlarges the existing volume of the structure but the materials used in the project cost less than $2,000 and the project is not normal maintenance, as defined.

B.	A building permit is required if the project is not normal maintenance, as defined, and the project either: 1) Enlarges the footprint of the existing building; or, 2) Enlarges the existing volume and the materials used in the project cost $2,000 or more.

C.	A building permit is also required in the Resource Protection Zone, Limited Residential and Recreational Zone and Stream Protection Zone when construction, erection, movement, or alteration is proposed or when a project is not normal maintenance. Normal maintenance in the shore land zone is defined as the normal upkeep and maintenance of a structure, including repairs and maintenance that do not involve the expansion of a structure. Expansion is defined as an increase in the floor area or volume of a structure, including all extensions such as, but not limited to: attached decks, garages, porches, and greenhouses.

D.	Any accessory structure that is less than one-hundred twenty (120) square feet in floor area
 
and less than ten (10) in height does not require a building permit and does not have to comply with side and rear setback requirements but must meet shore land setback requirements and must meet a front setback requirement of fifty (50) feet in the Farm and Farm Zone, Commercial Zone, and Industrial Zone and must meet a front setback requirement of twenty-five (25) feet for all other Zones, provided that the accessory structure is not placed on a permanent foundation and provided that only one accessory structure that complies with the requirement in this Article is allowed on a lot. Permanent foundation is defined as a foundation that attaches to the structure permanently to the ground.

E.	If more than one residential dwelling unit, principal governmental, institutional, commercial, or industrial structure or use, or combination thereof, is constructed or established on a single parcel, all dimensional requirements and setbacks shall be met for each dwelling unit, principal structure or use.

F.	A use permit is required from the Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) or from the Planning Board (PB) for any use or change of use noted in Table A. When a use permit is required from the CEO or from the PB and a building permit is also required from the CEO, then the CEO shall only issue the building permit after the use permit has been approved by the CEO or by the PB and the conditions established by the CEO or by the PB that must be complied with prior to the issuance of a building permit have been met. Use permits that involve only change of ownership of an existing permitted business may be issued by the CEO with notification of abutters 10 days prior to the issuance of said permit.

G.	A sign permit is required prior to the erection, enlargement or replacement of any sign under Section 5.15 of this Ordinance.

H.	Building, Use, and Sign permit application fees are to be established by the Selectmen with Planning Board input.

1.4	Validity and Severability

The invalidity of any section or provision of this Ordinance shall not be held to invalidate any other section or provision of this Ordinance.

1.5	Conflict With Other Ordinances

A. This Ordinance shall not be construed to repeal any existing bylaws or ordinances, or to impair the provisions of private restrictions placed upon property, provided, however, that where this Ordinance imposes greater restrictions, its provisions shall control. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the previously adopted Wilton Zoning Ordinance and all amendments thereto are replaced effective upon the adoption of this Ordinance by Town Meeting.

B.  Subdivision Ordinance
The review and approval of proposed subdivisions, generally defined as the division of a tract or parcel of land into three or more lots within a five-year period, or the division of an existing residential or commercial structure into three or more distinct and separate units
 
shall be governed by the Town of Wilton Subdivision Ordinance as adopted at Town Meeting in June 2003, and all amendments thereto.

1.6	Amendments

A.	Initiation of Amendments
An amendment to this Ordinance may be initiated by:

1.	The Planning Board provided a majority of the Board has so voted;
2.	Request of a majority of the Selectmen; or
3.	Written petition of a number of voters equal to at least 10% of the number of votes cast in the Town of Wilton in the last gubernatorial election.

B.	The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment at least 15 days prior to the Town Meeting at which the proposed amendment is to be considered. Notice of the hearing shall be posted in the municipal office at least 14 days before the public hearing and published at least twice in a newspaper that has general circulation in the Town of Wilton. The date of first publication must be at least 14 days before the hearing and the date of second publication must be at least 7 days before the hearing.

C.	Adoption of Amendment
An amendment to this Ordinance may be adopted by a majority vote of a special Town Meeting attended by at least 100 Wilton residents over 18 or by a majority vote of the Annual Town Meeting.

D.	Copies of amendments within the shore land area attested by the Town Clerk shall be submitted to the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection within fourteen (14) days of approval by the voters at Town Meeting and shall not be effective unless approved by the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection. If the Commissioner fails to act on any amendment within forty-five (45) days of the Commissioner’s receipt of the amendment, the amendment is automatically approved. Any application for a permit submitted to the municipality within this period shall be governed by the terms of the amendment, if such amendment is approved by the Commissioner.
 

1.7	Ordinance Review

The original Wilton Zoning Ordinance was adopted and became effective on March 11, 1974, and was revised and amended as follows:

Adopted	March 11, 1974
First Revision	March 10, 1975
Second Revision	March 15, 1976
Third Revision	March 25, 1977
Fourth Revision	March 9, 1981
Amended	March 8, 1982
Amended	March 7, 1983
Amended	March 12, 1984
Amended	March 11, 1985
Amended	March 10, 1986
Amended	March 10, 1986
Amended	March 21, 1988
Amended	March 6, 1989
Amended	March 12, 1990
Amended	March 11, 1991
Amended	March 3, 1992
Amended	August 10, 1992
Amended	June 12, 1995
Amended	June 22, 1998
Amended	June 21, 1999
Amended	June 19, 2000
Amended	June 18, 2001
Amended	June 17, 2002
Amended	June 16, 2003
Amended	June 14, 2004
Amended	June 13, 2005
Amended	June 19, 2006
Amended	June 18, 2007
Amended	June 16, 2008
Amended	June 15, 2009
Amended	June 14, 2010
Amended	June 06, 2011
Amended	June 18, 2012
Amended	June 10, 2013
Amended	June 19, 2014
Amended	June 20, 2016
Amended	May 22, 2017
Amended	June 18, 2018
Amended	June 17, 2019
 


 




2.1	Definition
 
ARTICLE 2.	NONCONFORMANCE
(Amended 6/18/2007 and 6/16/2008)
 

Any lot, building, structure, use of land or portion thereof, existing at the effective date of adoption of, or any amendment to, this Ordinance, which as a result of the adoption or amendment to this Ordinance does not conform with one or more of the applicable provisions of this Ordinance, shall be considered lawfully nonconforming.

2.2	Land Use Requirements

Except as hereinafter specified, no building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, expanded, moved or altered and no new lot shall be created or existing lot altered except in conformity with all of the provisions of this Ordinance and the regulations herein specified for the district in  which it is located, unless a variance is granted.

2.3	Nonconformance

A.	Purpose
It is the intent of this Ordinance to promote land use conformities, except that lawfully nonconforming conditions that existed before the effective date of this Ordinance or an amendment to this Ordinance shall be allowed to continue, subject to the requirements set forth  in this section. Except as otherwise provided by this Ordinance, a nonconforming condition shall not be permitted to become more nonconforming.

B.	General
1.	Transfer of Ownership. Nonconforming structures, lots and uses may be transferred, and the new owner may continue the nonconforming use or continue to use the nonconforming structure or lot, subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.
2.	Repair and Maintenance. This Ordinance allows, without a permit, the normal upkeep and maintenance of nonconforming uses and structures including repairs or renovations which do not involve expansion of the nonconforming use or structure, and such other changes in a nonconforming use or structure as federal, state or local building codes may require.

C.	Nonconforming Structures
1.	Expansions. A nonconforming structure may be added to or expanded after obtaining a permit from the same permitting authority as that for a new structure, if such addition or expansion does not increase the nonconformity of the structure and is in accordance with subparagraphs (a) and (b) below.

a.	After January 1, 1989, if any portion of a structure is less than any required setback that portion of the structure shall not be expanded, as measured in floor area or
 
volume, by 30 percent or more, during the lifetime of the structure. If a replacement structure conforms to the requirements of Section 2.3.C.3, and is less than the required setback from a water body, tributary stream or wetland, the replacement structure may not be expanded if the original structure existing on January 1, 1989 had been expanded by 30% in floor area or volume since that date.

b.	When a new, enlarged or replacement foundation is constructed under a nonconforming structure, the new foundation must be placed such that the setback requirement is met to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Planning Board, basing its decision on the criteria specified in subsection 2, “Relocation,” below, and the completed foundation does not extend beyond the exterior dimensions of the structure, except for expansions in conformity with Section 2.3.C.1.a above. In addition in shoreland areas (1) the foundation does not cause the structure to be elevated by more than three additional feet, as measured from the uphill side of the structure (from the original ground level to the bottom of the first floor sill), it shall not be considered as an expansion of the structure; (2) there is less than 5 feet between the finished basement floor and the bottom of the first floor joists; and (3) the basement area is used exclusively for storage or mechanical purposes, and not for habitation.

2.	Relocation. A nonconforming structure may be relocated within the boundaries of the parcel on which the structure is located, provided that the site of relocation conforms to all setback requirements to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Planning Board, and provided that the applicant demonstrates that the present subsurface sewage disposal system meets the requirements of State law and the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules (Rules), or that a new system can be installed in compliance with the law and said Rules. In no case shall a structure be relocated in a manner that causes the structure to be more nonconforming.

In determining whether the building relocation meets the setback to the greatest practical extent, the Planning Board shall consider the size of the lot, the slope of the land, the potential for soil erosion, the location of other structures on the property and on adjacent properties, the location of the septic system and other on-site soils suitable for septic systems, and the type and amount of vegetation to be removed to accomplish the relocation. When it is necessary to remove vegetation within the water or wetland setback area in order to relocate a structure, the Planning Board shall require replanting of native vegetation to compensate for the destroyed vegetation. In addition, the area from which the relocated structure was removed must be replanted with vegetation. Replanting shall be required as follows:

a)	Trees removed in order to relocate a structure must be replanted with at least one native tree, three (3) feet in height, for every tree removed. If more than five trees are planted, no one species of tree shall make up more than 50% of the number of trees planted. Replaced trees must be planted no further from the water or wetland than the trees that were removed.
 
b)	Other woody and herbaceous vegetation, and ground cover, that are removed or destroyed in order to relocate a structure must be re-established. An area at least the same size as the area where vegetation and/or ground cover was disturbed, damaged, or removed must be reestablished within the setback area. The vegetation and/or ground cover must consist of similar native vegetation and/or ground cover that was disturbed, destroyed or removed.

c)	Where feasible, when a structure is relocated on a parcel the original location of the structure shall be replanted with vegetation which may consist of grasses, shrubs, trees, or a combination thereof.

3. Reconstruction or Replacement. Any nonconforming structure which is removed, or which is damaged or destroyed, regardless of the cause, by more than 50 percent of the market value of the structure before such removal or damage, may be reconstructed or replaced provided that such reconstruction or replacement is in compliance with the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Planning Board in accordance with the purposes of this Ordinance, and provided a permit is obtained for the reconstruction or replacement within eighteen months of said damage, destruction, or removal. In no case shall a structure be reconstructed or replaced so as to increase its nonconformity. If the reconstructed or replacement structure is less than the required setback it shall not be any larger than the original structure, except as allowed pursuant to Section 2.3.C.1 above, as determined by the non-conforming floor area and volume of the reconstructed or replaced structure at its new location. If the total amount of floor area and volume of the original structure can be relocated or reconstructed beyond the required setback area, no portion of the relocated or reconstructed structure shall be replaced or constructed at less than the setback requirement for a new structure. When it is necessary to remove vegetation in order to replace or reconstruct a structure vegetation shall be replanted in accordance with Section
2.3.C.2 above.

If any such structure is located within a floodplain along a river or other waterbody identified by the 100-year floodplain as designated on the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, such structure shall be reconstructed only in compliance with the standards of the Floodplain Management Ordinance for the Town of Wilton.

Any nonconforming structure which is damaged or destroyed by 50 percent or less of the market value of the structure, excluding normal maintenance and repair, may be reconstructed in place with a permit, from the Code Enforcement Officer.

In determining whether the building reconstruction or replacement meets the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance to the greatest practical extent, the Planning Board shall consider in addition to the criteria in Paragraph 2 above, the physical condition and type of foundation present, if any.

4.  Change of Use of a Nonconforming Structure. The use of a nonconforming structure may not be changed to another use unless the Planning Board after receiving a written
 
application determines that the new use will have no greater adverse impact on any adjacent water body, tributary stream or wetland, or on the subject or adjacent properties and resources, than the existing use.

In determining that no greater adverse impact will occur, the Planning Board shall require written documentation from the applicant, regarding the probable effects on wildlife habitat, vegetative cover, visual and actual points of public access to waters, natural beauty, floodplain management, archaeological and historic resources and functionally water-dependent uses.

D.	Nonconforming Uses
1.	Expansion of nonconforming uses outside of the shoreland zone may be allowed provided the Planning Board after reviewing written application determines that no greater adverse impacts would occur as the result of the expansion as defined below. In the shoreland zone, only expansions of non-conforming residential uses are permitted, in accordance with the 30% expansion limitation in Article 2, section 2.3.c.1.a.

a.	The expansion of a nonconforming use will be in accordance with any applicable Performance Standards set forth in Article 5 and 6, Site Plan Review Standards.
b.	The expansions of the nonconforming use will not encroach further on the required setbacks.
c.	The proposed expansion is of the same character or less noxious than the current nonconforming use.
d.	The expansion use will not create a traffic hazard nor increase an existing traffic hazard.
e.	That the amount of parking required to meet the minimum requirements for the proposed use exists on the site or will be otherwise provided in Ordinance.
f.	The amount of noise, odors, vibrations, smoke, dust and air discharges of the proposed expansion shall be equal to or less than the present use.
g.	The hours of operation of the proposed expansion will be compatible with the existing, surrounding land uses.

2.	Resumption Prohibited. A lot, building or structure in or on which a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period exceeding one year, or which is superseded by a conforming use, may not again be devoted to a nonconforming use except that the Planning Board may, for good cause shown by the applicant, grant a single extension, of up to one year of that time period where the application for extension is made before expiration of the original one-year period. This provision shall not apply to prohibit the resumption of use of a residential structure for residential purposes provided that the structure has been used or maintained for residential purposes at any time during the preceding five (5) year period.

3.	Change of Use. An existing nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use provided that the proposed use has no greater adverse impact on the subject and adjacent properties and resources than the former use, as determined by the Planning Board. The determination of no greater adverse impact shall be made according to the criteria listed in Section 2.3.(c).(4) above.
 

E.	Nonconforming Lots
1.	Lots of Record. A single lot of record which at the time of first recording of its legal description in the Franklin County Registry of Deeds met all minimum lot frontage and lot area requirements then applicable, but subsequently has become non-conforming as to minimum lot frontage or lot area as a result of the passage of this Ordinance or any amendment to this Ordinance, may be built upon, without the need for a variance, provided that such lot is not owned by the same person or persons as any other contiguous lot and provided that all other requirements of this Ordinance are met. Relief from the requirements of this Ordinance other than lot frontage or lot area may be granted only by variance from the Board of Appeals in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.

2.	Merger of Lots (a) If two or more contiguous lots are owned by the same person(s), and if any of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot frontage or lot area established by this Ordinance, the lots shall be merged to the extent necessary to create a lot or lots which comply with the lot frontage and lot area requirements of this Ordinance, and no portion of the lots so merged which does not meet the lot area or lot frontage  requirements of this Ordinance may be built upon, or may be sold if such sale would result in separate ownership of the non-conforming portion. (b) This section 2.3 (E)(2) shall require merger only of (i) unimproved lots with one another and (ii) unimproved  lots with lots which are separately improved with a principal structure. As used in this subsection, the term “unimproved lot” includes any lot which does not contain a principal structure.

3.	Division of Single Lots Containing More Than One Principal Structure. Where a single lot of record contains more than one principal structure, each of which at the time of its construction complied with any applicable dimensional requirements, the lot may be divided and each principal structure may be conveyed separately upon approval by the Codes Enforcement Officer of a plot plan which complies to the fullest extent possible with the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, provided such dividing and conveyance comply with all other applicable local ordinances and State law.

4.	Nonconforming lots in the Shore land Zone. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in paragraphs 1 through 3 above, any lot in the Shore land Zone which is not served by public sewer and has less than 20,000 square feet of lot area or less than 100 feet of shore land frontage is subject to the following restrictions:

a.	no conversions from seasonal dwellings (as defined in 30-A M.R.S.A. section 4201(4)) to year-round dwellings are allowed.
b.	no new year-round dwellings are allowed.
 
ARTICLE 3.	ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES

3.1	Zones

For the purpose of this Ordinance, the Town of Wilton is hereby divided into ten zones:

Residential I (RI)	Farm & Forest (F&F)
Residential II (RII)	Resource Protection (RP)
Commercial (C)	Limited Residential & Recreational (LR&R)
Industrial (I)	Downtown/Village
Stream Protection (SP)	Watershed Overlay District

3.2	Zone Boundaries

A.	The boundaries of these zones are hereby established as shown on a map prepared by the Wilton  Planning Board and entitled “Zoning Map of the Town of Wilton”, and listed by lot number on a set of Wilton tax maps. In case of any apparent inconsistency between the boundaries shown on the map and the definitions, descriptions and purposes contained in the text of this ordinance, the map shall govern.

B.	This map, with such changes and amendments as may be made in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, shall be part of this Zoning Ordinance and shall be placed on file in the office of the Town Clerk.

C.	Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any zone as shown on the Zoning Map, the Planning Board shall determine the boundaries.

D.	Shore land Zones: The Shore land Zone includes those lands lying within 250 feet horizontal distance of the normal high water mark of Pease Pond and Varnum Pond, Wilson Lake, and Wilson Stream above and below Wilson Lake. In addition, the Shore land Zone includes those lands located within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of freshwater wetlands as defined on the Zoning Map, within 75 feet horizontal distance of a stream as defined herein and within the 100 year floodplain.

3.3	Lots in Two or More Zones

Where a zone boundary line as established in this Ordinance and shown on the Zoning Map, divides a lot which was a lot of record at the time of the enactment of this Ordinance, the provisions of this Ordinance applicable to the less restrictive zone shall be considered as extending to a maximum of 25 feet beyond the zone boundary line into the adjacent zone. Where a zone boundary line divides a lot created after enactment of this Ordinance, the provisions of this Ordinance applicable to the more restrictive zone shall extend 25 feet into the less restrictive zone. These provisions do not apply when the other portion is located in the Resource Protection, Stream Protection or Limited Residential & Recreation District.
 

ARTICLE 4.	ZONING DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS


4.0 Basic Requirements

The following basic requirements apply in all zoning districts:

A.	Use Regulations
Table A sets forth those uses which are permitted, permitted with a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer, permitted with a permit from the local plumbing inspector, permitted with a permit from the Planning Board, or prohibited in each zoning district. Any use not listed on Table A is prohibited use. Uses requiring Planning Board review (other than home occupations) must be approved under the Site Plan Review Standards of Article 6 of this Ordinance.

B.	Dimensional Requirements
Dimensional Requirements are set forth on Table B.

C.	Performance Standards
Performance standards are set forth in Article 5 of this Ordinance. Additional requirements applicable in particular zoning districts are set forth in Sections 4.1 through
4.10 below.

4.1	Resource Protection Zone

A.	Purpose
1.	To protect the most vulnerable shore land areas along with other areas in which development would adversely affect water quality, productive habitat, biological ecosystems, or scenic and natural values, and to discourage development in unsafe and unhealthful areas. The Resource Protection Zone may include areas located outside the Shore land Zone. The Resource Protection Zone may include but is not limited to:

a.	Wetlands, swamps, and bogs;
b.	Floodplains to the extent of the 100 year flood designation on the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard  Boundary Maps; or other floodplains as mapped by the Town and depicted on the Zoning Map.
c.	Slopes subject to severe natural erosion or on which erosion would be expected to be severe as the result of human activities;
d.	Areas designated as having special historic or scenic or natural significance;
e.	Areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of freshwater wetlands, and wetlands associated with great ponds and rivers, which are rated “moderate” or “high” value waterfowl and wading bird habitat, including nesting and feeding areas by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (MDIF&W) that are depicted on a Geographic Information System (GIS) data layer maintained by either MDIF&W or the Department as of May 1, 2006 or as subsequently adopted.  For the
 
purposes of this paragraph “wetlands associated with great ponds and rivers” shall mean areas characterized by non-forested wetland vegetation and hydric soils that are contiguous with a great pond or river, and have a surface elevation at or below the water level of the  great pond or river  during the  period of  normal high water. “Wetlands associated with great ponds or rivers” are considered to be part of that great pond or river.
f.	Areas of two or more contiguous acres with sustained slopes of 20 percent or greater that are located in the shore land zone as defined herein; and
g.	Land areas along rivers subject to severe bank erosion, undercutting or river bed movements.
h.	Areas of two (2) or more contiguous acres supporting wetland vegetation and hydric soils, which are not part of a freshwater wetland as defined, and which are not surficially connected to a water body during the period of normal high water.



B.	Specific Performance Standards
The provisions contained in Section 4.8 governing the Varnum Pond Watershed Overlay District apply if the property is also located in said District.

C.	Special Permit for Single Family Residence
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 4.0.A and Table A, excepting structure setback requirements the Planning Board may issue a special permit for construction of a single family residence in the Resource Protection Zone if the applicant demonstrates that all of the following conditions are met:
1.	There is no location on the property, other than a location within the Resource Protection Zone, where the structure can be built.
2.	The lot on which the structure is proposed is undeveloped and was established and recorded in the Franklin County Registry of Deeds before the adoption of the Resource Protection Zone.
3.	All proposed buildings, sewage disposal systems and other improvements are:

(a)	Located on natural ground slopes of less than 20% and
(b)	Located outside the floodway of the 100-year floodplain along rivers and artificially formed great ponds along rivers based on detailed flood insurance studies and as delineated on the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and Flood Insurance Rate Maps; all buildings, including basements, are elevated at least one foot above the 100-year floodplain elevation; and the development is otherwise in compliance with the Floodplain Management Ordinance for the Town of Wilton. If the floodway is not shown on the Federal Emergency Management Agency maps, it is deemed to be ½ the  width of the 100-year floodplain. For purposes of this subparagraph, “floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the 100-year flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot in height.

4.	The total ground-floor area, including cantilevering or similar overhanging extensions of all principal and accessory structures is limited to a maximum of 1,500 square feet.
 
This limitation shall not be altered by variance.
5.	All structures, except functionally water-dependent structures, are set back from the normal high-water line of a waterbody, tributary stream or upland edge of a wetland to the greatest practical extent, but not less than 75 feet, horizontal distance. In determining the greatest practical extent, the planning board shall consider the depth of the lot, the slope of the land, the potential for soil erosion, the type and amount of vegetation to be removed, the proposed building site’s elevation in regard to the floodplain and its proximity to moderate-value and high-value wetlands.

4.2	Limited Residential & Recreational Zone

A.	Definition and Purpose
1.	Definition: This zone comprises areas which would fall into the Resource Protection Zone except that they have already been developed, primarily for residential and recreational uses.
2.	Purpose: To regulate uses in such a way as to prevent significant pollution of the water and to preserve the aesthetic and recreational values of shore land areas.

4.3	Residential I Zone

A.	Definition and Purpose
1.	Definition: This zone comprises the older built-up village areas of Wilton, Dryden, and East Wilton. These areas are, for the most part, served by Town water and sewer.
2.	Purpose: To maintain the close residential character of these areas, the older built-up village areas of Wilton, Dryden and East Wilton, and to assure new development is compatible.

4.4	Residential II Zone

A.	Definition and Purpose
1.	Definition. This zone comprises the medium density, suburban residential areas of the Town.
2.	Purpose. The purpose of establishing this zone is to identify those areas whose proximity to Town maintained roads indicate a historical use for residential or other low intensity development and designate areas where low density residential growth can occur while minimizing local service costs.


4.5	Farm and Forest Zone

A.	Definition and Purpose
1.	Definition: This zone comprises the majority of generally unbuilt areas in the Town, primarily woodland and farmland.
2.	Purpose: To encourage the continued production of renewable resources by recognizing and maintaining those areas suitable for either agricultural or forest production.

B.	Specific Performance Standards
 
The requirements of §4.8 governing the Varnum Pond Watershed District shall apply if the property is also located within said District.

C.	Rural Land Management System
The following system shall be used to determine the required minimum lot area per dwelling unit and thus the density of development for residential subdivisions in the Farm
& Forest Zone of the Town of Wilton. This system is based upon the United States Department of Agriculture’s farmland importance classification and the sites’ suitability for subsurface sewage disposal.

To determine the density of development for a subdivision proposal, the site shall be evaluated according to the following factors.

This evaluation shall be based on a soils map prepared by a soil scientist following an on- site investigation and certified by the Franklin County Conservation District. For each factor, a numerical rating shall be made, and the ratings for the four factors shall be combined to get the “Overall Suitability Rating” for the parcel. The following schedule shall then be applied to the “OSR” to determine the allowable density of development.

Minimum Lot Area Per Overall Suitability Rating	Dwelling Unit

30 to 35	40,000 sq. ft.
24 to 29	80,000 sq. ft.
16 to 23	120,000 sq. ft.
12 to 15	200,000 sq. ft.
less than 12	Not permitted

Criteria:
1.	Percent of the site classified as Prime Farmland or Unique Farmland by the U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service.

a.	less than 10%	10
b.	11% - 20%	9
c.	21% - 40%	7
d.	41% - 65%	4
e.	more than 65%	0







2.	Percent of the site suitable for private underground sewage disposal utilizing conventional septic tank leach field systems based upon Part 11 of the Maine State Plumbing Code.
 

a.	more than 90%	10
b.	more than 70-90%	9
c.	more than 40-70%	7
d.	more than 20-40%	4
e.	less than 20%	0

3.	Percent of the site with a SCS soil suitability rating of good or fair for houses with basements.

a.	more than 90%	10
b.	more than 70-90%	9
c.	more than 40-70%	7
d.	more than 20-40%	4
e.	less than 20%	0

4.	Percent of the site located outside of a flood hazard area or wetland area, or located at least 100 feet from the high watermark of any pond, perennial stream or river.

a.	more than 90%	10
b.	more than 70-90%	9
c.	more than 40-70%	7
d.	more than 20-40%	4
e.	less than 20%	0

4.6	Commercial Zone

A. Purpose
To identify those areas which were deemed suitable for light industry, stores, lodging, or similar businesses.


4.7	Industrial Zone

A.	Purpose
To provide areas within the Town of Wilton for manufacturing, processing, treatment, research, warehousing, distribution and other industrial activities through the establishment of an industrial floating zone.

B.	Location (Amended June 19, 2000)
The location of the Industrial Zone shall be by amendment to this Ordinance and shall be adopted by a majority vote of the Governing Body of the Town. The location of an Industrial Zone shall be based upon:
1.	The minimum size of the area to be zoned shall not be less than twenty (20) acres.
2.	The zone is or will be served by adequate infrastructure including water and sewer provided by the Town or the developer.
3.	The availability of adequate transportation and traffic facilities.
4.	The zone shall be affixed not more than two (2) times without amendment to the Comprehensive Plan.
 

C.	Application for Location of Industrial Zone
An application for the location of industrial development shall follow a two step procedure (except those areas already zoned industrial), for proper rezoning of land and approval of development plans:
1.	The applicant shall submit to the Planning Board for rezoning consideration a general plan of the proposed parcel or use. This information shall not serve to comply with the Site Plan Review approval.
2.	The rezoning amendment shall comply with the provisions of Section 1.6 of this Ordinance.

4.8	Watershed Overlay District

A.	Purpose
The Watershed Overlay District is intended to maintain safe and healthful environmental conditions; prevent and control water pollution; protect spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life, bird and other wildlife habitats; control building sites; provide visual and physical points of access to waters and natural beauty; and protect and maintain the present quality and volume of potable water supplied from the Varnum Pond Watershed to residents of Wilton, Farmington, and North Jay.

B.	Boundaries and Definitions
The Watershed Overlay Zone is that area of Wilton in which surface and ground waters ultimately flow or drain into Varnum Pond as delineated on a watershed map on file in the Wilton Town Office. The Watershed Overlay Zone shall be superimposed over underlying zones. Permitted uses in the underlying zones shall continue subject to compliance with the provisions of the Watershed Overlay Zone.

C.	Use, Dimensional and Environmental Regulations
All buildings, structures, uses and activities in the Watershed Overlay Zone shall comply with the performance standards of Sections 5.1 through 5.8 of Article 5 of this Ordinance.

D.	Waiver
When by reason of extraordinary physical conditions peculiar to the land or buildings under appeal but not to other land or buildings adjoining or nearby, an owner of land would be subject to unusual difficulty or special hardships (not mere financial hardship or hardships caused by rigid sewage disposal regulations) by reason of the literal application and rigorous enforcement of the terms of this section, the Planning Board may grant a waiver from strict compliance with the requirements of this section after notice and   public hearing. No such waiver shall be granted unless the Board is satisfied that the waiver applied for will not adversely affect the quality of the Varnum Pond water supply. When an application for a waiver is filed, it shall be forwarded to the Water Department together with a request for an informational report and a recommendation to the Board regarding the disposition of the requested waiver application. In any case in which a waiver request is granted despite the recommendation of the Water Department that it be denied, the Planning Board shall make part of its permanent records a written statement  of its reasons for taking such action. In granting any such waiver application, the Board
 
may also impose reasonable conditions upon the use as part of the permanent records of the Board, as well as being furnished to the applicant for compliance which shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer or Plumbing Inspector.

E.	Conflict
In any case in which a provision of this section conflicts with a provision of any other section of this Chapter, the provisions which establishes the more stringent standard shall apply.

4.9	Downtown/Village Zone

A.	Purpose and Location
1.	Purpose. The Downtown/Village Zone is intended to maintain the traditionally  developed area of Town. Development is of greater density than in other areas of the Town and covers a mixture of land uses including manufacturing, commercial, public and residential. The traditional downtown area of the community should be a vital and active area, and this zone seeks to maintain the existing character and land use mix.
2.	Location. The Downtown/Village Zone shall include those lots on the west side of Wilson Stream with frontage on Main Street in the area between Weld Street and the Canal Street Bridge.

4.10	Stream Protection District

A.	Purpose and Location
1.	Purpose. To provide a buffer area adjacent to streams to maintain their natural values.
2.	Location. The Stream Protection District includes all land areas within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a stream, exclusive of those areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a great pond or river, or within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of a freshwater wetland. Where a stream and its associated shore land area is located within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the above water bodies or wetlands, that land area shall be regulated under the terms of the shoreland district associated with that water body or wetland
 



ARTICLE 5.	PERFORMANCE STANDARDS


5.0 Introduction

A. This article lists special regulations that pertain to individual zones or uses, as appropriate.

5.1	Special Considerations for the Shoreland Zone

A.	Applicability.
Section 5.1 applies only to Resource Protection, Limited Residential and Recreational,  Stream Protection and Watershed Overlay zones and to all land areas located within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of any great pond, river or the upland edge of a wetland and not located within the Downtown/Village, Commercial or Industrial zones. All other sections of Article 5 apply in all zones.

B.	Additional Considerations for Review and Approval
In addition to other criteria of this Ordinance the Planning Board shall find that the proposed use in the Shoreland Zone:
1.	Will maintain safe and healthful conditions;
2.	Will not result in water pollution, erosion, or sedimentation to surface waters;
3.	Will adequately provide for the disposal of all wastewater;
4.	Will not have an adverse impact on spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life, bird or other wildlife habitat;
5.	Will conserve shore cover and visual, as well as actual, points of access to inland waters;
6.	Will protect archaeological and historic resources as designated in the comprehensive plan;
7.	Will avoid problems associated with floodplain development and use; and
8. Is in conformance with the other provisions of Section 5.1


C.	Sanitation
1.	Privies shall be permitted in areas not served by municipal sewage facilities provided that they conform to the provisions of the State of Maine Subsurface Disposal Rules.
2.	All subsurface sewage disposal facilities shall be installed in conformance with the Maine Subsurface Disposal Rules and the following.
a.	Clearing or removal of woody vegetation necessary to site a new system	and any associated fill extensions, shall not extend closer than seventy-five (75) feet,
horizontal distance, from the normal high water line of a water body or the upland edge of a wetland; and
b.	A holding tank is not allowed for a first-time use in the shoreland zone.

D.	Principal and Accessory Structures and Lots
1.	All new principal and accessory structures shall be setback at least 100 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of great ponds, and 75 feet, horizontal distance,
 
from the normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland, except that in the Downtown/Village and Industrial Zones the setback from the normal high-water line shall be at least 25 feet. In the Resource Protection District the setback requirement shall be 250, feet horizontal distance, except for structure, roads, parking spaces or other related objects allowed in that district in which case the setback requirements specified above shall apply. In addition
a.	The water body, tributary stream or wetland setback provision shall not apply to structures which require direct access to the water body or wetland as an operational necessity, such as piers, private docks and retaining walls, and shall not apply to other functionally water-dependent uses. The setback provisions shall apply to boathouses, storage sheds, garages and other similar structures.
b.	The Planning Board may increase the required setback of a proposed structure, as a condition to permit approval, if necessary to accomplish the purposes of this ordinance. Instances where a greater setback may be appropriate include, but are not limited to, areas of steep slope; shallow or erodible soils; or where an adequate vegetative buffer does not exist.
2.	The lowest floor elevation of all buildings and structures, and all openings into structures including basements, shall be elevated at least one foot above the elevation of the 100 year flood, the flood of record, or in the absence of these, the flood as defined by soil types identified as recent flood plain soils.
3.	Notwithstanding the requirements stated above, stairways or similar structures may be allowed with a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer, to provide shoreline access in areas of steep slopes or unstable soils provided; 1) that the structure is limited to a maximum of four (4) feet in width; 2) that the structure does not extend below or over the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland, (unless permitted by the Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act, Title 38, MRSA Section 480-C); and 3) that the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable access alternative exists on the property.
4.	In determining compliance with the minimum lot size requirements set forth on Table B of this Ordinance, the following provisions apply to all land located within the shore land zone:
a.	Land below the normal high water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland and land beneath roads serving more than two lots shall not be included toward calculating minimum lot area.
b.	Lots located on opposite sides of a public or private road shall be considered each a separate tract or parcel of land, and shall be considered each a separate lot unless such road was established by the owner of land on both sides thereof after September 22, 1971.
c.	The minimum width of any portion of any lot within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland shall be equal to or greater than the shore frontage requirement for a lot with the proposed use.

E.	Piers, Docks, Wharfs, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or Below the Normal High-Water Line of a Water Body or Within a Wetland
(Amended June 21, 1999 and June 16, 2008)
1.	Access from shore shall be developed on soils appropriate for such use and constructed so as to control erosion.
 
2.	The location shall not interfere with existing developed or natural beach areas.
3.	The facility shall be located so as to minimize adverse effects on fisheries.
4.	The facility shall be no larger in dimension than necessary to carry on the activity and be consistent with the surrounding character and uses of the area. A temporary pier, dock or wharf shall not be wider than six feet for non-commercial uses.
5.	No new structure shall be built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock or other structure extending beyond the normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland unless the structure requires direct access to the water body or wetland as an operational necessity.
6.	New permanent piers and docks shall not be permitted unless it is clearly demonstrated to the Planning Board that a temporary pier or dock is not feasible, and a permit has been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection, pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act.
7.	No existing structures built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock or other structure extending beyond the normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland shall be converted to residential dwelling units in any district.
8.	Except in the Downtown/Village, Commercial or Industrial zones, structures built on,  over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock or other structures extending beyond the normal high- water line of a water body or within a wetland shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height above the pier, wharf, dock or other structure.

F.	Agriculture
1.	All spreading of manure shall be accomplished in conformance with the Manure Utilization Guidelines published by the Maine Department of Agriculture on November 1, 2001, and the Nutrient Management Law (7 M.R.S.A. sections 4201-4209), OR AMENDMENTS THERETO.
2.	Manure shall not be stored or stockpiled within one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, of a great pond or within seventy-five (75) feet horizontal distance, of other water bodies, tributary streams, or wetlands. All manure storage areas within the shore land zone must be constructed or modified such that the facility produces no discharge of effluent or contaminated storm water.
3.	All agricultural activities involving the tilling or fertilizing of soil greater than 10,000 square feet in surface area within the shore land zone, or the spreading, disposal or  storage of more than 1 ton of manure within the shore land zone shall be done in conformance with a soil and water conservation plan that conforms with or provides greater safeguards and protections than the standards and specifications contained in the publication entitled State of Maine Strategy for Managing Non point Source Pollution from Agricultural Sources and Best Management System Guidelines, dated October, 1991. Such activities shall require a permit from the Planning Board. Application for such permit shall be accompanied by the soil and water conservation plan. The Planning Board may require review and critique by the Franklin County Soil and Water Conservation District of any plan not prepared by the District and may impose conditions upon the activity as recommended by the District. Non-conformance with the provisions of said plan or conditions shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance. Agricultural activities involving the draining or altering of any inland wetlands within the shore land zone shall not be undertaken without applicable permits required under state and federal law and under the Floodplain Management Ordinance for the Town of Wilton.
 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in 1 M.R.S.A. §302, this paragraph (B) applies to applications for permits pending on the date of its adoption.
4.	There shall be no new tilling of soil within one-hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a great pond; within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from other water bodies; nor within twenty-five feet, horizontal distance, of tributary streams, and wetlands. Operations in existence on the effective date of this ordinance and not in conformance with this provision may be maintained.
5.	Newly established livestock grazing areas shall not be permitted within one hundred
(100) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a great pond; within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance of other water bodies, nor, within twenty-five
(25) feet, horizontal distance, of tributary streams, and wetlands. Livestock grazing associated with ongoing farm activities, and which are not in conformance with the above setback provisions may continue, provided that such grazing is conducted in accordance with a Conservation Plan.

G.	Timber Harvesting and Clearing of Vegetation for Development
1.	Timber Harvesting
The Town of Wilton repealed its local shoreland timber harvesting regulations on January 1, 2013.Timber harvesting in shore land zones are now regulated by State law. See the Maine Department of Conservation for State requirements and permitting.
2.	Clearing of Vegetation for Development
a.	Within a shore land area zoned for resource protection abutting a great pond, there shall be no cutting of vegetation within the strip of land extending 75 feet inland from the normal high water mark except to remove safety hazards. Elsewhere in any Resource Protection District the clearing of vegetation shall be limited to that which is necessary for uses expressly authorized in that district.
b.	Except in areas as described in paragraph a, above, and except to allow for the development of permitted uses, within a strip of land extending one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, inland from the normal high-water line of a great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, and seventy-five
(75) feet, horizontal distance, from any other water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland, a buffer strip of vegetation shall be preserved as follows:
1)	There shall be no cleared opening greater than 250 square feet in the forest canopy as measured from the outer limits of the tree crown. However, a footpath not to exceed SIX (6) feet in width as measured between tree trunks is permitted provided that a cleared line of sight to the water through the buffer strip is not created. Adjacent to a great pond classified GPA, or stream or river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, the width of the foot path shall be limited to six (6) feet.
2)	Selective cutting of trees within the buffer strip is permitted provided that a well distributed stand of trees and other vegetation is maintained. For the purposes of this section a “well-distributed stand of trees” adjacent to a great pond classified GPA or a river or stream flowing to a great pond classified GPA, shall be defined as maintaining a rating score of 12 or more in any 25-foot by 25 foot square (625 square feet) area as determined by the following rating system.

1.	Diameter of tree at 4 ½
 
2.	Feet above ground level	Points
3.	(inches)
a.	2-4	1
b.	>4-12	2
c.	>12	4

3)	Adjacent to other water bodies, tributary streams, and wetlands, a “well- distributed stand of trees” and other vegetation” is defined as maintaining a minimum rating score of 8 per 25-foot by 25-foot square area.
4)	For the purposes of Section 5.1.G.2.b.2., “other natural vegetation” is defined as retaining existing vegetation under three (3) feet in height and other ground cover and retaining at least three (3) saplings less than two (2) inches in diameter at four and one-half (4 ½) feet above ground level for each 25-foot by 25-foot rectangular area. If three (3) saplings do not exist, no woody stems less than two (2) inches in diameter can be removed until 3 saplings have been recruited in to the plot.
5)	Notwithstanding the above provisions, no more than 40% of the total volume of trees four (4) inches or more in diameter, measured at 4 ½ feet above ground level may be  removed in any ten (10) year period
6)	In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitat, adjacent to great ponds classified GPA, and streams and rivers which flow to great ponds classified GPA, existing vegetation under three (3) feet in height and other ground cover shall not be removed, except to provide for a footpath or other permitted uses as described in paragraphs G.2.a and G.2.b above.
7)	Pruning of tree branches, on the bottom 1/3 of the tree is permitted.
8)	In order to maintain a buffer strip of vegetation, when the removal of storm- damaged, diseased, unsafe, or dead trees results in the creation of cleared openings, these openings shall be replanted with native tree species unless existing new tree growth is present.
9)	The provisions contained in paragraph G.2.b above shall not apply to those portions of public recreational facilities adjacent to public swimming areas.
Cleared areas, however, shall be limited to the minimum area necessary
c.	At distances greater than one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, from a great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, and seventy- five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high water line of any other water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland, except to allow for the development of permitted uses, there shall be permitted on any lot, in any ten (10) year period, selective cutting of not more than forty (40) percent of the volume of trees four (4) inches or more in diameter, measured 4 ½ feet above ground level.
Tree removal in conjunction with the development of permitted uses shall be included in the forty (40) percent calculation. For the purposes of these standards volume may be considered to be equivalent to basal area.
d.	In no event shall cleared openings for development, including but not limited to, principal and accessory structures, driveways and sewage disposal areas, exceed in the aggregate, 25% of the lot area or ten thousand (10,000) square feet, whichever is greater, including land previously developed This provision shall not apply to the Industrial and Downtown Village Zones.
e.	Cleared openings legally in existence on the effective date of this Ordinance may be
 
maintained, but shall not be enlarged, except as permitted by this Ordinance.
f.	Fields which have reverted to primarily shrubs, trees, or other woody vegetation shall be regulated under the provisions of this section..
3.	Plan Required in Watershed Overlay District (Amended June 21, 1999)
Within the Watershed Overlay District, harvesting of trees may be permitted only after a plan prepared by a qualified forester is submitted to and approved by the Planning Board. Such plan shall be approved or disapproved on the basis of its conformance with good watershed management practice for domestic water supplies and shall be judged by the standards of this section 5.4.

H.	Floodplains
1.	All buildings and structures constructed, erected, enlarged modified, replaced or relocated within a floodplain area must comply with the requirements of the Floodplain Management Ordinance of the Town of Wilton.
2.	Mobile Home Parks in Floodplains
In the case of mobile home parks located in Zone A of the Flood Hazard Boundary Map, an evacuation plan shall be filed, by the owner, with the Town Civil Emergency Preparedness Office, indicating alternate vehicular access and escape routes.

I.	Individual Private Campsites. Individual, private campsites not associated with campgrounds are allowed provided the following conditions are met:
1.	One campsite per lot existing on the effective date of this Ordinance, or thirty thousand (30,000) square feet of lot area within the shore land zone, whichever is less, may be permitted.
2.	Campsite placement on any lot, including the area intended for a recreational vehicle or tent platform, shall be set back one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance from the normal high water line of a great pond and seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland.
3.	Only one recreational vehicle shall be allowed on a campsite. The recreational vehicles shall not be located on any type of permanent foundation except for a gravel pad, and no structure except a canopy shall be attached to the recreational vehicle.
4.	The clearing of vegetation for the siting of the recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter in a Resource Protection District shall be limited to one thousand (1000) square feet. (Amended June 21, 1999)
5.	A written sewage disposal plan describing the proposed method and location of sewage disposal shall be required for each campsite and shall be approved by the Local Plumbing Inspector. Where disposal is off-site, written authorization from the receiving facility or land owner is required.
6.	When a recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter is placed on-site for more than one hundred and twenty (120 ) days per year, all requirements for residential structures shall be met, including the installation of a subsurface sewage disposal system in compliance with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules unless served by public sewage facilities. (Amended June 17, 2019)

J.	Campgrounds (Amended June 21, 1999. Campgrounds shall conform to the minimum requirements imposed under State licensing procedures and the following:
 
1.	Campgrounds shall contain a minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet of land, not including roads and driveways, for each site. Land supporting wetland vegetation, and land below the high-water line of a water body shall not be included in calculating land area per site.
2.	The areas intended for placement of a recreational vehicle, tent or shelter, and	utility and service buildings shall be set back a minimum of one-hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of a great pond and seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance from the normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland.

K.	Roads and Driveways. The following standards shall apply to the construction of roads and/or driveways and drainage systems, culverts and other related features.
1.	Roads and driveways shall be set back at least one-hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of a great pond and seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary steams, or the upland edge of a wetland unless no reasonable alternative exists as determined by the Planning Board. If no other reasonable alternative exists, the road and/or driveway setback requirement shall be no less than fifty (50) feet, horizontal distance, upon clear showing by the applicant that appropriate techniques will be used to prevent sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Such techniques may include, but are not limited to, the installation of settling basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts placed so as to avoid sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or wetland.

On slopes of greater than twenty (20) percent the road and/or driveway setback shall be increased by ten (10) feet, horizontal distance, for each five (5) percent increase in slope above twenty (20) percent.

Section 1 does not apply to approaches to water crossings nor to roads or driveways that provide access to permitted structures, and facilities located nearer to the shoreline, or tributary stream due to an operational necessity, excluding temporary docks for recreational uses. Roads and driveways providing access to permitted structures within the setback area shall comply fully with the requirements of Section 1 except for that portion of the road or driveway necessary for direct access to the structure.

2.	Existing public roads may be expanded within the legal road right-of-way regardless of setback from a water body, tributary stream or wetland.
3.	New roads and driveways are prohibited in a Resource Protection District except that the Planning Board may grant a permit to construct a road or driveway to provide access to permitted uses within the district. A road or driveway may also be approved by the Planning Board in a Resource Protection District, upon a finding that no reasonable alternative route or location is available outside the district. When a road or driveway is permitted in a Resource Protection District the road and/or driveway shall be set back as far as practicable from the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland.
4.	Road and driveway banks shall be no steeper than a slope of two (2) horizontal to one (1) vertical, and shall be graded and stabilized in accordance with the provisions for erosion
 
and sedimentation control contained in Article 5.8. (Amended June 21, 1999)
5.	Road and driveway grades shall be no greater than ten (10) percent except for short segments of less than two hundred (200) feet.
6.	In order to prevent road and driveway surface drainage from directly entering water bodies tributary streams or wetlands, roads and driveways shall be designed, constructed, and maintained to empty onto an unscarred buffer strip at least (50) feet plus two times the average slope, in width between the outflow point of the ditch or culvert and the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland. Surface drainage which is directed to an unscarred buffer strip shall be diffused or spread out to promote infiltration of the runoff and to minimize channelized flow of the drainage through the buffer strip.
7.	Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips and water turnouts shall be installed in a manner effective in directing drainage onto unscarred buffer strips before the flow gains sufficient volume or head to erode the road, driveway or ditch. To accomplish this, the following shall apply:

a.	Ditch relief culverts, drainage dips and associated water turnouts shall be spaced along the road or driveway at intervals no greater than indicated in the following table:

Grade	Spacing
(Percent)	(Feet)

0-2	250
3-5	200-135
6-10	100-80
11-15	80-60
16-20	60-45
21+	40

b.	Drainage dips may be used in place of ditch relief culverts only where the grade is ten
(10) percent or less.
c.	On sections having slopes greater than ten (10) percent, ditch relief culverts shall be placed at approximately a thirty (30) degree angle down slope from a line perpendicular to the centerline of the road or driveway.
d.	Ditch relief culverts shall be sufficiently sized and properly installed in order to allow for effective functioning and their inlet and outlet ends shall be stabilized with appropriate materials.

8.	Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other storm water runoff control installations associated with roads and driveways shall be maintained on a regular basis to assure effective functioning.

L.	Parking Areas (Amended June 21, 1999)
1.	Parking areas shall meet the shoreline and tributary stream setback for structures for the district in which such areas are located. The setback requirement for parking areas serving public boat launching facilities may be reduced to no less than fifty (50) feet from
 
the normal high-water line or upland edge of a wetland if the Planning Board finds that no other reasonable alternative exists.
2.	Parking areas shall be adequately sized for the proposed use and shall be designed to prevent storm water runoff from flowing directly into a water body, and where feasible, to retain all runoff on-site.
3.	In determining the appropriate size of proposed parking facilities, the following shall apply:
a.	Typical parking space: Approximately ten (10) feet wide and twenty (20) feet long, except that parking spaces for a vehicle and boat trailer shall be forty (40) feet long.
b.	Internal travel aisles: Approximately twenty (20) feet wide.

M.	Essential Services
1.	Where feasible, the installation of essential services shall be limited to existing public ways and existing service corridors.
2.	The installation of essential services, other than road-side distribution lines, is not allowed in a Resource Protection or Stream Protection District, except to provide services to a permitted use
within said district, or except where the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable alternative exists. Where allowed, such structures and facilities shall be located so as to minimize any adverse impacts on surrounding uses and resources, including visual impacts.
3.	Damaged  or  destroyed  public  utility  transmission  and  distribution  lines,  towers  and  related equipment may be replaced or reconstructed without a permit.

N.	Mineral Exploration
Mineral exploration to determine the nature or extent of mineral resources shall be accomplished by hand sampling, test boring, or other methods which create minimal disturbance of less than one hundred (100) square feet of ground surface. A permit from the Code Enforcement Officer shall be required for mineral exploration which exceeds the above limitation. All excavations, including test pits and holes, shall be immediately capped, filled or secured by other equally effective measures to restore disturbed areas and to protect the public health and safety.

O.	Water Quality
No activity shall deposit on or into the ground or discharge to the waters of the State any pollutant that, by itself or in combination with other activities or substances, will impair designated uses or the water classification of the water body, tributary stream or wetland.

P.	Archaeological Site
Any proposed land use activity involving structural development or soil disturbance on or adjacent to sites listed on, or eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic Places, as determined by the permitting authority, shall be submitted by the applicant to the Maine Historic Preservation Commission for review and comment, at least twenty (20) days prior to action being taken by the permitting authority. The permitting authority shall consider comments received from the Commission prior to rendering a decision on the application.

Q.	Erosion and Sedimentation Control (Amended June 21, 1999)
1.	Filling, grading, lagooning, dredging, earth moving activities and other land use activities shall be conducted in such a manner to prevent to a maximum extent the erosion and sedimentation of surface waters.
 
2.	Clearing of vegetation in the shore land zone shall require a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer. Filling and earth-moving activities greater than ten (10) cubic yards in the shore land zone shall require a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer, except that filling and earth-moving activities greater than ten (10) cubic yards in the Resource Protection District shall require a permit from the Planning Board.
3.	Conditions may be imposed on earth moving activities by the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board as necessary to prevent erosion and sedimentation and such conditions will become part of a permit.

5.2	Conversion of Dwellings

A.	General Requirements
This section does not apply to dwellings in the shoreland zone. The Planning Board may permit a dwelling which existed prior to March 11, 1974 and which cannot meet the dimensional or parking requirements for two-family or multi- family dwellings to be converted to a two family or multi-family dwelling if the Board finds that the proposed conversion meets the criteria and standards of Section 6.4 of this Ordinance, subject to the limitations and guidelines of paragraphs B and C below. Approval of a conversion under this Section shall not require and shall not be deemed to be the granting of a variance.

B.	Limitations
1.	Dimensional requirements may not be decreased more than fifty-five percent (55%).
2.	Parking requirements may not be decreased more than fifty percent (50%).

C.	Guidelines
In setting required conditions, the Planning Board shall use the following guidelines.
1.	Minimum Dwelling Unit Size 500 square feet for single family homes and 350 square feet for apartments. (Amended June 6, 2011)
2.	Exterior. Exteriors of structures shall be maintained or reconstructed in a manner so that the architectural and aesthetic character of the property and of the neighborhood is maintained.
3.	Open Space. Open, unpaved (lawn, garden, shrub or tree) area of a minimum equal to half the combined floor space of the dwelling units but no less than twenty-five percent (25%) of the property shall be maintained.

5.3	Entrances and Exits to Public Ways
(Amended June 21, 1999)
All new developments must provide properly marked entrances and exits at right angles to the public way, including subsurface drainage when needed and curbing and sidewalks as may be required by the Maine Department of Transportation, the Planning Board, the Town, or Article 6.4.3.

5.4	Off-Street Parking and Loading

A.	The following minimum off-street parking requirements shall be provided and maintained for all new construction, alterations and changes of use:
 

1.	Dwellings:	1 ½ parking spaces for each dwelling unit
2.	Motels, tourist homes:	1 parking space for each sleeping room
3.	Schools:	5 parking spaces for each room used for the purpose of instruction
4.	Health institutions:	1 parking space for every(bed facilities only) 3 beds and 1 parking space for each employee based on the  expected average employee occupancy
5.	Theaters, auditoria, and churches:	1 parking space for every 4 seats or for every 100
square feet or major fraction thereof of assemblage space if no fixed seats
6.	Retail stores:	1 parking space for every 200 square feet of gross floor area
7.	Restaurants, eating and	1 parking space for
drinking establishments:	3 seats
8.	Offices, professional	1 parking space for every 200 square feet
and public buildings:	of gross leasable area, exclusive of cellar and bulk storage areas
9.	Industrial:	1 parking space for each 2 employees, based on the highest expected average employee occupancy

B.	Required off-street parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the principal building or use except within the Downtown/Village Zone where required off-street may be provided within 1,000 feet of the principal building measured along lines of access or at an off-site satellite parking area approved by the Planning Board. (Amended June 21, 1999.)

C.	The Planning Board is empowered to determine the number of parking spaces required for any use not specifically listed herein by applying the requirements for the listed use category which most closely resembles the non-listed use.

5.5	Removal of Topsoil

The removal of topsoil in excess of 100 cubic yards within a 12 month period shall not be permitted without a site plan approval by the Planning Board except where such removal is necessarily incidental to or in connection with the construction, alteration, excavation, or grading of a building, structure, road or parking area on the premises. The Planning Board may impose such restrictions as it deems necessary to protect adjacent properties or water bodies, and such restrictions shall be considered a condition of the permit.



5.6	Removal of Stone, Sand, Gravel & Minerals
(Amended June 21, 2002)

The removal of sand, gravel or fill that is not for commercial sale or use, which will result in a total excavated area of one acre or less, shall be permitted with a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer provided that the standards in this Section are complied with.
 
Any removal of sand, gravel or fill that is for commercial sale or use, as well as removal that is not for commercial sale or use but that will result in a total excavated area in excess of one acre shall be permitted only with a Site Plan approval from the Planning Board. This Section also applies to the quarrying of stone or minerals for commercial sale or use. In addition to complying with the requirements of Article 6, such excavation or quarrying must comply with the following submissions requirements, review criteria and standards:

A.	Submission Requirements The Site Plan must show:

1.	The existing and proposed limits of excavation clearly delineated.
2.	Location, functions and ground area of all structures, facilities, (processing equipment such as crushers, washers, screeners, and hot-mix asphalt facilities) parking lots, roads, and mud run-off areas.
3.	Entrance and exit layout.
4.	Gates or other means for controlling access.
5.	Pre- and post-development topography using an interval of ten foot contours for pits of less than five (5) acres and no greater than 10 foot contours for pits of five (5) acres or more if deemed necessary by the Planning Board.
6.	Location of topsoil stockpile areas. Sufficient topsoil shall be salvaged for reclamation purposes.
7.	Areas where natural vegetation will be left and where plantings will be made to screen the operation from view.
8.	Slopes and vegetation for protecting adjacent structures.
9.	For an extraction for commercial sale or use, location of a benchmark sufficient to verify the location of the seasonal high water table and one or more monitoring wells documenting the seasonal high water table during the life of the pit.
10.	Proposed disposal method for stumps and grubbing.
11.	Plans and schedule for reclamation.
12.	A spill prevention, control and countermeasure plan to control spills of petroleum products and other hazardous materials.
13.	The phases of excavation and reclamation.
14.	Surface drainage and watersheds on parcel, pre- and post-excavation.
15.	For pits of five (5) acres or more, at least one cross section along the long axis of the pit and another cross section at a right angle to it. The cross section diagrams should show the existing grade, the proposed final grade including maximum depth of excavation, depth to ground water and the stratigraphy of the surficial deposits at the site.



B.	Review Criteria and Standards
1.	A natural buffer strip of not less than 50 feet shall be maintained between the location of any extraction of materials and all property lines. The existing vegetation within the natural buffer strip shall not be removed. This buffer strip may be reduced to 10 feet with written consent from abutting property owners. The Planning Board may reduce the front setback to twenty-five feet from the right-of-way of a public road, if in the opinion of the Planning Board, suitable buffers and fencing are provided.
2.	Buffers may be eliminated between abutting properties containing pits provided the Planning Board is shown proof of written permission of the abutting pit owners.
 
3.	No petroleum products shall be stored or handled in the pit and no refueling or oil changes shall be conducted in the pit unless such activities comply with applicable standards promulgated by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection and a spill prevention, control and countermeasure plan is provided.
4.	There shall be no storage or dumping in the pit of any substances that could produce harmful leach ate, unless such substances are placed under cover and on impermeable, spill proof base. Such potentially deleterious substances include, but are not limited to salt, rubbish, creosoted timber and petroleum products.
5.	No oiling of access and haul roads is permitted.
6.	No excavation within five (5) feet of the seasonal high water table may occur at any site.
7.	No ditches, trenches, pumping or other methods shall be used to lower the water table to permit more gravel extraction than could occur under natural conditions unless a plan for such activities has been approved by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection and the Planning Board.
8.	Access to the pit shall be strictly controlled.
9.	All final reclaimed slopes shall not exceed a horizontal to vertical ratio of 2:1.
10.	The affected land shall be restored to a condition or physical state which either is similar to or compatible with that which existed prior to extraction, or encourages the future productive use of the land. The pit shall be reclaimed in phases so that:
a.	the working pit (operation phase) does not exceed ten (10) acres at any time; and
b.	the area being actively reclaimed (reclamation phase) does not exceed fifteen (15) acres at any time.
c.	upon the completion of excavation, the side slopes of the pit shall be re-graded within thirty (30) days.
11.	Stumps and grubbings shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the Planning Board and in conformance with all applicable State of Maine regulations.
12.	Upon cessation of the extraction of materials or upon the expiration of the Planning Board approval, the site shall be rehabilitated in accordance with a plan approved by the Board.
13.	Unless authorized pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act, Title 38, M.R.S.A., Section 480-C no part of any extraction operation, including drainage and runoff control features shall be permitted within one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance of the normal high-water line of a great pond and within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of any other water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland as defined.
14.	Any gravel pit which requires a permit from the Maine Department of Environmental Protection under the Site Location of Development Act shall obtain written approval from the Department before the site plan is approved under this Ordinance.

5.7	Public Service Corporations
(Amended June 21, 1999)
Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance in any zone of the transmission or distribution system of a utility, water or gas main, sewer pipe, telephone or power line, and their accessories. Structures essential to such a utility, such as power substations, standpipes, and the like, shall be permitted by the Planning Board subject to such restrictions as the Planning Board may impose in order to protect adjacent properties. A public utility, water district, sanitary district, or any utility company of any kind may not install
 
services to any new structure located in the shore land zone unless written authorization attesting to the validity and currency of all local permits required under this or any previous Ordinance  has been issued by the appropriate municipal officials or other written arrangements have been made between the municipal officials and the utility.

5.8	Signs

No sign requiring a permit shall be erected, enlarged, or relocated without a sign permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer upon finding that the sign complies with the requirements of this article. No sign may be displayed along a state highway that is in violation of Maine State Law and Maine DOT regulations and policies.

1.	Business Use Signs must be on premise
A.	Business Use Signs require a sign permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer unless listed  as no permit required.
B.	Business Use Signs that are free standing are limited to 32 sqft in size (64 sqft if double sided). The height limit for Business Use Signs is 25 feet above grade. Business Use Signs may be illuminated internally or by shielded lights directed at the sign. Signs must be located within 1000 feet of the principal building where the business is carried on or practiced. Free Standing signs are limited to one per business.
C.	Inflatable Signs, Tethered Balloons, Sale Banners, and Pennants: limited to 4 events per business per year and a total of 30 calendar days per year. Tethered Balloons are restricted to a 100 foot height limit.  No permit required.
D.	Wall and Roof Signs cannot exceed the existing area of the wall or roof that the sign will be attached to and are limited to no more than 10 feet in height above the wall or roof.
E.	Canopies over fuel islands shall only advertise fuel or fuel products.
F.	Non-flickering neon lights are allowed only in window signs and only in the Commercial and Downtown Village Zones. No permit required.
G.	Projecting awning signs may extend from the building by no more than 4 feet from the building and may not extend beyond the curb.
H.	A kiosk is required if more than 2 businesses are located on the property. The kiosk size is limited to 80 sqft (160 sqft if double sided).
I.	Sandwich Board signs are allowed in all zones. There is a 6 foot height limit and a 2 foot width limit. These signs may only be displayed during business hours and must be brought into the building at the close of each business day. The limit is one sandwich board sign per business.
J.	Business flags are limited to 2 per premise no larger than 15 sqft/flag.

2.	Home Occupation Use Signs must be on premise
A.	Home Occupation Use Signs require a sign permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.
B.	Home Occupation Use Signs are limited to one sign per premise and 6 sqft in size, (12 sqft if double sided).
C.	Home Occupation Use Signs may not be illuminated.

3.	Regulations for all signs:
A.	Discontinued signs must be removed within 60 days after the closing of the business by
 
either the business or property owner. Nonconforming sign supports must also be removed within 60 days of the closing of the business.
B.	Signs may not be located on utility poles, unless approved by the utility; rocks, trees or other natural features, or, any traffic control sign. Signs regulating hunting, fishing, and trespassing may be located on natural features according to Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife or other applicable state regulations.
C.	Signs shall be prohibited if they attempt or appear to attempt to direct the movement of traffic or if they interfere with, imitate, or resemble any official traffic sign, signal, or device. Signs may not prevent the driver of a vehicle from having a clear and unobstructed view of official signs and approaching or merging traffic. Signs may not have flashing or moving lights or moving parts.  So called changeable signs must conform to Title 23, M.R.S.A. section 11-A.

D.	Approach signs for businesses on a private way located more than 1000 feet from the nearest public way or is not visible to traffic from the nearest public way may erect no more than 2 approach signs with a total surface area not to exceed 32 square feet per sign. These signs are to be located outside of the public right-of-way limits within 300 feet of the intersection of the public and private way and on the land owned by the business they advertise.

4.	Allowable off-premise signs outside of the right-of-way.  No Permit Required.
A.	Political Signs: No limit on the number of signs. May not be erected more than 6 weeks prior to the voting date and must be removed within 1 week after the voting date. Political signs are limited to 32 square feet in size per sign (64 sqft if double sided). No political signs may be placed on any town property and may not be placed within the boundaries of a cemetery. Political signs may not interfere with traffic visibility at intersections.
B.	Signs for the growers of agricultural products erected between May 1st and December  31st, including Christmas trees and wreaths, maple syrup, etc are limited to 4 signs within 5 miles of the sales area. The sizes of off-premise agricultural product signs are limited to 8 sqft per sign, may only be displayed while the product is available and must be directional in nature.  Agricultural signs may only be displayed on private property with the owner’s written permission and must be placed a minimum of 33 feet from the center line of a road. The maximum number of signs is 4 off-premise and 2 on-premise. A grower of agricultural products who sells from a location that fronts on a numbered state highway may not erect any off-premise signs adjacent to that numbered state highway.
C.	Signs showing the place and time of services or meeting of in-town religious and civic organizations are limited to 4 signs for each organization. The size limit is 24 by 30 inches.



5.	Signs allowed with no limit on size or quantity. No permit required
A.	Government and traffic signs.
B.	Memorial signs.
C.	Signs on registered and inspected motor vehicles and rolling stock of common carriers, unless trying to circumvent the intent of this ordinance. Circumnavigation shall include, but not be limited to, signs which are continuously in the same location or signs that
 
extend beyond the height, width or length of the vehicle.
D.	Garage sale signs. Cannot be erected more than 2 days prior to the sale and must be removed within one day after the sale.
E.	Hand held signs.
F.	Public and private safety signs.

6.	Real Estate Sales and/or Rental Signs – no permit required

Two signs per premise are allowed. No off premise real estate signs are allowed. Real estate signs for private residential units are limited to 3 sqft in size. Real estate for commercial property shall be limited to 32 sq ft. Real estate signs must be removed within one week of the sale or rental of the property.

7.	Contractor signs – no permit required
Contractor signs may be displayed on a customer’s property while the contractor is engaged in working on the property and must be removed at the completion of the job. Contractor signs shall be limited to one 3 sqft sign per property.

8.	Temporary signs advertising a community or civic activity shall be allowed with a 60 day time limit. One such sign shall be allowed per premise and no permit is required. The size limit shall be the same as for Business Use Signs.

9.	Signs in the Shoreland Zones: The following provisions shall govern the use of signs in the Resource Protection, Stream Protection, Limited Residential Zones:

(1)	Signs relating to goods and services sold on the premises shall be allowed, provided that such signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area and shall not exceed two (2) signs per premises. In the Limited Commercial District, however, such signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area. Signs relating to goods or services not sold or rendered on the premises shall be prohibited.
(2)	Name signs are allowed, provided such signs shall not exceed two (2) signs per premises, and shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in the aggregate.
(3)	Residential users may display a single sign not over three (3) square feet in area relating to the
sale, rental, or lease of the premises.
(4)	Signs  relating to trespassing and  hunting shall  be allowed  without  restriction  as to  number provided that no such sign shall exceed two (2) square feet in area.
(5)	Signs relating to public safety shall be allowed without restriction.
(6)	No sign shall extend higher than twenty (20) feet above the ground.
(7)	Signs may be illuminated only by shielded, non-flashing lights.



10.	Definitions
For the purposes of this Article, the following certain terms and words are hereby defined as follows. The definition of “Sign” is found in Article 8 of the Zoning Ordinance.

Awning Sign: A sign placed on, affixed, or incorporated onto the surface of an awning.
Government Sign: A sign erected and maintained pursuant to and in discharge of any governmental functions or require by law, ordinance or other governmental
 
regulation.
Memorial Sign: A sign-tablet, or plaque memorializing a person, event, structure or site.
Sandwich Board Sign: A two-faced sign in an A-frame configuration placed temporarily during business hours on a sidewalk or street frontage.
Sign Supports: Posts, poles or other structural members that support a sign.
Traffic Sign: An official route marker, warning sign, sign directing traffic to or from a community, or a sign regulating traffic, which has been erected by officers having jurisdiction over the public way.

5.9	Hazardous Waste

A.	The disposal or storage of hazardous wastes as designated under the U.S. Clean Water Act, Section 311, Public Law 92-500 and/or the disposal or storage of hazardous waste as designated by the Maine Board of Environmental Protection under M.R.S.A, Title 38, Section 1303 and 1303.A, and/or the disposal or storage of radioactive waste material as defined by M.R.S.A. Title 38, Section 361-1-B within the boundaries of the Town of Wilton is prohibited.

B.	Any request for an exception to this prohibition shall be submitted in writing to the Planning Board and brought to the whole Town of Wilton, acting as a body politic; to be voted on by all registered voters present in a Town Meeting. Any person intending to construct or operate any temporary or permanent hazardous waste repository shall at least one year prior to commencing any construction or operation notify the Planning Board in writing of his or her intent and of the nature and location of the facility, together with any other information the Planning Board may require.

C.	Any exception granted shall comply with all conditions and regulations as may be established by the Planning Board, or may be found in M.R.S.A., Title 38, Section 13, the Maine Hazardous Waste, Septage, and Solid Waste Management Act, whichever is more restrictive.



5.10	Cluster, or Open Space Development

A. Purpose
It is the policy of the Town of Wilton to encourage land development that preserves the agricultural and village landscapes characteristic of the area. Incentives, standards, and criteria for open space, or cluster development of subdivisions are governed by the provisions of the Town of Wilton Subdivision Ordinance.
(Amended June 13, 2005)

5.11	Transmission Towers, Windmills, and Wind Energy Systems
(Amended June 18, 2018)
A.	Transmission Towers
1.	Setbacks. A transmission tower allowed under Section 5.11 must be located such that its distance from all property lines is at least equal to the height of the tower and any antenna structures that extend above the top of the tower, plus ten feet. The Code
 
Enforcement Officer may modify or waive this requirement where necessary to accommodate the reasonable operation of a federally licensed amateur radio station.
2.	Abandonment/Decommissioning. A transmission tower that has not been utilized for twelve consecutive months and fallen into disrepair may be deemed abandoned, and shall be removed by the facility owner/operator within 120 days of receipt of notice from the Town. The Town may require that the owner/operator post a performance guaranty in order to assure funds for tower removal and site restoration in case of abandonment or other cessation of operations.

B.	Windmills
1.	Wind powered systems that convert wind energy to mechanical energy for the pumping of water for agricultural or other uses are considered accessory structures, and may be permitted by the Code Enforcement Officer if the system is 35 feet or less in height at its greatest extent. Systems taller than 35 feet in height require Planning Board review and approval.
2.	A windmill tower must be located such that its distance from all property lines is at least equal to the height of the structure at its greatest extent, plus ten feet.

C.	Small Wind Energy Systems (SWES)
1.	Definition. Small wind energy systems have a generating capacity of 100kW or less, and are intended primarily for the generation of electrical power for on-site use. A SWES is typically composed of a wind turbine (blades, generator, tail), a tower or roof mount for support, and associated controls and conversion electronics.
2.	Site and System Dimensional Requirements.
a.	Minimum site area. Minimum site area for a SWES shall be one-half acre unless the system is roof mounted. Each additional free standing SWES shall require an additional two acres. No more than three SWES are allowed on any one lot regardless of area.
b.	Safety setbacks. A SWES shall be set back at least the total system height at its maximum extent, plus ten feet, from the nearest property line, public road, or public utility line.
c.	Visual impact. A SWES shall not be placed so as to make a significant adverse impact on an important local scenic view, as defined by the most recent Comprehensive Plan for the Town of Wilton.
3.	System Design Requirements.
a.	Mount structures.
1)	For a free-standing system, the mounting tower and its ground installations (foundations, anchors) shall be designed and constructed to adequately support both the weight and the operational stresses of the SWES.
2)	Roof or building-mounted systems shall have mounting/attachment systems designed and constructed to adequately support both the weight and the operational stresses of the SWES.
b.	Safety.
1)	All associated electrical and control equipment shall be labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access.
2)	The SWES shall be installed so that no step bolts or ladders are less than 12 feet above ground, to prevent public access.
 
3)	The blades of a free standing SWES shall have a minimum clearance of 25 feet from the ground.
4)	All on-site electrical wiring to or from the SWES shall be installed underground, except for necessary tie-ins to public utility poles, towers, or lines.
5)	The SWES shall not cause audible noise in excess of 5 dBA, or low frequency noise in excess of 20 dBC, above ambient, non-operating noise levels as measured at the nearest property line.
6)	SWES shall be equipped with both manual and automatic over-speed controls.
7)	The SWES shall be located and operated in such a way that it will not disrupt the transmission or reception of electromagnetic signals beyond the site. If a SWES can be demonstrated to cause disruptive interference beyond its site, the system operator shall promptly eliminate the interference or cease operation of the system.
c.	Visual appearance.
1)	No signs are permitted on the SWES or its mounting except those appropriate for manufacturer or installer identification and information, or for safety warnings.
2)	No SWES or its mounting shall be lighted unless required by the FAA.

4.	Abandonment. A SWES that has not generated electricity for twelve consecutive months and fallen into disrepair may be deemed abandoned, and shall be removed by the property owner within 120 days of receipt of notice from the Town.

D.	Large Wind Energy Systems (LWES)
1.	Definition. Large wind energy systems have a generating capacity greater than 100kW, and are intended primarily for the commercial generation of electrical power. More than one LWES on one or adjacent sites constitutes a wind farm. A LWES is typically composed of a wind turbine (blades, generator, tail), a tower mount for support, and associated controls and conversion electronics.
2.	Special Considerations. Given the potential long-term impact of large wind energy systems on the Town and its environment, the Planning Board may use the provisions of Section 6.3 of this ordinance to require an escrow fund or other performance guaranty from the applicant to pay for independent engineering, consulting, or legal studies or reviews of the proposed project. Such studies may include, but are not limited to: 1) pre-construction studies of the impact of the proposed project on the environment, wildlife, habitat, or noise levels, and 2) post-construction studies to monitor and address any negative impacts with respect to the environment or public health and safety.
3.	Site Requirements.
a.	Safety setbacks. A LWES must have a minimum setback of 1.5 times its maximum height from the nearest property line, publicly traveled road, or public utility line, and a minimum setback of 13 times its maximum height from the nearest occupied structure existing at the time of submission of the site plan.
b.	Visual impact. A LWES shall not be placed so as to make a significant adverse impact on an important local scenic view, as defined by the most recent Comprehensive Plan for the Town of Wilton.
4.	System Design Requirements.
a.	Safety.
 
1)	All associated electrical and control equipment shall be labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access.
2)	The LWES shall be installed so that no step bolts or ladders are less than 15 feet above ground, to prevent public access.
3)	The blades of a free standing LWES shall have a minimum clearance of 25 feet from the ground.
4)	All on-site electrical wiring to or from the LWES shall be installed underground, except for necessary tie-ins to public utility poles, towers, or lines.
5)	LWES shall be equipped with both manual and automatic over-speed controls.
b.	Visual appearance.
1)	The LWES shall be of a solid, neutral, non-reflective color, such as off-white or light gray.
2)	No signs are permitted on the LWES or its mounting except those appropriate for manufacturer or installer identification and information, or for safety warnings.
3)	No LWES or its mounting shall be lighted unless required by the FAA.
5.	Public Health and Safety
a.	Noise. The LWES shall not cause audible noise in excess of 5 dBA, or low frequency noise in excess of 20 dBC, above nighttime ambient, non- operating noise levels as measured at the nearest property line. Autistic measurements are to be made by independent contractors chosen by the Town and paid for by the wind company.
b.	Shadow Flicker/Reflections. A LWES shall be designed and sited such that shadow flicker/reflections (changes in light intensity or shadows on the ground or structures caused by LWES blade rotation) shall not affect an off-site occupied structure for more than 10 hours per year.
c.	Electromagnetic Interference. The LWES shall be located and operated in such a way that it will not disrupt the transmission or reception of electromagnetic signals beyond the site.
d.	If a LWES can be demonstrated to cause excessive noise, excessive shadow flicker at an affected structure, or disruptive electromagnetic interference beyond its site, the system operator shall promptly take steps to eliminate the problem or cease operation of the system.
e.	An owner of property adjacent to the LWES site may waive any applicable noise, signal transmission, or shadow flicker/reflection restrictions by entering into a legal agreement with the LWES developer. A copy of any such agreement(s) must be provided to the Planning Board.
6.	Abandonment/Decommissioning. A LWES that has not generated electricity for twelve consecutive months and fallen into disrepair may be deemed abandoned, and shall be removed by the facility owner/operator within 120 days of receipt of notice from the Town. The Town may require that the owner/operator post a performance guaranty in order to assure funds for turbine removal and site restoration in case of abandonment or other cessation of operations of the facility.
 
5.12	Construction Standards

A.	The minimum size of a dwelling shall be 500 square feet. All dwellings shall be set upon an 8 inch solid foundation of concrete, stone, or other masonry wall. Concrete slabs may be permitted when properly installed with a minimum of 4 inch reinforced concrete on a minimum of 12 inch of compacted gravel. Concrete posts may be permitted if placed upon a footing below the frost line.

B.	Mobile homes and manufactured homes shall comply with the Manufactured Home Installation Standard promulgated by the State of Maine, Department of Professional and Financial Regulation, Manufactured Housing Board, dated March 31, 1993, as such may be amended from time to time.



5.13	New Street Construction and Driveway Entrances
(Amended June 18, 2001)

All streets shall comply with the Town of Wilton’s Street Standards Ordinance if they are to be considered for acceptance by the Town.

A.	All streets. As defined, except for streets that provide access for rear lots, shall comply with the Town of Wilton’s Street Standards Ordinance.

B.	1. Any entrance within the right-of-way limit of town maintained roads for any parcel of land on which agricultural, timber-harvesting, or any other use will be conducted or on which an existing use will be changed to another use, or on which a new structure will be built must be reviewed by the Road Commissioner, or the Commissioner’s designee, prior to the use being initiated or the structure being built.

2.	The following minimum standards shall apply to all entrances;
a.	Sight Distance in each direction along the town-maintained road is equal to or greater than 10 times the posted speed limit for the section of the road where the driveway entrance is located.
b.	Culverts, if required, shall be of aluminized Type II steel construction; have a minimum gauge of 16, a minimum diameter of 15 inches, or shall be polyethylene double wall (n-12) corrugated outside with a smooth interior and a minimum diameter of 12 inches. All culverts shall have a minimum length of 30 feet for all uses or for any parcel of land on which a new structure will be built; shall be installed so as not to interfere with the existing road drainage; and shall be covered with an amount of gravel equal to or exceeding the diameter of the installed culvert. Culverts shall be sized based on the 25 year storm.
c.	Proper erosion control measures shall be installed prior to the construction of the entrance and shall be maintained during and after construction until the entrance and associated work area is stabilized.

3.	When the Road Commissioner, or the Commissioner’s designee, determines that the entrance cannot meet the above minimum standards, the Road Commissioner, or the
 
Commissioner’s designee, may allow a reduction of no more than 30% or a change to the above minimum standards. When the standards are reduced or changed, the Road Commissioner or the Commissioner’s designee, may require as applicable, the trimming of additional vegetation, the installation of “hidden drive” signage, the installation of a larger culvert, additional ditching, etc. or the placement of the entrance to another location.
4.	The construction of a driveway entrance is the responsibility of the landowner, even if the landowner hires a private contractor to construct the entrance. The landowner is also responsible for complying with all conditions established by the Road Commissioner or the Commissioner’s designee.
5.	After the driveway entrance has been constructed, and any conditions imposed by the Road Commissioner or the Commissioner’s designee have been satisfactorily complied with, the Road Commissioner shall issue a Certificate of Compliance. A landowner must receive a Certificate of Compliance from the Road Commissioner prior to initiating the use or occupying the structure.
6.	Culverts installed at entrances that either complies with the minimum standards in Section B.2.b. above, or that have received a permit from the Road Commissioner shall be maintained by the town.




5.14	Water and Sewer Lines

The Developer must install sewer lines at their own expense in conformance with the town’s regulations and standards. Water lines must be installed in conformance with Public Utility Commission Regulations governing funding and installation as adopted by the Town’s Water Department.



5.15	Animal Raising

Nondomestic farm animals kept on lots of less than five acres shall comply with the following standards:

A.	A parcel of land used for the keeping of horses, mules, cows, goats, sheep, hogs, poultry and similar size animals for the domestic use of the residents of the lot, shall contain land area for each animal unit of at least the following, excluding water bodies of one-quarter (1/4) acre surface area or larger.

1.	Cattle: 2 bovine animal units per 40,000 sq. ft. lot.
2.	Horse: 2 equine animal units per 40,000 sq. ft. lot.
3.	Sheep or goats: 6 animal units per 40,000 sq. ft. lot.
4.	Swine:  2 animal units per 40,000 sq. ft. lot.
5.	Fowl: 50 animal units per 40,000 sq. ft. lot.
6.	Combinations of the above: The required lot size shall be determined by the Planning Board and shall conform to the lot size for similar size animals.
 
B.	Fences shall be constructed so as to protect neighbor rights in accordance with the determination of the Code Enforcement Officer. (Amended June 21, 1999)

C.	Manure shall be removed every six months.



5.16	Recreational Vehicles, Campers/Camper Trailers
(Amended June 18, 2018)

A camper, camper trailer, or RV that is used for residential purposes, may remain in place for more than thirty (30) days with a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer, provided that it is not inhabited for more than one hundred and eighty (180) days in any one calendar year and that written permission to use the town’s sewage treatment plant for the disposal of the wastewater generated by the camper, camper trailer, or RV has been given by the Superintendent of the Sewer Department or that sewage is properly disposed of in accordance with the Maine State Plumbing Code. Campers, camper trailers, or RVs in  the shore land zone are also subject to Article 5.1 and subject to the Floodplain Management Ordinance for the Town of Wilton.


5.17	Elder Cottage Housing Opportunity (ECHO) Units

A.	Purpose: The purpose of these standards is to provide for the temporary habitation of a dwelling unit, to be occupied by an older person(s), on lots where single family dwellings exist, except in the Resource Protection and Stream Protection Districts, so that adult children may care for aging parents or persons with a disability.

B.	General Requirements: The construction or placement of an “ECHO” unit on a lot which a single family dwelling is located may be allowed by a permit granted by the Planning Board regardless of lot size and frontage if the following are met.
1.	The owner of the principal structure must reside in either the principal structure or the “ECHO” unit.
2.	The owner of the principal structure shall be related to the occupants by blood, marriage or adoption.
3.	The occupant of the “ECHO” unit must be at least 62 years of age or be unable to live independently due to a disability.
4.	The number of occupants of the “ECHO” unit shall be limited to two persons.
5.	All zoning setbacks and non-vegetated surface ratio requirements contained in this Ordinance shall be met.
6.	There shall be a separation of a minimum of fifteen (15) feet between the principal dwelling and the “ECHO” unit.
7.	The maximum size of the “ECHO” unit shall be 750 square feet of living space and shall be limited in size to accommodate two (2) bedrooms.
8.	The subsurface sewage disposal system on the property shall be functioning properly and be of sufficient size to accommodate the additional flow in compliance with the Maine State Plumbing Code.
9.	The parking requirements of the performance standards contained herein or those of the
 
applicable zoning district apply.
10.	Proper ingress and egress shall be provided to an ECHO unit.
11.	Prior to the issuance of a building permit for the placement or construction of an ECHO unit by the Code Enforcement Officer, the owner of the property shall sign a binding agreement limiting the approval of an ECHO unit for the purposes set forth in this subsection and that ECHO unit must be removed or converted to a non-habitable accessory structure within ninety (90) days from the date of occupancy cessation.
12.	Occupancy of the “ECHO” unit shall be conditioned upon the issuance by the Code Enforcement Officer of an occupancy permit annually on the anniversary date of the building permit. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue the annual occupancy permit only upon determining that the unit continues to comply with all requirements of this subsection B.



5.18	Soils

All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which the proposed uses or structures can be established or maintained without causing adverse structural or environmental impacts, including severe erosion, mass soil movement, improper drainage, and water pollution, whether during or after construction. Proposed uses requiring subsurface waste disposal, and commercial or industrial development and other similar intensive land uses, shall require a soils report based on an on-site investigation and prepared by state-certified professionals. Certified persons may include Maine Certified Site Evaluators, Maine Certified Soil Scientists, Maine Registered Professional Engineers, Maine State Certified Geologists and other persons who have training  and experience in the recognition and evaluation of soil properties. The report shall be based upon the analysis of the characteristics of the soil and surrounding land and water areas, maximum ground water elevation, presence of ledge, drainage conditions, and other pertinent  data which the evaluator deems appropriate, including the soil’s ability to support the structure or use. The soils report shall include recommendations for a proposed use to counteract soil limitations where they exist.

5.19	Small Enterprises, Home Occupations and In-Home Offices

A.	SMALL ENTERPRISES
Small enterprises, as defined in Article 8 of this Ordinance, require site plan review by
The Planning Board and, in addition to meeting the criteria for site plan approval, must comply with the following conditions:
1.	The total number of employees, both full and part-time, shall be six or less. All residents of the dwelling who participate in the small enterprise shall be considered employees for the purpose of determining compliance with this standard.
2.	The total area utilized for the small enterprise, including floor area within the principal structure, floor area within any accessory structures, parking spaces and paved areas shall not exceed 2,500 square feet.

B.	HOME OCCUPATIONS
Home occupations require a permit from the Planning Board (but do not require site plan
 
approval) and must comply with the following conditions:
1.	No more than two persons, including part time workers, who do not make the dwelling their permanent home, may be employed in the home occupation.
2.	Any additions to the dwelling and any accessory structure utilized for the home occupation are constructed and finished in the same manner as the original dwelling, so that the residential character and appearance of the principal structure are retained.
3.	The home occupation is conducted in a manner that will not cause the dwelling to differ from its residential character by means of colors, lights or sounds.
4.	There is adequate off-street parking on the premises for customer or client use.
5.	There is no substantial increase in traffic over the normal traffic volume in the neighborhood.
6.	The home occupation does not generate any nuisance, waste discharge, offensive noise, vibrations, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare, radiation, fumes or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses, or interfere with normal radio or television reception, or cause other nuisance conditions which extend beyond the boundaries of the lot on which the home occupation is located.
7.	All waste materials must be removed promptly from the premises in compliance with state law and applicable local ordinances.
8.	The home occupation will not adversely affect any natural resource or environmentally sensitive area, including, but not limited to, a wetland, aquifer, and watercourse or water body.
9.	The home occupation will not use chemicals not commonly found in a residence and will not use chemicals in quantities not commonly used in a residence.

C.	IN-HOME OFFICES
The operation of an in-home office by one or more residents of a dwelling unit is allowed in all districts as an accessory use to the dwelling unit and shall not be considered a home occupation requiring a planning board permit if the following conditions are met:
1.	Customers or clients do not come to the dwelling to receive goods or services.
2.	Communication with customers, clients and business associates is principally by mail, electronic mail, telephone or other telecommunication device, and deliveries or pick- ups by truck, if any, occur at an average frequency not substantially greater than the ordinary frequency of delivery truck traffic at a single family residence.
3.	There are no signs or any other exterior indications of the in-home office activity.
4.	The activities conducted within the in-home office are limited to processes which do not create noise, pollution or nuisance conditions detectable outside the dwelling, such as data processing, word processing, desk top publishing and the like.
5.	The in-home office does not employ any persons who do not make the dwelling their permanent home.
6.	There are no signs, exterior exhibits, exterior storage of materials or any other exterior indications of the in-home office.

5.20	Rear Lots
(Amended June 18, 2001)

A.	Notwithstanding the street frontage requirements of this ordinance, a single family dwelling may be constructed on a lot that does not have frontage on a street or that has insufficient
 
frontage on a street, provided the following requirements are met:

1.	The right-of-way width for a rear lot for all zoning districts shall be 50 feet.
2.	The rear lot is located to the rear of a lot that meets the total of the minimum street frontage requirement for the front lot added to the width of the right-of-way required for the rear lot for the zoning district that the front lot is located in.
3.	The area of the rear lot is equal to or greater than the minimum lot size noted in Table B for the zoning district in which the rear lot is located.
4.	The right of way for the rear lot shall, first, be located where the driveway for the front lot is currently located in order to promote shared driveways; or second, shall be located in such a way that the minimum frontage requirement of the front lot is continuous.
5.	The minimum width of the traveled way for a 50-foot wide right-of-way on which no more than one single-family dwelling will be constructed shall be 12 feet. The minimum width of the traveled way for a 50-foot wide right-of-way on which more than one single- family dwelling will be constructed shall be 20 feet. These minimum widths shall not be reduced during winter conditions.
6.	The minimum depth of gravel of the traveled way for a 50-foot wide right-of-way is 18 inches.
7.	The right of way serving the rear lot is in the form of a permanent easement deed, described by metes and bounds or by reference to a recorded plan, which deed is recorded in the Franklin County Registry of Deeds.
8.	A copy of the recorded permanent easement deed creating the right of way is attached to the building permit application.
9.	The rear lot and all structures located on the rear lot meet all other applicable requirements of this ordinance.

B.	After the traveled way has been constructed, but prior to the occupancy of the single-family dwelling, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a Certificate of Compliance indicating that the traveled way is in compliance with the above standards. The landowner or the applicant is responsible for constructing the traveled way to the above standards.

C.	A single-family dwelling may also be constructed on a lot that abuts only the end and neither sideline of an existing public or private street, provided the street meets the minimum street requirements of Section A, above, and the lot meets the minimum lot area requirements of Table B.

D.	Previously created rights-of-way that were limited to serving only the single-family dwelling located on the rear lot no longer have to comply with that limitation but must comply with  the requirements of Article 5.20 A.5 above.

E.	Commercial Lots: Lots in the Commercial Zone that do not have the required  frontage may be built upon for commercial uses provided the requirements of Article 5.20 A are met.

5.21	Lots Served by Nonconforming Rights-of-way
(Amended 6/18/2007)

A lot which could otherwise be legally built upon but which is served by a right-of-way which
 
does not comply with Article 5.20 may nevertheless be used for a single-family dwelling with Planning Board approval. No other use either requiring a permit or not permitted by this ordinance shall occur on such lots. The Board shall require the following before approval may be granted.
1.	A copy of the deed or other legal instrument which grants use of the right-of-way and the description of the right-of-way;
2.	The names and addresses of all others granted use of the right-of-way;
3.	Assurance in such form as the Planning Board may require that all other applicable state laws and regulations and local ordinances will be complied with; and
4.	A statement in recordable form signed by the applicant that if conversion of summer camps or the erection of new dwellings accessed by the unaccepted right-of-way occurs, those persons owning property on the unaccepted right-of-way shall continue to assume responsibility for maintaining and plowing the access road and that, because the private access road is not constructed to town street standards, the travel of personal, service, emergency and maintenance vehicles over the access road may be hindered. Nothing contained within shall be construed as requiring the Town to provide additional services to properties on unaccepted rights-of-way not already receiving those services or to accept such rights-of-way as public streets.



5.22	Corner Lots

A.	Where a lot abuts more than one public street, the front setback requirement shall be observed on all such streets. Where a lot abuts both a public street and one or more private streets, the front setback requirement shall be maintained from the public street, and side or rear setbacks shall be maintained from the private streets as appropriate.

B.	Walls, fences, trees, shrubs and any other structures or vegetation which, because of their height, would block motorists’ views of other vehicles at the intersection shall not be located on a corner lot within a radius of 25 feet from the intersection of the lot lines abutting the intersecting streets.



5.23	On-site Disposal of Demolition Debris

Disposal of landscape refuse, fill and demolition or construction debris which is not hazardous waste as defined in state or federal law is permitted with a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer provided the following conditions are met:

A.	the surface area of the disposal area does not exceed one acre;
B.	the disposal is limited to materials which are generated on the lot or parcel or within the subdivision where the disposal area is located and the disposal is secondary and incidental to construction or building activity which complies with the requirements of this Ordinance;
C.	the disposal is allowed under state laws regulating solid waste disposal; and
D.	the materials are buried or covered with fill so that no unsanitary, unsightly or nuisance conditions exist.
 
5.24	Automobile Recycling Business Permits

An automobile business, automobile graveyard and junkyard business must meet the operation standards of 30-A M.R.S.A Sections 3753-3755-A, Subsection 1 Paragraph C, except that the following criteria shall apply under this ordinance:

A.	A vehicle with an intact engine or motor may not be stored, crushed or dismantled within 300 feet of any body of water or freshwater wetland.

B.	A vehicle may not be located or dismantled closer than 50 feet from any lot line, unless the operator has obtained written permission from the abutting owner bearing the abutting owner’s notarized signature.

C.	All dismantling of vehicles shall take place only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.

D.	All vehicles are to be dismantled and completely removed from the premises within 30 days, except for those component parts which have been removed, shelved and inventoried specifically for resale.

E.	The recycling yard shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times so that the Code Enforcement Officer may determine compliance with these standards and the operation standards of the state statute.

5.25	Mobile Home Requirements
(Adopted June 6, 2011)

As of July 1, 2011, No person shall locate or place a mobile home in the Town of Wilton unless it complies with the following standards.

A.	Has been built in accordance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 and subsequent amendments, or

B.	Complies with the following:
1.	Is a minimum of 14 feet in width;
2.	Has a pitched roof.
3.	Has siding which is residential in appearance.
4.	Is installed according to The Maine Manufactured Housing Board’s Manufactured Home Installation Standard Chapter 900 as may be amended.

C.	Existing Mobile Home Dwelling units
Any Mobile Home unit used as a dwelling prior to the passage of this Section shall not be required to meet the requirements of this Section.

5.26	Building Demolition Permit Standards
(Adopted 6/10/2013)

A.	Permit required. Prior to the demolition of any commercial, industrial, institutional building
 
or dwelling other than accessory structures in the Town of Wilton, the property owner shall obtain a Demolition Permit from the Town.

B.	Evidence of Inspection Compliance Required. Applicants for a Demolition Permit shall submit written evidence sufficient to satisfy the Code Enforcement Officer and/or the Planning Board that the applicant has complied with all applicable state and federal laws regarding the inspection of the structure for asbestos and other regulated materials.

C.	Removal of Asbestos and Other Materials Required. If asbestos or other regulated materials are determined to be present, it must be removed in accordance with applicable state and federal law and written evidence sufficient to satisfy the Code Enforcement Office and/or the Planning Board that said removal has occurred shall be submitted prior to the issuance of a Demolition Permit.

D.	Demolition Permits for Single-family Dwellings. Applications for the demolition of single- family dwellings shall be reviewed by the Code Enforcement Officer.

E.	Demolition Permits for Structures Other than Single-family Dwellings. Applications for the demolition of buildings other than single-family dwellings shall be reviewed by the Planning Board.

F.	Evidence of Financial Capacity. Applications for Demolition Permits requiring Planning Board Review must include written evidence sufficient to satisfy the Planning Board that the applicant has sufficient financial resources to complete the project. This may include letters of credit or bonding.

G.	Notification to the Water and Sewer Departments.  The owners of properties served by the Wilton Water and Sewer Departments must notify those departments of the intention to demolish the building.

H.	Site Cleanup Required. No building debris of any kind may be left on the site at the conclusion of the demolition of any structure. Demolition sites shall be graded off and replanted, unless being made ready for a new structure. Failure to complete cleanup activities within 90 days of the structure removal may be subject to fines according to Article 7.10.

I.	Damaged Buildings. Any building destroyed by fire or other causes shall be made secure immediately and a permit for demolition or reconstruction shall be obtained within 90 days. Work to either remove or restore a fire damaged building must begin no later than 120 days from the date of the fire.

J.	Expiration of Demolition Permit. Demolition Permits shall expire ninety (90) days after the date of its issuance, provided that, for good cause shown, the Code Enforcement Officer may extend the permit for periods of not more than thirty (30) days.
 



ARTICLE 6.	SITE PLAN REVIEW

6.1	Purpose

Large scale development or major land use change can have a profound effect upon the cost and efficiency of municipal services and upon the environment of the Town of Wilton. The regulations and standards contained within the provisions of this Ordinance are sufficient to advance those objectives and to protect the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the citizens of the Town of Wilton where development involves only the construction of single and two-family dwellings and agricultural buildings; but those regulations need to be supplemented when development involves commercial, retail, industrial, institutional uses or multiple family residential developments.

6.2	Applicability

A.	This Article shall apply to, and site plan review and approval shall be required for, all development proposals for new construction, alterations or change in use to existing commercial, retail, industrial, institutional, recreational uses and structures, multi-family dwellings, topsoil removal and mining activities, their accessory uses and structures and all structures, uses and activities requiring Planning Board review under Table A.

B.	This Article does not apply to detached single or two-family dwelling units, the normal and customary practices involved with forestry and timber management and traditional agricultural operations.

C.	All proposed residential and commercial subdivisions shall be reviewed under the standards and criteria of the Town of Wilton Subdivision Ordinance.

6.3	Administration

A.	The following procedures and requirements shall apply to all applications for site plan review:

1.	All applications for site plan review shall be made in writing to the Code Enforcement Officer on the forms provided for this purpose. The application shall be made by the owner of the property or business or his agent as designated in writing by the owner, and shall be accompanied by the payment of an application fee pursuant to Section 7.3.A.

Any new occupancy of a business into a building location that has been previously approved for a site plan review by the Planning Board is required to apply for an occupancy permit to be reviewed by the Planning Board accompanied by the payment of an application fee pursuant to Section 7.3.A.

The completed application for site plan review, together with the documentation required in these regulations, shall be placed on the Planning Board’s agenda for consideration
 
within thirty (30) days of its receipt. However, any application which is determined by  the Code Enforcement Officer to be incomplete shall not be placed on the agenda but  shall be returned to the applicant by the Code Enforcement Officer with an indication of the additional information required. Within sixty (60) days of the receipt of a completed application, the Board shall act to approve, approve with conditions or disapprove the site plan as submitted or amended. Prior to taking final action on any site plan review application, the Planning Board may hold a hearing to afford the public the opportunity to comment on the application.

2.	Abutting property owners shall be notified by mail of a pending application for site plan review. This notice shall indicate the time, date, and place of Planning Board consideration of the application. Failure of an abutter to receive notice does not invalidate Planning Board action on an application.

3.	One copy of the approved site plan shall be included in the application for a Building Permit.
4.	Prior to formal application, an owner or his authorized agent may request an informal review of the site plan by the Planning Board to determine its compliance with Town regulations.

B.	The Planning Board may require the posting, prior to final approval of any plan, of a bond, irrevocable letter of credit or escrow deposit in such amount as is approved by the Planning Board as being reasonably necessary to ensure completion of all improvements described in the site plan or required as conditions of approval of such plan.

C.	The Planning Board may require the owner or his authorized agent to deposit in escrow with the Town an amount of money sufficient to cover the costs for any professional review of the site plan documents which the Board may feel is reasonably necessary to protect the general welfare of the Town. This escrow payment shall be made before the Board engages any outside party to undertake this review and to make recommendations to the Board. Any part of this escrow payment in excess of the final costs for the review shall be returned to the owner or his agent.

6.4	Submission Requirements

A.	When the owner of the property or his authorized agent makes formal application for site plan review, the application shall contain at least the following exhibits and information:

1.	A fully executed and signed copy of the application for site plan review.
2.	Two (2) copies of a site plan drawn at a scale sufficient to allow review of the items listed under the preceding general standards, but at not more than 50 feet to the inch for that portion of the total tract of land being proposed for development, and showing the following:
a.	Owner’s name, address and signature.
b.	Names and addresses of all abutting property owners.
c.	Sketch map showing general location of the site within the Town.
d.	Boundaries of all contiguous property under the control of the owner or applicant
 
regardless of whether all or part is being developed at this time.
e.	The bearings and distances of all property lines and the source of this information.
The Board may waive the requirement of a formal boundary survey when sufficient information is available to establish, on the ground, all property boundaries.
f.	Zoning classification(s) of the property and the location of zoning district boundaries if the property is located in two or more zoning districts.
g.	Soil types and location of soil boundaries as certified by a registered engineer or soil scientist.
h.	The location of all building setbacks required by the Zoning Ordinance.
i.	The location, size, and character of all signs and exterior lighting.
j.	The lot area of the parcel, street frontage and the zoning requirements for minimum lot size and frontage.
k.	The location of all existing and proposed buildings (including size and height), driveways, sidewalks, parking spaces, loading areas, open spaces, large trees, open drainage courses, signs, exterior lighting, service areas, easements, and landscaping.
l.	The location of all buildings within 50 feet of the parcel to be developed and the location of intersecting roads or driveways within 200 feet of the parcel.
m.	Existing and proposed topography of the site at two foot contour intervals if major changes to the existing topography are being proposed.
n.	A storm water drainage plan showing:
1)	The existing and proposed method of handling storm water runoff.
2)	The direction of flow of the run-off through the use of arrows.
3)	The location, elevation, and size of all catch basins, dry wells, drainage ditches, swales, retention basins, and storm sewers.
4)	Engineering calculations used to determine drainage requirements based upon a 10-year storm frequency, if the project will significantly alter the existing drainage pattern due to such factors as the amount of new impervious surfaces (such as paving and building area) being proposed.
o.	A utility plan showing provisions for water supply and waste water disposal including the size and location of all piping, holding tanks, leach fields, etc.
p.	Where the plan was prepared by an architect, engineer, surveyor, geologist, soil scientist or other professional licensed or certified and issued a seal by the State of Maine, the preparer’s seal shall be affixed to the plan.
3.	A planting schedule keyed to the site plan and indicating the varieties and sizes of trees, shrubs, and other plants to be planted on the site.
4.	Building plans showing, as a minimum, the first floor plan and all elevations, together with a schedule detailing the type, color, and texture of all exterior surfacing materials of all proposed principal buildings and structures and all accessory buildings and structures.
5.	Copies of any proposed or existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions, etc.
6.	Copies of all applicable State approvals and permits, provided, however, that the Board may approve site plans subject to the issuance of special State licenses and permits in cases where it determines that it is not feasible for the applicant to obtain them at the time of site plan review.

B.	The Planning Board may waive any of these requirements when the Board determines that the scale of the project is of such magnitude as to make the information unnecessary.
 
6.5	Criteria and Standards

A.	The following criteria and standards shall be utilized by the Planning Board in reviewing applications for site plan review. These standards are intended to provide a guide for the applicant in the development of site, use, and building plans as well as a method of review for the Board. These standards are not intended to discourage creativity, invention and innovation.

1.	Preservation of Landscape: The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar as practicable, by minimizing tree and soil removal, retaining existing vegetation where desirable, and keeping any grade changes in character with the general appearance of neighboring areas. No unreasonable adverse effects on wildlife habitat shall be created.

2.	Relation of Proposed Buildings to the Environment: Proposed structures shall be related harmoniously to the terrain and to existing building in the vicinity which have a visual relationship to the proposed buildings. Special attention shall be paid to the scale of the proposed building(s), massing of the structure(s), and such natural features as slope, orientation, soil type, and drainage courses.

3.	Vehicular Access: The proposed site layout shall give special consideration to the location, number, and control of access points, adequacy of adjacent streets, traffic flow, sight distances, turning lanes, and existing or proposed traffic signalization.

a.	The proposed development shall provide safe vehicular access to and from public and private streets. The applicant for a development to be located on a parcel of land of ten (10) acres or greater or five hundred (500) feet or more of frontage on a public street shall file a conceptual Access Master Plan with the Planning Board. The conceptual Access Master Plan shall address the overall use of the parcel, the overall vehicular circulation system within the parcel and the coordination of access into and out of the site. The conceptual Access Master Plan shall demonstrate how the requirements for access as contained in this section will be met.

After the Conceptual Access Master Plan has been filed with the Planning Board, any application for approval shall be consistent with the plan unless a revised plan is filed.
1)	Vehicular access to the site shall be on roads which have adequate capacity to accommodate the additional traffic generated by the development. The Planning Board may approve a development not meeting this requirement if the applicant demonstrates that:
a)	A public agency has committed funds to construct the improvements necessary to bring the level of access to this standard, or
b)	The applicant shall assume financial responsibility for the improvements necessary and will guarantee the completion of the improvements within one
(1)	year of approval of the project.
2)	Any exit driveway or driveway land shall be so designed in profile and grading and so located as to provide the following minimum sight distance measured in each direction. The measurements shall be from the driver’s seat of a vehicle standing on that portion of the exit driveway from distances of between 10 and 15
 
feet behind the curb line or edge of the shoulder with the height of the eye 3.5 feet to the top of an object 4.25 feet above the pavement.

MINIMUM SIGHT DISTANCE
Posted Speed Limit
25 mph	250’
30 mph	300’
35 mph	350’
40 mph	400’
45 mph	450’
50 mph	500’
55 mph	550’

3)	Where more than one business or structure is located on a single parcel, all vehicular access  to and from a public or private road shall be via a common access or entrance way(s) serving all business and structures except as provided for herein. When a common access or entrance is provided, a 15 percent reduction in lot area and lot frontage may be granted by the  Planning Board.
4)	The grade of any exit driveway or proposed street for a distance of fifty (50) feet from its intersection with any existing street will be a maximum of three (3) percent.
5)	The intersection of any access drive or proposed street will function at a Level of Service of C, following development if the project will generate 400 or more vehicle trips per 24-hour period or a level which will allow safe access into and out of the project if less than 400 trips are generated.
6)	Projects generating 400 or more vehicle trips per 24-hour period will provide two or more separate points of vehicular access into and out of the site.
7)	The Planning Board may require the applicant to conduct a traffic impact study. In making the determination as to the need for a traffic impact study, the Planning Board shall consider the following:
a)	The proposed development will generate 100 or more peak hour site trips in the peak direction of flow (inbound or outbound).
b)	The existence of a current safety problem in the area: high accident location, confusing intersection, etc.
c)	Current or projected capacity deficiencies near the development.
d)	Sensitive neighborhood areas adjacent to the development.
e)	The proximity of site drives to other drives or intersections.
b.	Vehicular access to Route 2 & 4 shall comply with the following provisions in addition to the above. Where conflicts exist between this subsection and above, this subsection shall apply.
1)	Where a proposed development is to be located at the intersection of 2 or 4 and a minor or collector road, entrance(s) to and exit(s) from the site shall be located only on the minor or collector road, provided that this requirement may be waived where the applicant demonstrates that existing site conditions preclude the location of a driveway on the minor or collector road, or that the location of a driveway on the minor or Collector road would conflict with residential areas. When entrance(s) are provided on the minor or collector road, a 15 percent reduction in lot area and lot size may be granted by the Planning Board.
2)	Curb cuts or access points shall be limited to one per lot for all lots with less than the
 
required road frontage as of the effective date of this ordinance. For lots with greater   than 150 feet of frontage, a maximum of one curb cut per 150 feet of frontage shall be permitted to a maximum of two, provided the Planning Board makes a finding that (a) the driveway design relative to the site characteristics and site design provides safe entrance and exit to the site and (b) no other practical alternative exists.
3)	The maximum number of curb cuts to a particular site shall be governed by the following:
a)	No low volume traffic generator shall have more than one two-way access onto a single roadway.
b)	No medium or high volume traffic generator shall have more than two two-way accesses in total onto Routes 2 or 4.
4)	Curb cut widths and design shall conform to the following standards:
a)	Low volume driveways: Defined as driveways with less than 50 vehicle trips/day based on the latest edition of the Institute of Traffic Engineers’ Trip Generation Report, as the same may be amended from time to time shall:
(1)	have two-way operation;
(2)	intersect the road at an angle as close to 90 degrees as site conditions permit, but at no less than 60 degrees;
(3)	not require a median;
(4)	slope from the gutter line on a straight slope of 3 percent or less for at least 50 feet, with a slope no greater than 8 percent except where unique site conditions permit a waiving of the slope standard to 10 percent; and
(5)	comply with the following geometric standards:

NOTE: The Planning Board may vary these standards due to unique factors such as a significant level of truck traffic.


Item	Desired Value (ft.)	Minimum Value (ft.)	Maximum Value (ft.)
R	15-25*	10	15-25*
W	20-30*	20	24-30*
*Upper values apply where major street speed and/or volume is high.

b)	Medium volume driveways with more than 50 vehicle trips/day but fewer than 200 peak hour vehicle trips, based on the latest edition of the Institute of Traffic Engineers’ Trip Generation Report, as the same may be amended from time to time, and generally including all land uses not in the low or high volume groups shall:
(1)	have either two-way or one-way operation and be a minimum of 50 feet in length;
(2)	intersect the road at an angle as close to 90 degrees as site conditions permit, but at no less than 60 degrees;
(3)	not require a median;
(4)	slope upward from the gutter line on a straight slope of 3 percent or less for at least
50 feet and a slope of no more than 6 percent thereafter, with the preferred grade being a 4 ½ percent, depending on the site; and
(5)	comply with the following geometric standards;

NOTE: The Planning Board may vary these standards due to unique factors such as a significant level of truck traffic.
 

Item	Desired Value (ft.)	Minimum Value (ft.)	Maximum Value (ft.)
ONE WAY	
30	
25	
40
R1 (radius)			
R2 (radius)	5	5	10
W (drive width)	20-24	20	24
TWO WAY	
30	
25	
40
R			
WS	26-36*	24	30-40*
*Where separate left and right exit lanes are desirable.

c)	High volume driveway defined as driveways with more than 200 peak hour vehicle trips and generally 25,000 sq. ft. or more of retail space, or 75,000 sq. ft. or more of office space, or 150,000 sq. ft. or more of industrial space, shall:
(1)	have two-way operations separated by a raised median of 6 to 10 feet in width and be a minimum of 50 feet in length.
(2)	intersect with the road at an angle as close to 90 degrees as possible but at no less than 60 degrees;
(3)	be striped for 2 to 4 lanes, with each lane 12 feet wide;
(4)	slope upward from the gutter line on a straight slope of 3 percent or less for at least 75 feet and a slope of no more than 5 percent thereafter;
(5)	have a “STOP” sign control and appropriate “Keep Right” and “Yield” sign controls for channelization; signalization may be required. Level of service and traffic signal warrants
(6)	should be conducted for all high volume drive-ways; and
(7)	comply with the following geometric standards;

NOTE: The Planning Board may vary these standards due to unique factors such as a significant level of truck traffic.

Item	Desired Value (ft.)	Minimum Value (ft.)	Maximum Value (ft.)
W/O CHANNELIZATION	
50	
30	
50
R			
R	24	20	26
W	6	6	10
W/CHANNELIZATION	
100	
75	
100
R			
WD	24	20	26
M	6	6	10
WR	20	16	20
*For industrial developments with a high percentage of truck traffic maximum values are desired.



5)	Distance from edge of driveway corner (point of tangency) to edge of intersection corner (point of tangency) shall be as follows:
 

	
Minimum Corner Clearance (feet)
Driveway	Intersection Signalization	Intersection Unsignalization
Low Volume <50-100 trips/day	150	50
Medium Volume >50-100 trips/day
<200 trips/hour	150	50
High Volume >200 trips/hour	500	250

6)	The minimum distance between driveways shall be measured from the center of the driveways and shall be a function of highway need according to the following table. Where these standards would prohibit access to a lot, the Planning Board shall have the authority to waive the minimum spacing standards.

MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN DRIVEWAYS


Highway Speed	
Minimum Spacing

20 mph	
85 feet
25 mph	105 feet
30 mph	125 feet
35 mph	150 feet
40 mph	185 feet
45 mph	230 feet
50 mph	275 feet

7)	Minimum distance between driveways serving the same parcel, measured from point of tangency to point of tangency by type of driveway, shall be as follows:

	Minimum Spacing to Adjacent Driveway by Driveway Type
Driveway Type	Medium
feet	High w/o RT
feet	High w/RT
feet
Medium Volume	75		
High Volume W/O RT (without
right-turn channelization)	
75	
150	
High Volume W/RT (with right-turn
channelization	
75	
250	
500
8)	The minimum distance between driveway to property line, as measured from point of tangency shall be:

Driveway Type	Minimum Spacing to Property Line (ft.)
Low Volume	10
 
Medium Volume	20
High Volume (without right-turn channelization)	75
High Volume (with right-turn channelization)	75


The minimum spacing to property line may be varied if (1) the safest point of access to the site is closer to the property line and (2) there are at least 20 feet of separation between low volume driveways serving adjacent parcels, 40 feet of separation between medium volume driveways, and 150 feet of separation between high volume driveways.
9)	When the proposed development is to be located on the opposite side of an existing development, the driveway shall be directly opposite of the existing driveway or separated from the opposite driveway by a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet whenever possible.
10)	When a conversion or expansion of an existing use occurs, access shall be upgraded to comply with these standards. This requirement may be waived upon a written finding that
(a) the need to demolish or relocate an existing building on the site or (b) denial of full access to Route 4 where full access presently exists and cannot be provided by Route 4 and/or adjacent side street.
4.	Parking and Circulation: The layout and design of all means of vehicular and pedestrian circulation, including walkways, interior drives, and parking areas shall consider general interior circulation, separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, service, traffic, loading areas, and the arrangement and use of parking areas. These facilities shall be safe and convenient and, insofar as practicable, shall not detract from the proposed buildings and neighboring properties.
a.	Parking areas associated with developments which abut or are accessed by Routes 2 and 4 shall comply with the following provisions.
1)	No parking stall shall be directly accessible for Routes 2 and 4.
2)	No parking lot or area shall be located closer than 35 feet from the edge of the pavement.
3)	A buffer comprised of natural vegetation or landscaping which does not interfere with site distances from driveways shall be maintained from the edge of a road shoulder to the parking area.
4)	Where the development will abut an existing or potential parking area, provisions shall be made for internal vehicular connections between parking areas. The vehicular connector shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width and set back a minimum of 60 feet measured from the edge of the pavement to the center line of connector. If internal connections between parking areas are provided, the Planning Board may allow a ten (10) percent reduction in required lot size and street frontage requirements.
5)	No loading dock or receiving area shall be located such that it faces Routes 2 or 4 unless the loading dock or receiving area is set back a minimum of 100 feet from the edge of the pavement.

5.	Surface Water Drainage: Adequate provisions shall be made for surface drainage so that removal of surface waters will not adversely affect neighboring properties, downstream conditions, or the public storm drainage system. On-site retention and/or absorption shall be utilized to minimize discharges whenever possible. All drainage calculations shall be based on a ten-year storm frequency.
 
The Project must be designed in conformance with the following, if they apply:

Maine Stormwater Management Law and Maine Stormwater regulations (Title 38 M.R.S.A. 420-D AND 060960 CMR 500 AND 502.

Maine DEP allocations for allowable levels of phosphorus on lake/pond watersheds in the Shoreland Zones.

Maine Pollution Discharge Elimination System Stormwater Program requirements.

6.	Utilities: The site plan shall show what facilities are proposed for water supply and waste water disposal. Whenever feasible, electric, telephone, and other utility lines shall be installed underground. Any utility installations above ground shall be located so as to have a harmonious relationship with neighboring properties and the site. Adequate water supply shall be available to meet the demands of the proposed development, including fire protection.
7.	Advertising Features: The size, location, design, color, texture, lighting and materials of all exterior signs and outdoor advertising structures or features shall not detract from the design of proposed buildings and structures and the surrounding properties.
8.	Special Features: Exposed storage areas, exposed machinery installations, service areas, truck loading areas, utility buildings and structures and similar accessory areas, and structures shall be subject to such setbacks, screen plantings or other screening methods as shall reasonably be required to prevent their being incongruous with the existing or contemplated environment and the surrounding properties.
9.	Exterior Lighting: All exterior lighting shall be designed to minimize adverse impact on neighboring properties and public ways. All lighting shall be directed towards the property and shall be down shielded in a manner to prevent light from shining off the owner’s property and/or above the horizontal plane. External lights for signs must be positioned above the sign shining downward and towards the sign or the sign shall be internally lit. Parking lot lighting shall be turned off or minimized one hour after close of business to one hour before opening. (Amended June 6, 2011)
10.	Emergency Vehicle Access: The development shall provide and maintain convenient and safe emergency vehicle access to all buildings and structures at all times.
11.	Landscaping: Landscaping shall be designed and installed to define, soften, or screen the appearance of off-street parking areas from the public right-of-way and abutting properties, to enhance the physical design of the building(s) and site, and to minimize the encroachment of the proposed use on neighboring land uses. Particular attention should be paid to the use of planting to break up parking areas.
12.	Fire Protection: The site layout and design shall provide adequate fire protection features. 13.Solid Waste: Adequate provisions shall be made for the removal and disposal of all solid
waste and the development must not cause an unreasonable burden on municipal solid waste disposal. Adequate provision shall be made for the lawful transportation, storage and disposal of any hazardous materials as defined by State law.
14.	Community Impact: The Planning Board may require the applicant to obtain, at the applicant’s expense, a professional review of the impact of the development on off-site public improvements including any new public improvements that may be required to accommodate the development. A one-time “impact fee” may be charged to a new
 
development, by the Town, to accommodate the new development, as determined by the Planning Board through professional review.
15.	Water Supply. The development will not have unreasonable adverse effects on the quality or quantity of groundwater.
16.	Erosion Control. The development will not cause undue sedimentation or erosion. A soil and water conservation plan reviewed by the Franklin County Soil and Water Conservation District may be required.
17.	Pollution Control. The development will not cause undue air or water pollution.
18.	Health and Safety. Safe and healthful conditions will be maintained at all times within and about the proposed development.
19.	Shore land Protection. The proposed development will conserve visual, as well as actual, points of public access to inland waters.
20.	Floodplain Protection. The proposed development will avoid problems associated with floodplain development and use.
21.	Performance Standards. All performance standards of this Ordinance which are applicable to the proposed development shall be met. In determining whether a proposed development meets the foregoing standards, the Planning Board shall consider the following factors:
a.	The need of a particular location for the proposed development;
b.	Access to the site from existing or proposed roads;
c.	The location of the site with respect to floodplains and floodways of rivers or streams;
d.	The amount and type of wastes to be generated by the proposed development and adequacy of the proposed disposal systems;
e.	The impact of the proposed development on the land and adjacent water bodies and the capability of the land and water to sustain such development without degradation;
f.	Existing topographic and drainage features and vegetative cover on the site;
g.	The erosion potential of the site based upon degree and direction of slope, soil type, and vegetation cover;
h.	The impact of the proposed development on transportation facilities;
i.	The impact of the proposed development on local population and community facilities;
j.	The impact of the proposed development on local water supplies; and
k.	The amount of dust, noise, smoke or odors detectable at the lot line.

B.	Waivers
Where the Planning Board makes written findings that the applicant will incur an unreasonable economic or other hardship if certain of the criteria or standards of Section 6.4A are strictly applied, the Board may waive the necessity of strict compliance in order to permit a more practical and economical development, provided that the public health, safety and welfare will not be compromised and provided no other standards of this Ordinance are waived. A waiver under this subsection shall not require and shall not be deemed a variance under Section 7.8

6.6	Conditions of Approval

The Planning Board may impose conditions on any site plan approval where the Board finds  such conditions are necessary to insure that the development will comply with the criteria and standards of Section 6.4 of this Ordinance. All elements and features of the plan and all representations made by the applicant concerning the development and use of the property which
 
appear in the record of the Planning Board proceedings are conditions of approval. No change from the conditions of approval is permitted unless an amended plan is first submitted to and approved by the Planning Board.
 

ARTICLE 7.	ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT


7.1	Code Enforcement Officer

A.	The Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) shall act as Building Inspector.

B.	It shall be the duty of the CEO to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. If the CEO shall find that any of the provisions of this Ordinance are being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation(s), indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of illegal changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done, or shall take any other action authorized by this Ordinance to insure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions, including revocation of a previously issued permit.

C.	When any violation of any provision of this Ordinance, including failure to comply with any subdivision or site plan approved by the Planning Board, any condition imposed by the Board of Appeals or any order of the Code Enforcement Officer shall be found to exist, the CEO shall notify the Municipal Officers who may then institute any and all actions to be brought in the name of the Town.

D.	The code enforcement officer may, with the assistance of the Planning Board, develop and utilize standardized forms, procedures, handouts and other administrative aids to facilitate the implementation and enforcement of this Zoning Ordinance.

7.2	Building Permit

The requirements of this Ordinance must be complied with even where the land use activity does not require issuance of a building permit.

A.	No building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, structurally altered, enlarged, or moved unless a Building Permit for such action has been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board, according to Table A.

B.	No Building Permit shall be issued until the Code Enforcement Officer shall have certified  on said Building Permit that the plans and proposed use of said building or structure conform to all the provisions of this Ordinance.

C.	A building permit shall be conspicuously displayed at the building site.

D.	Applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a fee established pursuant to Section 7.3.A.
 
7.3	Fee for Permits

A.	All application, permit, notification, inspection and other fees required by this Ordinance or required for subdivision review shall be established by the Board of Selectmen and published within a schedule of fees, which the Selectmen may amend from time to time according to the procedures required for taking actions at meetings of the Board.

B.	When the Planning Board determines, in its sole discretion, that it requires special advice or expertise to review technical aspects of an application under consideration, it reserves the right to assess the applicant the cost of retaining said assistance, which cost shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of a building permit.




7.4	Plot Plan

A.	Each application for a Building Permit shall be accompanied by a plot plan showing the measurements of the lot and of all buildings, setbacks, parking spaces, existing or proposed, and a description of the intended use or uses of the land and buildings, and such further information as the Code Enforcement Officer may require for a clear understanding of the case.

B.	Except where the building is to be served by a public sewer, or where no sanitary wastes will be produced, or the building is not a dwelling unit, each application for said permit shall be accompanied by proof that the soils of the lot on which it is to be built are suitable for on-site sewage disposal and/or construction, and as may be required by the Maine Plumbing Code.




7.5	Expiration of Permits

Permits issued under this Ordinance are not transferable and expire one year after date of issuance. If substantial construction has not commenced or the use has not been instituted and one year has elapsed since the date of issuance, the applicant must apply for and obtain a new permit. A permit may be extended for one additional year only if the applicant applies to the issuing board or the CEO prior to the expiration of the original permit. As used in this section, substantial construction means completion of 30% of the work authorized by the permit, measured as a percentage of total estimated cost.



7.6	Appeal

All aggrieved persons have the right of appeal to the Board of Appeals upon payment of a fee to cover costs of advertising the appeal hearing, as established under Section 7.3.A.
 
7.7	Administrative and Variance Appeals to the Board of Appeals

A.	Appointment and Composition
(Amended 6/18/2012)
There shall be a Board of Appeals of five members and two alternate members, all of whom shall be residents of the Town of Wilton, and serve without compensation. The members of the Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen, in accordance with the laws of the State of Maine and the following provisions shall apply.
1.	Terms of Board member shall be for three years except that initial appointments shall be made so that the terms of not more than two members expire in any given year.
2.	Neither Municipal officers nor their spouses shall be appointed as members of the Board of Appeals.
3.	When there is a permanent vacancy, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint a person to fill the unexpired term within ninety (90) days.

B.	Powers and Duties
1.	The Board shall elect a Chairman and Secretary from its own membership.
2.	A quorum for the conduct of business shall consist of at least four members.
3.	An appeal shall lie from the decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, to the Board of Appeals, and from the Board of Appeals to the Superior Court according to the provisions of the laws of the State of Maine.

C.	Administrative Appeals
To hear and decide administrative appeals, on an appellate basis, where it is alleged by an aggrieved party that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by, or failure to act by, the Planning Board in the administration of this Ordinance; and to hear and decide administrative appeals on a de novo basis where it is alleged by an aggrieved party that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by, or failure to act by, the Code Enforcement Officer in his or her review of and action on a permit application under this Ordinance. Any order, requirement, decision or determination made, or failure to act, in the enforcement of this ordinance is not appealable to the Board of Appeals.

When the Board of Appeals reviews a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer the Board of Appeals shall hold a “de novo” hearing. At this time the Board may receive and consider new evidence and testimony, be it oral or written. When acting in a “de novo” capacity the Board of Appeals shall hear and decide the matter afresh, undertaking its  own independent analysis of evidence and the law, and reaching its own decision.

When the Board of Appeals hears a decision of the Planning Board, it shall hold an appellate hearing, and may reverse the decision of the Planning Board only upon finding that the decision was contrary to specific provisions of the Ordinance or contrary to the facts presented to the Planning Board. The Board of Appeals may only review the record of the proceedings before the Planning Board. The Board Appeals shall not receive or consider any evidence which was not presented to the Planning Board, but the Board of Appeals may receive and consider written or oral arguments. If the Board of Appeals determines that the record of the Planning Board proceedings are inadequate, the Board
 
of Appeals may remand the matter to the Planning Board for additional fact finding.

D.	Variance Appeals
The Board of Appeals has the authority to hear and decide, upon appeal; in specific cases such a variance from the terms of this Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where; owing to the special conditions, literal enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance would result in undue hardship. In granting any variance the Board of Appeals may prescribe conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under this   Ordinance. The granting of a variance requires a majority vote of those Board of Appeals members present and voting, except that there must be a minimum of three (3) votes in favor of the variance.

As used in this Ordinance, “undue hardship” shall mean:
1.	That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is granted;
2.	That the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not to the general conditions in the neighborhood;
3.	That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality; and
4.	That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner.

E.	Setback Variance for Single Family Dwellings
The Board of Appeals may permit a variance from setback requirements for a single family dwelling which is the primary year-round residence of the applicant or its accessory structure(s) upon finding that strict application of the Ordinance to the applicant’s property would create undue hardship, defined for purposes of this subsection only as follows:

1.	the need for the variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not to the general conditions in the neighborhood;
2.	the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality;
3.	the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner;
4.	the granting of the variance will not substantially reduce or impair the use of abutting property; and
5.	the granting of a variance is based upon demonstrated need, not convenience, and no other feasible alternative is available.

The Board may not grant a variance under this subsection if the result would be to exceed the maximum non-vegetated surface ratio allowed in the zoning district. Minimum setback from a water body or wetland may not be reduced under this subsection. Minimum front, side and rear setbacks may be reduced by more than 20% under this subsection only if the applicant has obtained the written consent of any affected abutting landowner.

F.	Disability Variance
(Amended 6/16/2014)
 
Notwithstanding Section 7.8.D.1-4 above, the Code Enforcement Officer may grant a variance to an owner of a residential dwelling for the purpose of making that dwelling accessible to a person with a disability who resides in or regularly uses the dwelling. The Code Enforcement Officer shall restrict any variance granted under this subsection solely to the installation of equipment or the construction of structures necessary for access to or egress from the dwelling by the person with the disability. The Code Enforcement Officer may impose conditions on the variance, including limiting the variance to the duration of the disability or to the time that the person with the disability lives in the dwelling. The term “structures necessary for access to or egress from the dwelling” shall include ramps and associated railings, wall or roof systems necessary  for the safety or effectiveness of the ramps.

G.	Public Hearings
For appeals from the decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, or appeals for a variance, and for the consideration of applications for permits requiring approval of the Board, the Board shall hold a public hearing as prescribed, herein:
1.	At least seven days before the public hearing, the Town Clerk shall cause notice to be published in a locally distributed newspaper and posted in a conspicuous place, which notice shall indicate the property involved, the nature of the appeal, and the time and place of the public hearing.
2.	The Town Clerk shall forthwith notify by mail the owners of all property within 500 feet of the property for which the appeal or application is made. Failure to receive this notice shall not invalidate the proceeding herein prescribed. The owners of properties shall be considered to be the parties listed by the Board of Assessors as against whom the taxes are assessed.
3.	The Code Enforcement Officer and the Chairman of the Planning Board, unless prevented by illness or absence from the State, shall attend all hearings and shall present to the Board, all plans, photographs, or other factual materials which are appropriate to an understanding of the case.
4.	The Board of Appeals shall not continue hearings to a future date except for good cause.
5.	The Board of Appeals shall state the reasons and basis for its decision,  including a statement of the facts found and conclusions reached by the Board. Copies of written decisions of the Board of Appeals shall be given to the Planning Board, Code Enforcement Officer, and the municipal officers within seven (7) days of  the Boards decision.
6.	For appeals in the shoreland zone the Board shall cause written notice of its decision to be mailed or hand-delivered to the Department of Environmental Protection within seven (7) days of the Board’s decision.

H.	Appeal Procedure
1.	Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board may appeal such decision to the Board of Appeals.
2.	Any appeal to the Board of Appeals must be filed within 30 days of the date of the decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board. The appellant shall file an appeal at the office of the Town Clerk upon forms to be approved by the Board of Appeals. The appellant shall set forth on said forms, the grounds of his appeal and shall
 
refer to the specific provisions of the Zoning Ordinance involved. A fee shall be paid at the time of filing as established under Section 7.3.A.

Following the receipt of the appeal, the Town Clerk shall notify forthwith the Code Enforcement Officer and/or Planning Board and the Chairman of the Board of Appeals.

A copy of each variance request in the shoreland zone, including the application and all supporting information supplied by the applicant, shall be forwarded by the town clerk to the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection at least twenty (20) days prior to action by the Board of Appeals. Any comments received from the Commissioner prior to the action by the Board of Appeals shall be made part of the record and shall be taken into consideration by the Board of Appeals.

I.	Successive Appeals
After a decision has been made by the Board of Appeals, a new appeal involving the same matter shall not be entertained by the Board until one year shall have elapsed from the date of said decision, except that the Board may entertain a new appeal if the Chairman believes, that owing to a mistake of law or misunderstanding of fact, an injustice was done, or if he believes that a change has taken place in some essential aspect of the case, sufficient to warrant a reconsideration of the appeal.

J.	Further Appeal
An aggrieved party may appeal from the decision of the Board of Appeals to the Superior Court as provided by the laws of the State of Maine.

7.8	Violations

The Board of Selectmen, on notification by the Code Enforcement Officer, shall institute or cause to be instituted, in the name of the Town, any and all actions, legal and equitable, that may be appropriate or necessary for the enforcement of this Ordinance.

7.9	Penalty for Violation
(Amended June 19, 2000)

Any person, firm, or corporation owning or having control of any building or premises or part thereof, who violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance, or who fails to comply with a “Stop Work” order posted by the Code Enforcement Officer or who fails to conform to any of the provisions hereof, commits a civil violation and is subject to civil penalties under 30-A
M.R.S.A. §4452. Each day such violation or failure to comply is permitted to exist, after notification by the Code Enforcement Officer, shall constitute a separate violation. All such fines shall be paid to the Town of Wilton. Note: Current penalties include fines of not less than
$100 or more than $2,500 per violation for each day that the violation continues. However, in the resource protection district, the maximum penalty is increased to $5,000.
 

ARTICLE 8.	DEFINITIONS
(Amended June 18, 2018)



For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain terms and words are hereby defined as follows:

Accessory Structure: A structure detached from a principal building, located on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or use.

Accessory Use: A use of land or of a building or portion thereof customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and located on the same lot with the principal use.

Adult Business Establishment: (Amended June 18, 2018)
A business entity which customarily excludes persons under the age of 21 from admission to its premises, including but not limited to, adult amusement establishments, private membership clubs, and/or sexually-oriented businesses.

Agriculture: The normal, customary traditional production, keeping or maintenance for sale or lease, of plants and/or animals, including but not limited to: forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products; poultry and poultry products; livestock; fruits and vegetables; and ornamental and green house products. Agriculture does not include forest management and timber harvesting activities and does not include confined feeding operations.

Agricultural/Sales/Services: The use of building or land for the sale or service of equipment or products to those engaged in agriculture.

Amusement Facility: any indoor private, commercial premises which are maintained or operated primarily for the amusement, patronage, or recreation of the public, containing four (4) or more table sports, pinball machines, video games, or similar mechanical or electronic games, whether activated by coins, tokens or discs, or whether activated through remote control by the management.

Apartment House: A building erected or converted for the purpose of providing three or more dwelling units.

Aquaculture: The growing or propagation of harvestable freshwater, estuarine, or marine plant or animal species.

Automobile Graveyard: see “junkyard.”

Automobile Hobbyist: A person who will store, organize, restore, or display antique autos, antique motorcycles, classic vehicles, horseless carriages, reconstruction vehicles, street rods or parts of these vehicles as these vehicles are defined in Title 29-A, Sect. 101 as long as the hobbyist’s activities comply with all applicable federal, state statutes and rules and municipal ordinances, other than ordinances that are more restrictive than this subsection regarding the
 
storage of vehicles or vehicles or vehicle parts that are collected by a hobbyist. For the purposes of this subparagraph, an automobile hobbyist is a person who is not primarily engaged in the business of selling any of those vehicles or parts from those vehicles.

Automobile Recycling Business: the business premises of a person who purchases or acquires salvage vehicles for the purpose of reselling the vehicles or component parts of the vehicles or rebuilding or repairing salvage vehicles for the purpose of resale or for selling the basic materials in the salvage vehicles, provided that at least 80 percent of the premises is used for recycling operations.

Basal Area: the area of cross-section of a tree stem at 4 ½ feet above ground level and inclusive of bark.

Basement: any portion of a structure with a floor-to-ceiling height of 6 feet or more and having more than 50% of its volume below the existing ground level.

Bed and Breakfast: a dwelling in which a full-time permanent resident of the dwelling provides transient lodging or boarding and lodging to the public for compensation for periods of less than one week per guest or group of guests and where there are no cooking facilities in any of the guest rooms.

Boat Launching Facility: a facility designed primarily for the launching and landing of watercraft, and which may include an access ramp, docking area, and parking spaces for vehicles and trailers.

Building: Any structure designed or intended for the shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels, or property.

Camp: A single family dwelling which is occupied no more than 150 calendar days per year and is not a primary residence.

Camper/Camper Trailer: A trailer or semi-trailer of less than 32 feet in length primarily designed and constructed to provide temporary living quarter for recreational camping, travel or other use, or a self-contained recreational vehicle.

Campground: Any area of tract of land to accommodate two (2) or more parties in temporary living quarters, including, but not limited to tents, recreational vehicles or other shelters. Canopy: the more or less continuous cover formed by tree crowns in a wooded area.

Cluster Development: A method of subdividing or developing a parcel of land whereby densities are increased on some sections while other sections are left undeveloped. The subdivision or development may be comprised of single-family homes, mobile homes and/or multi-family structures.

Commercial Use: The use of lands, buildings, or structures, other than a small enterprise, home occupation, or in-home office allowed pursuant to Section 5.26, the intent and result of which activity is the production of income from the buying and selling of goods and/or services, to
 
include rental dwelling units. (Amended 6/18/07)

Commercial Firewood Processing: The wholesale or retail sale of more than 100 cords of cut, sawed and/or split logs or cord- wood suitable for fuel in any calendar year.

Commercial Recreation, Indoor: A commercial enterprise conducted in a structure or building that receives a fee in return for the provisions of some recreation activity including but not  limited to: racket and tennis facilities, gymnasiums, indoor swimming pools, and bowling alleys but not including amusement facilities as defined herein.

Commercial Recreation, Outdoor: A commercial enterprise conducted out of doors that receives a fee in return for the provisions of some recreation activity including but not limited to: X-country ski areas, shooting ranges and tennis courts but not including amusement facilities as defined herein.

Commercial School: an institution operated for profit which offers classes in various skills, trades, professions or fields of knowledge, but is not authorized by the State to award baccalaureate or higher degrees.

Community Center: a building which provides a meeting place for local, nonprofit community organizations on a regular basis and which is not used for activities customarily carried on by businesses.

Confined Feeding Operations: specialized livestock production enterprises with confined beef cattle or confined hog feeding or poultry or egg farms and accessory structures.

Congregate Housing: residential housing consisting of private apartment and central dining facilities and within which a supportive services program assists functionally impaired elderly or disabled residents who are unable to live independently but do not require the constant supervision of intensive health care of an intermediate care or skilled nursing care facility.

Convenience Store: A store where such items as, but not limited to, basic foods, newspapers, emergency home repair articles and other household items, and gasoline are sold.

DBH: The diameter of a standing tree measured 4.5 feet from ground level.

Deck: A platform which does not have walls, roof, or an enclosed foundation.

Development: means any change caused by individuals or entities to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the construction of buildings or other structures; the construction of additions or substantial improvements to buildings or other structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials; and the storage, deposition, or extraction or materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities.
 
Disability: (Amended June 16, 2014)
1.	A physical or mental impairment that:
a.	Substantially limits one or more of a person's major life activities;
b.	Significantly impairs physical or mental health; or
c.	Requires special education, vocational rehabilitation or related services;
2.	Without regard to severity unless otherwise indicated: absent, artificial or replacement limbs, hands, feet or vital organs; alcoholism; amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; bipolar disorder; blindness	or abnormal vision loss; cancer; cerebral palsy; chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; Crohn's disease; cystic fibrosis; deafness or abnormal hearing loss; diabetes; substantial disfigurement; epilepsy; heart disease; HIV or AIDS; kidney or renal diseases; lupus; major depressive disorder; mastectomy; intellectual disability; multiple sclerosis; muscular dystrophy; paralysis; Parkinson's disease; pervasive developmental disorders; rheumatoid arthritis; schizophrenia; and acquired brain injury;
3.	With respect to an individual, having a record of any of the conditions in paragraph 1 or 2; or
4.	With respect to an individual, being regarded as having or likely to develop any of the conditions in paragraph 1 or 2.

Driveway: An access way serving not more than two single family or one two-family dwellings. Wood roads and field roads are not considered driveways until a dwelling is proposed.

Domestic Pet: A pet normally kept in a dwelling, such as a dog, cat and the like.

Dwelling, two families: a building containing two dwelling units.

Dwelling, Single-Family: A building containing one dwelling unit, including trailers and mobile homes.

Dwelling, Multi-family: A building containing three or more dwelling units.

Dwelling Unit: A room or suite of rooms designed for residential use as living quarters by a single-family, and including provisions for sleeping, living, cooking and eating. The term “dwelling unit” shall include mobile homes, but shall not include campers or camper/trailers.

“ECHO” Unit: a small residential structure placed or constructed to the side or rear of an existing single family dwelling and occupied by one or two people who benefit from living close to the family. Also called an Elder Cottage Housing Opportunity Unit.
Emergency Operations: Operations conducted for the public health, safety or general welfare, such as protection of resources from immediate destruction or loss, law enforcement, and operations to rescue human beings, property and livestock from the threat of destruction of injury.

Entrance: The access between the right-of-way line of a town-maintained road and the traveled way of a town-maintained road. (Amended June 18, 2001)
 
Essential Services: Gas, electrical or communications facilities; steam, fuel, electric power or water transmission or distribution lines, towers and related equipment; telephone cables or lines, poles and related equipment; gas, oil, water, slurry or other similar pipelines; municipal sewage lines, collection or supply systems; and associated storage tanks. Such systems may include towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, piles, conduits, cables, fire alarms and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar accessories, but shall not include service drops or buildings which are necessary for the furnishing of such services.

Expansion of a structure: an increase in the floor area or volume of a structure, including all extensions such as, but not limited to: attached decks, garages, porches and greenhouses.

Expansion of use: the addition of one or more months to a use’s operating season; or the use of more floor area or ground area devoted to a particular use.

Family: One or more persons occupying premises and living as a single housekeeping unit.

Farm: An area which is used for the growing of farm products such as vegetables, fruits, trees, and grain and their storage on the area, as well as for the raising thereon of farm poultry and farm animals. The term “farming” includes the operation of such an area for one or more of the above uses.

Floodplain: The lands adjacent to a body of water which have been designated as within the limits of a 100 year flood.

Floodway: The channel of a stream and those portions of the floodplain that are required to carry and discharge the flood waters, and further defined as “Regulatory Floodway” in the Town of Wilton Floodplain Management Ordinance.

Floor area: the sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a structure enclosed by exterior walls, plus the horizontal area of any unenclosed portions of a structure such as porches and decks.

Forest Management Activities: Timber cruising and other forest resource evaluation activities, pesticide or fertilizer application, management planning activities, timber stand improvement, pruning, regeneration of forest stands, and other similar or associated activities, exclusive of timber harvesting and the construction, creation or maintenance of roads.

Forested wetland: a freshwater wetland dominated by woody vegetation that is six (6) meters tall (approximately twenty (20) feet) or taller.

Foundation: the supporting substructure of a building or other structure, excluding wooden sills and post supports, but including basements, slabs, frost walls, or other	base consisting of concrete, block, brick or similar material.

Freshwater Wetland: Freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas, other than forested wetlands, which are:
A.	of ten or more acres; or of less than 10 contiguous acres and adjacent to a surface
 
water body, excluding any river, stream or brook such that in a natural state, the combined surface area is in excess of 10 acres; and
B.	inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for duration sufficient to support, and which under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils.

Freshwater Wetland may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that do not conform to the criteria of this definition. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the upland edge (the shoreline) of a freshwater wetland is defined as the boundary line at which the wetland becomes a forested wetland. Although wetlands are shown on the Official Zoning Map, the actual boundaries shall be determined by field investigation.

Frontage, street or shoreline: the horizontal distance, measured in a straight line without  regard to road or shoreline curvature, between the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the street or with the shoreline at normal high water elevation. On a cul-de-sac, street frontage is measured along a curve which is parallel to the sideline of the street and which is set back from the street a distance equal to the front yard setback requirement for the zoning district in which the lot is located or equal to the actual setback of the building closest to the street, whichever is greater.

Functionally water-dependent uses (Amended June 21, 1999) - Those uses that require, for  their primary purpose, location on submerged lands or that require direct access to, or location in, coastal or inland waters and that cannot be located away from these waters. The uses include but are not limited to commercial and recreational fishing and boating facilities, excluding recreational boat storage buildings, finfish and shellfish processing, fish storage and retail and wholesale fish marketing facilities, waterfront dock and port facilities, shipyards and boat  building facilities, marinas, navigation aids, basins and channels, retaining walls, industrial uses dependent upon water-borne transportation or requiring large volumes of cooling or processing water that cannot be reasonably located or operated at an inland site, and uses that primarily provide general public access to coastal or inland waters.

Governmental Use: The use of land or structures by a governmental entity for public and not private purposes.

Great Pond: Any inland body of water which in a natural state has a surface area in excess of 10 acres, and any inland body of water artificially formed or increased which has a surface area in excess of 30 acres except for the purposes of this article, where the artificially formed or increased inland body of water is completely surrounded by land held by a single owner and except those privately owned inland bodies of water which are held primarily as waterfowl and fish breeding areas or for hunting and fishing.

Ground cover: small plants, fallen leaves, needles and twigs, and the partially decayed organic matter of the forest floor.

Group Home: A housing facility for mentally handicapped or developmentally disabled persons which is approved, authorized, certified or licensed by the state. A group home may include a community living facility or foster home.
 

Height of a structure: the vertical distance between the mean original (prior to construction) grade at the downhill side of the structure and the highest point of the structure, excluding chimneys, steeples, antennas, and similar appurtenances that have no floor area.

Home Occupation: Any occupation or profession carried on by an occupant of a building  within that building which contains his dwelling unit or a structure accessory to the dwelling   unit, and which does not occupy more than forty percent (40%) of the space including basement devoted to the occupant’s living quarters and which employs not more than two (2) non-residents of the dwelling unit.

Hospice: A facility that offers a range of interdisciplinary services provided o a 24-hour-a-day, 7-days-a-week basis to a person terminally ill and that person’s family.

In-home office: a small scale, low impact office use conducted exclusively within a dwelling unit or structure accessory to a dwelling unit and which does not employ anyone who is not a resident of the dwelling unit. Examples of activities permitted as an in-home office include word processing, data processing and desk top publishing. In-home offices are subject to the standards of section 5.26(c).

Increase in non-conformity of a structure (Amended June 21, 1999) - Any change in a structure or property which causes further deviation room the dimensional standard(s) creating the nonconformity such as, but not limited to, reduction in property line, right-of-way line, water body, tributary stream or wetland setback distance, increase in lot coverage, or increase in height of a structure. Property changes or structure expansions which either meet the dimensional standard or which cause no further increase in the linear extend of nonconformance of the existing structure shall not be considered to increase nonconformity. For example, there is no increase in nonconformity with the setback requirement for water bodies, wetlands, or tributary streams if the expansion extends no further into the required setback area than does any portion of the existing nonconforming structure. Hence, a structure may be expanded laterally provided that the expansion extends no closer to the water body, tributary stream or wetland than the closest portion of the existing structure from that water body tributary stream or wetland. Included in this allowance are expansions which in-fill irregularly shaped structures.

Individual private campsite: an area of land which is not associated with a campground, but which is developed for repeated camping by only one group not to exceed ten (10) individuals and which involves site improvements which may include  but not be limited to a gravel pad, parking area, fire place, or tent platform.

Industrial: The assembling, fabrication, finishing, manufacturing, packaging or processing of goods, or the extraction of minerals.

Inland Wetland: Areas enclosed by the normal high water mark of inland waters and areas otherwise identified on the basis of soils, vegetation, or other criteria as inland wetlands, including but not limited to bogs, swamps and marshes.
 
Junkyard: A lot or part thereof, which is used for the outdoor storage of:
A.	Secondhand products or materials, such as automobile parts, tires, building supplies, appliances, furniture, scrap metal, general household garbage, and the like, or
B.	More than two unregistered, discarded, worn-out or junked motor vehicles, excluding vehicles held for repair in the normal course of an automobile repair or restoration business and kept outdoors on the premises for no longer than 60 days in total. Operational plow trucks are exempt (plow frame must be attached to vehicle)

Kennel: Any place, building, structure, or tract of land in or on which three (3) privately owned dogs or other pets, or both, are kept at any one time for their owners in return for a fee.

Lot Width: The distance measured along the road line or shore line measured in a straight line between the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the road line or shoreline at normal high water elevation.

Lot: A parcel of land described in a deed, plan or other similar document which has been recorded in the Franklin County Registry of Deeds. Parcels on opposite sides of a street, as defined in this ordinance, shall constitute separate lots.

Lot line, side: any lot boundary line which is not a front or rear lot line.

Lot line, front: the lot boundary line separating the lot from the street. On lots abutting more than one street, the street line on which the principal structure faces.

Lot line, rear: the lot boundary line opposite and furthest from the front lot line.

Manufacturing, Light: A use engaged in the manufacture, predominately from previously prepared materials, finished products or parts, or the processing, fabrication, assembly, packing, incidental storage, sales and distribution of such previously prepared materials, finished products, or goods and the production, manufacturing, assembly, fabrication, processing, treatment, compounding, preparation, cleaning, servicing, testing or the repair of materials, goods or finished products. (Amended June 21, 1999.)

Manufacturing, Heavy: A use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or products predominately from extracted or raw materials and the production, manufacturing, assembly, fabrication, processing, treatment, compounding, preparation, cleaning, servicing, testing, or the repair of materials, goods or products occupying a space exceeding 20,000 square feet and where more than 25 employees typically occupy the space at any given time.

Manufactured Home: a structure, transportable in one or more sections which were  constructed in a manufacturing facility and transported to a building site to be used as a dwelling when connected to the required utilities.

Market value: the estimated price a property will bring in the open market and under prevailing market conditions in a sale between a willing seller and a willing buyer, both conversant with the property and with prevailing general price levels.
 
Mineral Exploration: Hand sampling, test boring, or other methods of determining the nature or extend of mineral resources which create minimal disturbance to the land and which include reasonable measures to restore the land to its original condition.

Mineral Extraction: Any operation which removes soil, topsoil, loam, sand, gravel, clay, rock, peat, or other like material from its natural location and to transport the product removed, away from the extraction site.

Minerals: A naturally occurring aggregate of inorganic substances that has a definite chemical composition and more or less characteristic physical properties.

Mobile Home Park: a parcel of land under unified ownership approved by the Planning Board for the placement of three or more mobile homes or manufactured homes.

Mobile Home: A structure transportable in one or more sections which is 8 body feet or more in width and is 32 body feet or more in length and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein.

Native: indigenous to the local forests.

Neighborhood convenience store: a store of less than 1,000 square feet of floor space intended to service the convenience of a residential neighborhood primarily with the sale of merchandise such as, but not limited to, basic foods, newspapers, emergency home repair articles and other household items but not gasoline.

Non-conforming condition: non-conforming lot, structure or use which is allowed solely because it was in lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendment took effect.

Non-conforming lot: a single lot of record which, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, does not meet the area, frontage, or width requirements of the district in which it is located.

Non-conforming structure: a structure which does not meet any one or more of the following dimensional requirements; setback, height, or lot coverage, but which is allowed solely because it was in lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or	subsequent amendments took effect.

Non-conforming use: use of buildings, structures, premises, land or parts thereof which is not allowed in the district in which it is situated, but which is allowed to remain solely because it was in lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendments took effect.

Normal High Water Line: That line which is apparent from visible markings, changes in the character of soils due to prolonged action of the water or changes in vegetation, and which distinguishes between predominantly aquatic and predominantly terrestrial land. Areas contiguous with rivers and great ponds that support non-forested wetland vegetation and hydric
 
soils and that are at the same or lower elevation as the water level of the river or great pond during the period of normal high-water are considered part of the river or great pond.

Normal Maintenance: Structural repairs that do not enlarge the existing footprint or volume of the structure. Normal maintenance does not include activities that alter, remove, or replace load- bearing and structural members of a structure. By way of example, new roofing materials on the same roof pitch, new siding, and the installation of bay windows and new stairways are considered normal maintenance. (See Article 1.3 C for the definition of normal maintenance in the shore land zone.) (Amended June 19, 2001.)

Nursing Home: A facility operated in connection with a hospital, or in which nursing care and medical services are prescribed by or performed under the general direction of persons licensed  to practice medicine or surgery in the State, for the accommodation of convalescent of other persons who are not acutely ill and not in need of hospital care, but do require skilled nursing  care and related medical services. The term nursing home shall be restricted to those facilities, the purpose of which is to provide skilled nursing care and related medical services for a period  of not less than 24 hours per day to individuals admitted because of illness, disease or physical or mental infirmity and which provides a community service.

Parking Space: An area designed or used for the parking of a motor vehicle.

Parking Area: A public or private open area for the use of the owners, tenants, lessees, or occupants of the lot on which the parking area is located or their customers, employees or others designed for five or more motor vehicles.

Parking Garage: A building or structure consisting one or more levels and used to store motor vehicles.

Parks and Recreation: Non-commercially operated facilities open to the public including, but not limited to, playgrounds, parks, monuments, open space athletic fields, boat launching ramps, along with necessary accessory facilities. The term shall not include campgrounds or commercial recreation and amusement centers.

Piers, Docks, Wharves, and Bridges: Over 20 feet in length, other uses projecting into water bodies.

Permanent: Structures which remain in the water seven or more months in any period of twelve
(12)	consecutive months

Temporary: Structures which remain in the water less than seven months in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months

Principal Structure: A structure in which is conducted the principal use of the lot.

Private Air Strip: An area of land used or intended to be used by any individual or individuals for the landing and take off of private noncommercial aircraft.
 
Public utility: any person, firm, corporation, municipal department, board or commission authorized to furnish gas, steam, electricity, water disposal, communication facilities, transportation or water to the public.

Recreational facility: a place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure time activities, and other customary and usual recreational activities, excluding boat launching facilities.

Recreational vehicle: a vehicle or an attachment to a vehicle designed to be towed, and designed for temporary sleeping or living quarters for one or more persons, and which may include a pick-up camper, travel trailer, tent trailer, camp trailer, and motor home. In order to be considered as a vehicle and not as a structure, the unit must remain with its tires on the ground, and must be registered with the State Division of Motor Vehicles.

Residual basal area: the average of the basal area of trees remaining on a harvested site.

Riprap: rocks, irregularly shaped, and at least six (6) inches in diameter, used
for erosion control and soil stabilization, typically used on ground slopes of two (2) units horizontal to one (1) unit vertical or less.

River: a free-flowing body of water including its associated floodplain wetlands from that point at which it provides drainage for a watershed of twenty five (25) square miles to its mouth.

Road and Driveway Construction: The activities including but not limited to grubbing and filling associated with driveway and road construction.

Service Drop: Any utility line extension which does not cross or run beneath any portion of a water body provided that:
A.	in the case of electric service
1.	the placement of wires and/or the installation of utility poles is located entirely upon the premises of the customer requesting service or upon a roadway right-of- way; and
2.	the total length of the extension is less than one thousand (1,000) feet.
B.	in the case of telephone service
1.	the extension, regardless of length, will be made by the installation of telephone wires to existing utility poles, or
2.	the extension requiring the installation of new utility poles or placement underground is less than one thousand (1,000) feet in length.

Setback: The shortest horizontal distance from the edge of a street or traveled way or lot line to the closest point of a structure.

Shore frontage: the length of a lot bordering on a water body or wetland measured in a	straight line between the intersections of the lot lines with the shoreline.

Shoreland Setback: The horizontal distance from the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or from the upland edge of a wetland to the nearest part of a structure, road,
 
parking space or other regulated object or area.

Shoreland Zone: The land area located within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high- water line of any great pond, river, or the upland edge of a freshwater wetland; within 75 feet horizontal distance of the normal high-water line of a stream, and within the 100 year floodplain.

Sign: Any notice or advertisement used to display or convey messages or pictures out-of-doors.

Skid trail: a route repeatedly used by forwarding machinery or animal to haul or drag forest products from the stump to the yard or landing, the construction of which requires minimal excavation.

Slash: the residue, e.g., treetops and branches, left on the ground after a timber harvest.

Small enterprise: a small scale commercial or industrial enterprise which is conducted exclusively in a dwelling unit or structure accessory to a dwelling unit. Small enterprises are subject to site plan review and to the standards of section 5.19(A).

Stream Channel: A channel between defined banks created by the action of surface water and characterized by the lack of terrestrial vegetation or by the presence of a bed.

Stream: A free-flowing body of water from the outlet of a great pond or the confluence of two perennial streams as depicted on the most recent edition of a United States Geological Survey 7.5 minute series topographic map, or, if not possible, a 15-minute series topographic map, to the point where the body of water becomes a river or flows to another water body or wetland within the shore land zone, or any other free-flowing bodies of water as depicted on the official Wilton Zoning Map.

Street: (1) A public way established by or maintained under public authority; or (2) a private right of way at least 50 feet in width, the description of which is recorded in the Franklin County Registry of Deeds.

Street Line: A dividing line between a lot and a contiguous street.

Subdivision: See Town of Wilton Subdivision Ordinance.



Structure: Anything built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, goods or property of any kind, together with anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, exclusive of fences, and poles, wiring and other aerial equipment normally  associated with service drops as well as guying and guy anchors. The term includes structures temporarily or permanently located, such as decks, patios, and satellite dishes.

Substantial Expansion of Building: An expansion which, individually or together with past expansions, increases either the volume or floor area by 30% or more. The 30% expansion limitation is for the lifetime of the structure.
 
Substantial start: completion of thirty (30) percent of a permitted structure or use measured as a percentage of estimated total cost.

Sustained slope: a change in elevation where the referenced percent grade is substantially maintained or exceeded throughout the measured area.

Swimming Pool: An outdoor artificial receptacle or other container, whether in or above the ground, used or intended to be used to contain water for swimming or bathing and designed for a water depth of 24 inches or more. A swimming pool is considered a structure.

Timber Harvesting: the cutting and removal of timber for the primary purpose of selling or processing forest products. The cutting or removal of trees in the shoreland zone on a lot that has less than two (2) acres within the shoreland zone shall not be considered timber harvesting. Such cutting or removal of trees shall be regulated pursuant to Article 5.4.B.

Tributary stream: means a channel between defined banks created by the action of surface water, which is characterized by the lack of terrestrial vegetation or by the presence of a bed, devoid of topsoil, containing waterborne deposits or exposed soil, parent material or bedrock;  and which is connected hydrologically with other water bodies. “Tributary stream” does not include rills or gullies forming because of accelerated erosion in disturbed soils where the natural vegetation cover has been removed by human activity.

This definition does not include the term “stream” as defined elsewhere in this Ordinance, and only applies to that portion of the tributary stream located within the shoreland zone of the receiving water body or wetland.

Upland edge of a wetland: the boundary between upland and wetland. For purposes of	a freshwater wetland, the upland edge is formed where the soils are not saturated for a duration sufficient to support wetland vegetation; or where the soils support the growth of wetland vegetation, but such vegetation is dominated by woody stems that are six (6) meters (approximately twenty (20) foot) tall or taller.

Vegetation: All live trees, shrubs, and other plants including without limitation, trees both over and under 4 inches in diameter, measured at 4 ½ feet above ground level.



Volume of a Structure: The volume of all portions of a structure enclosed by a roof and fixed exterior walls as measured from the exterior faces of the walls and roof, including basements.

Water body: any great pond, river or stream.

Water crossing: any project extending from one bank to the opposite bank of a river, stream, tributary stream, or wetland whether under, through, or over the water or wetland. Such projects include but may not be limited to roads, fords, bridges, culverts, water lines, sewer lines, and cables as well as maintenance work on these crossings. This definition includes crossings for timber harvesting equipment and related activities.
 
Wetland: A freshwater wetland is inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for a duration sufficient to support, and which under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils.

Wetlands Associated With Great Ponds and Rivers: Wetlands contiguous with or adjacent to a great pond or river, and which during normal high water, are connected by surface water to the great pond or river. Also included are wetlands which are separated from the great pond or river by a berm, causeway, or similar feature less than 100 feet in width, and which have a surface elevation at or below the normal high water line of the great pond or river. Wetlands associated with great ponds or rivers are considered to be part of that great pond or river.

Windmill: A device for generating electrical or mechanical energy using wind power.

Woody Vegetation: live trees or woody, non-herbaceous shrubs.

Yard Sale: The activity of selling or offering to sell household or personal articles (such as, but not limited to, furniture, tools, or clothing) on the lot on which the owner of the articles resides, provided that such activity occurs on no more than twelve days during any calendar year commencing on or after January 1, 1994. Any such activity occurring on more than twelve days per calendar year shall constitute a commercial use. Any such activity commenced prior to the adoption of this definition shall not constitute a lawful non- conforming use and can occur only as permitted pursuant to this definition. The term yard sale shall include garage sales, porch sales, tag sales, and the like. A yard sale is allowed in any district as an accessory use to a dwelling.
 























ARTICLE 9.	TABLES
 



TABLE A.	PERMITTED USES BY CATEGORY AND ZONE



TABLE A1.  RESIDENTIAL USES

NO – PROHIBITED	CEO - PERMIT FROM CEO REQUIRED	PB - PLANNING BOARD PERMIT REQUIRED	LPI - PERMIT FROM LOCAL PLUMBING INSPECTOR REQUIRED

USE	RESIDENTIAL I	RESIDENTIAL
II	FARM & FOREST	LIMITED RESIDENTIAL	COMMERCIAL	DOWNTOWN VILLAGE	INDUSTRIAL	STREAM PROTECTION	RESOURCE PROTECTION
SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO1	CEO	NO	PB3	PB2
TWO FAMILY DWELLING	CEO	CEO	PB	PB	NO	PB	NO	NO	NO
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING	PB	PB	PB	PB	NO	PB	NO	NO	NO
MANUFACTURED HOME	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO1	CEO	NO	PB3	PB2
MOBILE HOME	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO1	NO	NO	PB3	PB2
MOBILE HOME PARK	PB	PB	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT	PB	PB	PB	PB	NO	PB	NO	NO	NO
CONGREGATE HOUSING	PB	PB	PB	PB	NO	PB	NO	NO	NO
STRUCTURES  ACCESSORY
TO ALLOWED USES
< 500 SF

> 500 SF	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
PB	
PB	
PB	
CEO3	
CEO
	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO	PB	PB	PB	PB3	PB
SWIMMING POOL	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO	PB	CEO	NO	CEO	PB
CONVERTING SEASONAL
TO YEAR-ROUND	LPI	LPI	LPI	LPI	LPI	LPI	NO	LPI	CEO - LPI
HOME OCCUPATION - *5
LOW IMPACT	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO	NO	CEO	PB
HIGH IMPACT	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	NO	PB	NO
SMALL ENTERPRISE	PB	PB	PB	NO	PB	PB	PB	PB	NO
IN-HOME OFFICE	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	NO	YES	NO
PRIVATE SEWAGE
DISPOSAL SYSTEMS FOR ALLOWED USES	
LPI	
LPI	
LPI	
LPI	
LPI	
LPI	
LPI	
LPI	
LPI
 

TABLE A1. RESIDENTIAL USES (Continued)



USE	RESIDENTIAL I	RESIDENTIAL
II	FARM & FOREST	LIMITED RESIDENTIAL	COMMERCIAL	DOWNTOWN VILLAGE	INDUSTRIAL	STREAM PROTECTION	RESOURCE PROTECTION
USES SIMILAR TO USES
REQUIRING PERMIT FROM CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO
USES SIMILAR TO USES
REQUIRING PLANNING BOARD APPROVAL	
PB	
PB	
PB	
PB	
PB	
PB	
PB	
PB	
PB
USES SIMILAR TO THOSE
NOT PERMITTED	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO

Notes:
1.	Except that these uses are prohibited on the south side of US Rt. 2 East from the Wilson Stream Bridge to the Farmington town line.
2.	Allowed with a special permit as outlined in Article 4.1C. See Land Use Table sheet.
3.	Unless a variance from setback requirement is obtained from the Board of Appeals.
4.	Unless otherwise required by Section 6.2, in-home offices do not require site plan reviews.
5.	Low impact home occupations shall not occupy a combined floor area and impervious area greater than 2500 sq feet. High impact homes shall comply with the provisions of Article 5.19B.

AMENDED JUNE 22, 1998
AMENDED JUNE 22, 1998
AMENDED JUNE 14, 2004
AMENDED JUNE 20, 2016
 



 TABLE A2. COMMMERCIAL USES

NO – PROHIBITED	CEO - PERMIT FROM CEO REQUIRED	PB - PLANNING BOARD PERMIT REQUIRED	LPI - PERMIT FROM LOCAL PLUMBING INSPECTOR REQUIRED

USE	
RESIDENTIAL I	RESIDENTIAL
II	FARM & FOREST	LIMITED RESIDENTIAL	COMMERCIAL	DOWNTOWN VILLAGE	INDUSTRIAL	STREAM PROTECTION	RESOURCE PROTECTION
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
<500 SF
>500 SF	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	CEO4	
CEO
	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB
AMUSEMENT FACILITY
(indoor)	NO	NO	NO	NO	PB	PB	PB	NO	NO
INDOOR COMMERCIAL
RECREATION	NO	NO	NO	NO	PB	PB	PB	NO	NO3
AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARD	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	PB	PB	NO	NO
JUNKYARD	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	PB	PB	NO	NO
AUTO BODY SHOP	NO	PB1	PB1	NO	PB1	PB	PB	NO	NO
AUTO REPAIR / SALES	NO	PB1	PB1	NO	PB1	PB	PB	NO	NO
AUTO CAR WASH	NO	NO	NO	NO	PB	PB	PB	NO	NO
AUTOMOBILE HOBBYIST	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB
BED & BREAKFAST	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	NO	NO	NO
BUILDING MATERIALS -
RETAIL SALES	NO	NO	PB	NO	PB	PB	PB	NO	NO
COMMERCIAL SCHOOL	NO	PB2	PB	NO	PB	PB	PB	NO	NO
FIREWOOD PROCESSING	NO	PB	PB	NO	NO	PB	PB	NO	NO
GASOLINE SERVICE
STATION	NO	NO	NO	NO	PB	PB	NO	NO	NO
HOTEL / MOTEL	NO	PB	PB	NO	PB	PB	NO	NO	NO
INDOOR THEATER	NO	NO	NO	NO	PB	PB	NO	NO	NO
KENNEL	NO	PB1	PB	NO	PB	PB	NO	NO	NO
NEIGHBORHOOD
CONVENIENCE STORE	PB1	PB1	PB	NO	PB	PB	NO	NO	NO
OFFICES:  BUSINESS,
PROF. MEDICAL	NO	PB1	PB	NO	PB	PB	PB	NO	NO
PUBLISHING, PRINTING	NO	PB1	PB	NO	PB	PB	PB	NO	NO
COMMERCIAL
COMMUNICATION TOWER	NO	PB	PB	NO	NO	PB	PB	NO	NO
 

TABLE A2.  COMMMERCIAL USES (Continued)



USE	
RESIDENTIAL I	RESIDENTIAL
II	FARM & FOREST	LIMITED RESIDENTIAL	COMMERCIAL	DOWNTOWN VILLAGE	INDUSTRIAL	STREAM PROTECTION	RESOURCE PROTECTION
RESTAURANT	NO	PB3	PB	NO	PB	PB	PB	NO	NO
TAVERN	NO	NO	PB	NO	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB
RETAIL BUSINESS	NO	PB1	PB	NO	PB	PB	PB	NO	NO
SERVICE BUSINESS	NO	PB1	PB	NO	PB	PB	PB	NO	NO
SHOPPING CENTER	NO	NO	NO	NO	PB	PB	PB	NO	NO
WHOLESALE BUSINESS	NO	NO	PB	NO	PB	PB	PB	NO	NO
CAMPGROUND	NO	NO	PB	PB	NO	PB	NO	NO	NO3
FUNERAL HOME	NO	PB1	PB	NO	PB	PB	NO	NO	NO
ARICULTURAL RELATED
SERVICES-SALES	
NO	
NO	
PB	
NO	
PB	
PB	
PB	
NO	
NO
AUCTION BARN	NO	NO	PB	NO	PB4	PB	PB4	NO	NO
ADULT BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT6	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
PB6	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO
MARIJUANA RETAIL SALES7, 8	
NO	
NO	
PB7, 8	
NO	
PB7, 8	
NO	
PB7, 8	
NO	
NO
MARIJUANA CULTIVATION- INDOOR7, 8	
NO	
NO	
PB7, 8	
NO	
PB7, 8	
NO	
PB7, 8	
NO	
NO
MARIJUANA CULTIVATION- OUTDOOR7, 8	
NO	
NO	
PB7, 8	
NO	
PB7, 8	
NO	
PB7, 8	
NO	
PB7, 8
MARIJUANA MFG., PROCESSING & TESTING7, 8	
NO	
NO	
PB7, 8	
NO	
PB7, 8	
NO	
PB7, 8	
NO	
NO
MARIJUANA SOCIAL CLUB	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO
ANTIQUE SALES	NO	PB1	PB	NO	PB	PB	PB	NO	NO
AUTO RECYCLING	NO	NO	PB	NO	NO	PB	PB	NO	NO
CONVENIENCE STORE	NO	NO	NO	NO	PB	PB	PB	NO	NO
DAY-CARE CENTER
FACILITIES	
PB	
PB	
PB	
PB	
PB	
PB	
NO	
NO	
NO
OUTDOOR COMMERCIAL
RECREATION	
NO	
PB1	
PB	
PB5	
NO	
PB	
PB	
PB5	
PB5
USES SIMILAR TO USES
REQUIRING PLANNING BOARD PERMIT	

PB	

PB	

PB	

PB	

PB	

PB	

PB	

PB	

PB
USES SIMILAR TO NOT
PERMITTED	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO
 

TABLE A2.  COMMMERCIAL USES (Continued)

SIGNS	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO
STABLE	NO	PB1	PB	NO	PB	PB	NO	NO	NO
VETERINARY HOSPITAL	NO	PB1	PB	NO	PB	PB	NO	NO	NO
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL
UNITS	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO

NOTES:

1.	SHALL NOT OCCUPY A COMBINED FLOOR AREA AND IMPERVIOUS AREA GREATER THAN 2500 SQ. FT.
2.	NOT ALLOWED TO HAVE ANY BOARDING STUDENTS ON PREMISE
3.	IN EXISTING STRUCTURES ONLY
4.	NO LIVESTOCK ALLOWED
5.	ONLY IF NO STRUCTURES ARE INVOLVED. THE SALE, LEASE AND RENTAL OF JET SKIS IS NOT ALLOWED.
6.	NO ADULT BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT MAY BE LOCATED CLOSER THAN FIVE HUNDRED (500) FEET FROM ANY SCHOOL, RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION, LIBRARY, DWELLING UNIT, OR OTHER ADULT ESTABLISHMENT, THE DISTANCE SHALL BE MEASURED IN A STRAIGHT LINE FROM THE NEAREST CUSTOMER ENTRANCE OF THE ADULT BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT TO THE NEAREST POINT ON THE PROPERTY BOUNDARY OF THE SCHOOL, RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION, LIBRARY, DWELLING UNIT OR OTHER ADULT BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT.
7.	NO MARIJUANA RETAIL SALES WITHIN 500 FT OF SCHOOLS, RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION, LICENSED DAY CARE, OR LIBRARY. RETAILS SALES ONLY, NO CONSUMPTION ON SITE.
8.	MEDICAL MARIJUANA OR ADULT USE ALLOWED.

AMENDED JUNE 14, 2004
AMENDED JANUARY 03, 2005
AMENDED JUNE 18, 2007
AMENDED JUNE 18, 2018
AMENDED JUNE 17, 2019
 



TABLE A3.  INDUSTRIAL USES

NO – PROHIBITED	CEO - PERMIT FROM CEO REQUIRED	PB - PLANNING BOARD PERMIT REQUIRED	LPI - PERMIT FROM LOCAL PLUMBING INSPECTOR REQUIRED

USE	RESIDENTIAL I	RESIDENTIAL
II	FARM & FOREST	LIMITED RESIDENTIAL	COMMERCIAL	DOWNTOWN VILLAGE	INDUSTRIAL	STREAM PROTECTION	RESOURCE PROTECTION
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	NO	NO
BULK OIL, GAS TERMINAL	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	PB	PB	NO	NO
DEMOLITION WASTE DISP.	NO	NO	PB	NO	NO	PB	PB	NO	NO
HEAVY MANUFACTURING	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	PB	NO	NO
LIGHT MANUFACTURING	NO	NO	PB	NO	PB	PB	PB	NO	NO
COMM. RECYCL.
OPERATIONS	
NO	
NO	
PB	
NO	
NO	
PB	
PB	
NO	
NO
SAWMILL	NO	NO	PB	NO	NO	PB	PB	NO	NO
TRUCKING DIST. TERMINAL	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	PB	PB	NO	NO
WAREHOUSING &
STORAGE	
NO	
NO	
PB	
NO	
PB	
PB	
PB	
NO	
NO
AIRPORT	NO	NO	PB	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	PB
ABATTOIRS	NO	NO	PB	NO	NO	PB	PB	NO	NO
BULK GRAIN STORAGE
FOR AGRICULTURAL USES	
NO	
NO	
PB	
NO	
NO	
PB	
PB	
NO	
NO
PRIVATE AIRSTRIPS	NO	NO	PB	PB	NO	PB	PB	NO	PB
USES SIMILAR TO USES
REQ. PLANNING BD. PERMIT	

PB	

PB	

PB	

PB	

PB	

PB	

PB	

PB	

PB
USES SIMILAR TO NOT
PERM.	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO
 



TABLE A4.  OUTDOOR RESOURCE BASE USES

NO – PROHIBITED	CEO - PERMIT FROM CEO REQUIRED	PB - PLANNING BOARD PERMIT REQUIRED	LPI - PERMIT FROM LOCAL PLUMBING INSPECTOR REQUIRED

USE	RESIDENTIAL I	RESIDENTIAL II	FARM & FOREST	LIMITED RESIDENTIAL	COMMERCIAL	DOWNTOWN VILLAGE	INDUSTRIAL	STREAM PROTECTION	RESOURCE PROTECTION
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE
<500 SF
>500 SF	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO
	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB
AGRICULTURE	YES	YES	YES	PB	YES	NO	YES	YES	PB
CONFINED FEEDING
OPERATIONS
AGRICULTURE PRODUCTS PROCESSING AND STORAGE	NO	NO	PB	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO
	
PB1	
PB1	
PB	
NO	
PB	
PB	
PB	
NO	
NO
FARM STANDS	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	NO
CLEARING OF VEGETATION
FOR APPROVED CONSTRUCTION & OTHER APPROVED USES	
YES	
YES	
YES	
CEO	
YES	
YES	
YES	
CEO	
CEO
INDIVIDUAL PRIVATE
CAMPSITES	NO	CEO	CEO	CEO	NO	NO	NO	CEO	PB
PIERS, DOCKS, WHARFS, BRIDGES & OTHER STRUCTURES, & USES EXTENDING OVER OR
BELOW THE NORMAL HIGH-WATER LINE OR WITHIN A WETLAND.
A.  TEMPORARY	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO
B. PERMANENT	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB
DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION	YES	YES	YES	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB
ROAD CONSTRUCTION	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB
PARKING AREA	YES1	YES1	YES	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB
FACILITIES	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB
CEMETERY	PB	PB	PB	PB	NO	PB	NO	NO	NO
MINERAL EXPLORATION	NO	PB	YES	CEO	YES	PB	YES	CEO	CEO
GRAVEL PITS/QUARRIES4,5	NO	NO	PB4,5	NO	CEO/PB4,5	NO	CEO/PB4, 5	NO	PB4, 5
 

TABLE A4. OUTDOOR RESOURCE BASE USES (Continued)



USE	RESIDENTIAL I	RESIDENTIAL II	FARM & FOREST	LIMITED RESIDENTIAL	COMMERCIAL	DOWNTOWN VILLAGE	INDUSTRIAL	STREAM PROTECTION	RESOURCE PROTECTION
GOLF COURSE	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	NO	NO	PB
PARKS & RECREATION	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB
FILLING-EARTH MOVING
<15 CUBIC YARDS2, 3	YES	YES	YES2	CEO3	YES	YES	YES	CEO3	CEO3
>15 CUBIC YARDS 2, 3	CEO	CEO	CEO3	CEO3	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO3	CEO3
SLUDGE SPREADING	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO

SEPTAGE DISPOSAL SITE	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO
USES SIMILAR TO ALLOWED USES	
YES	
YES	
YES	
YES	
YES	
YES	
YES	
YES	
YES
USES SIMILAR TO USE
REQUIRED PERMIT FROM CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO
USE SIMILAR TO USES
REQUIRED PLANNING BOARD PERMIT	
PB	
PB	
PB	
PB	
PB	
PB	
PB	
PB	
PB
USES SIMILAR TO NOT PERMITED	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO

ANIMAL RAISING	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO

RVs , CAMPERS	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
CEO	
PB
NOTE:
1.	SHALL NOT OCCUPY A COMBINED FLOOR AREA AND IMPERVIOUS AREA GREATER THAN 2500 SQ. FT.
2.	EXCEPT IN THE FARM & FOREST DISTRICT UP TO 100 CUBIC YARDS IS ALLOWED WITHOUT A PERMIT. STORMWATER AND EROSION CONTROL STANDARDS MAY STILL APPLY.
3.	EXCEPT THAT IN THE LIMITED RESIDENTIAL AND RECREATIONAL DISTRICT, FILLING AND EARTH-MOVING ACTIVITIES ARE ALLOWED WITH A CEO PERMIT; IN THE STREAM PROTECTION AND RESOURCE PROTECTION DISTRICTS MORE THAN TEN (10) CUBIC YARDS REQUIRES A PERMIT FROM THE PLANNING BOARD
4.	USE PERMITS ARE GRANTED AS PER THE STANDARDS IN ARTICLE 5.6
5.	THIS USE IS NOT PERMITTED IN A RESOURCE PROTECTION DISTRICT SO DESIGNATED BECAUSE OF WILDLIFE VALUE AMENDED: JUNE 22, 1998	AMENDED: JUNE 21, 1999	AMENDED: JUNE 14, 2004
 



TABLE A5.  EDUCATIONAL, INSTITUTIONAL, AND PUBLIC USES

NO – PROHIBITED	CEO - PERMIT FROM CEO REQUIRED	PB - PLANNING BOARD PERMIT REQUIRED	LPI - PERMIT FROM LOCAL PLUMBING INSPECTOR REQUIRED

USE	RESIDENTIAL I	RESIDENTIAL II	FARM & FOREST	LIMITED RESIDENTIAL	COMMERCIAL	DOWNTOWN VILLAGE	INDUSTRIAL	STREAM PROTECTION	RESOURCE PROTECTION
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE
<500 SF	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO	CEO
>500 SF	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB
CHURCH,  SYNAGOGUE,
PARISH HOUSE	PB	PB	PB	NO	PB	PB	NO	NO	NO
COMMUNITY CENTERS	PB	PB	PB	NO	PB	PB	NO	NO	NO
ESSENTIAL SERVICES	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB
FIRE - POLICE STATIONS	PB	PB	PB	NO	PB	PB	PB	NO	NO
GOVERNMENT OFFICE	PB	NO	NO	NO	PB	PB	PB	NO	NO
GROUP HOMES	PB	PB	PB	NO	PB	PB	NO	NO	NO
MUSEUM /  LIBRARY	PB	PB	PB	NO	PB	PB	NO	NO	NO
PUBLIC /  PRIVATE
SCHOOLS	PB	PB	PB	NO	PB	PB	NO	NO	NO
PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITY	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING	NO	NO	PB	NO	NO	PB	PB	NO	NO
CLINICS /  HOSPITALS	PB	PB	PB	NO	PB	PB	PB	NO	NO
PRIVATE & SEMI-PRIVATE
CLUBS	PB	PB	PB	NO	PB	PB	PB	NO	NO
HOSPICE - NURSING HOME	PB	PB	PB	NO	PB	PB	NO	NO	N0
USES SIMILAR TO USES
REQUIRING REVIEW PLANNING  /  BD PERMIT	
PB	
PB	
PB	
PB	
PB	
PB	
PB	
PB	
PB
USES SIMILAR TO NOT
PERMITTED	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO
MEDICAL MARIJUANA AND METHADONE CLINICS1	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	PB 1	PB 1	NO	NO

NOTE:
1. These uses must be located at least 500 feet away from private homes, schools, churches, parks, and public buildings.
 



TABLE B.	SPACE & BULK STANDARDS




ZONE	
MINIMUM  LOT SIZE / SUBSURFACE DISPOSAL / SEWER	


MINIMUM STREET FRONTAGE	

MINIMUM SHORE FRONTA GE	
MINIMU M FRONT SETBA CK #3	

MINIMUM STANDARD SETBACK / NORMAL HIGHWATER LINE WETLAND / EDGE / UPLAND #4	


MINIMUM SIDE SETBACK	
MINIM UM REAR SETB ACK	

MAXIMUM NONVEGETA TED SURFACE AREA #5	MAXIM
UM BUILDI NG
HEIGH
T *	

MINIMUM DWELLING SIZE SQUARE FEET
RESIDENTIAL I 2	30,000 / 15,000
SQ FT.	
100 FEET2	
N / A	
25 FEET	
N /A	
10 FEET	10
FEET	
40%	35
FEET	500/350
APARTMENT
RESIDENTIAL II 2	30,000 / 15,000
SQ FT	
100 FEET2	
N / A	
25 FEET	
N / A	
10 FEET	10
FEET	
40%	35
FEET	500/350
APARTMENT
LIMITED
RESIDENTIAL & RECREATIONAL 2,6	

40,000 / 20,000
SQ FT	


100 FEET2,6	


200 FEET	


25 FEET	

100 FEET / POND
75 FEET OTHER	


10 FEET	

10
FEET	


20%	

35
FEET	


500
FARM AND FOREST2,6	40,000
SQ. FEET1	
150 FEET2,6	
200 FEET	
50 FEET	
75 FEET	
25 FEET	25
FEET	
50%	35
FEET	500/350
APARTMENT
DOWNTOWN VILLAGE 2	
20,000/7,500 SQ FT	
100 ft/ 75 ft 2	
200 ft	
6 ft	
25 ft	COMMON WALLS	
NONE	
70%	35
FEET	500/350
APARTMENT
COMMERCIAL2	40,000 / 20,000
SQ FT	
150 FEET 2	
200 FEET	
50 FEET	100 FEET / POND
75 FEET / OTHER	
25 FEET	25
FEET	
50%	35
FEET	500/350 1 UNIT
ONLY
INDUSTRIAL 2	40,000 / 20,000
SQ FT	
200 FEET 2	
200 FEET	
50 FEET	100 FEET / POND
75 FEET / OTHER	
25 FEET	25
FEET	
25%	35
FEET	NO
DWELLINGS
STREAM PROT
2,6	
40,000 SQ FEET	
100 FEET 2,6	
200 FEET	
25 FEET	
75 FEET	
15 FEET	15
FEET	
25%	35
FEET	
500
RESOURCE PROTECTION 2,6	
40,000 SQ FEET	
100 FEET 2,6	
200 FEET	
25 FEET	100 FEET / POND
75 FEET / OTHER	
15 FEET	15
FEET	
20%	35
FEET	
500
NOTES:
1.	EXCEPT THAT FOR RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS IN THE FARM AND FOREST DISTRICT MINIMUM LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT IS DETERMINED ACCORDING TO SECTION 4.5 C OF THIS ORDINANCE
2.	EXCEPT AS ALLOWED UNDER SECTION 5.20
3.	FRONT SETBACKS ARE MEASURED FROM THE EDGE OF PAVEMENT OR IN THE CASE OF UNPAVED ROADS, FROM THE EDGE OF THE TRAVELED WAY. ON UNDEVELOPED STREETS WHERE THE LOCATION OF THE PAVED OR TRAVELED WAY HAS NOT BEEN FIXED BY RECORDED DEED OR RECORDED PLAN, THE FRONT SETBACK SHALL BE MEASURED FROM THE EDGE OF THE RIGHT-OF-WAY. SPECIAL PROVISIONS APPLY TO CORNER LOTS. SEE SECTION 5.22
4.	INCLUDES RIVERS, STREAMS AND UPLAND EDGE OF WETLANDS AS DEFINED
5.	THE PERCENTAGE OF THE LOT COVERED BY ALL STRUCTURES, PARKING LOTS AND OTHER NONVEGETATED SURFACES INCLUDING LAND PREVIOUSLY DEVELOPED PRESERVATION OF LANDSCAPE, RELATION OF THE PROPOSED BUILDING TO THE ENVIRONMENT, FOR PROTECTION AND SAFETY OF THE STRUCTURE.
6.	CAMPS MAY HAVE FRONTAGE ON ROADS THAT DO NOT MEET CURRENT STREET STANDARDS.
 

TABLE B. SPACE AND BULK STANDARDS (Continued)

AMENDED JUNE 21, 1999	AMENDED JUNE 14, 2004	AMENDED JUNE 18, 2007
