
Active Duty Military Personnel Vehicle Excise Tax Exemption Ordinance – Adopted November 8, 2016
ACTIVE DUTY MILITARY PERSONNEL
VEHICLE EXCISE TAX EXEMPTION ORDINANCE
Section 1. Authority.
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to 36 M.R.S.A. § 1483-A, which expressly authorizes such
ordinances.
Section 2. Excise tax exemption; qualifications.
Vehicles owned by a resident of this municipality who is on active duty serving in the United
States Armed Forces and who is either permanently stationed at a military or naval post, station or
base outside this State or deployed for military service for a period of more than 180 days and who
desires to register that resident’s vehicle(s) in this State are hereby exempted from the annual
excise tax imposed pursuant to 36 M.R.S.A. § 1482.
To qualify for this exemption, the resident must present to the municipal excise tax collector
certification from the commander of the resident’s post, station or base, or from the commander’s
designated agent, that the resident is permanently stationed at that post, station or base or is
deployed for military service for a period of more than 180 days.
For purposes of this section, “United State Armed Forces” includes the National Guard and the
Reserves of the United States Armed Forces.
For purposes of this section, “deployed for military service” has the same meaning as in 26
M.R.S.A. § 814(1)(A).
For purposes of this section, “vehicle” has the same meaning as in 36 M.R.S.A. § 1481(5).
Section 3. Effective date; duration.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon enactment by the municipal legislative body
unless otherwise provided and shall remain in effect unless and until it or 36 M.R.S.A. § 1483-A
is repealed.
Active Duty Military Personnel Vehicle Excise Tax Exemption Ordinance – Adopted November 8, 2016
Statement of Fact
ACTIVE DUTY STATIONED IN MAINE EXCISE TAX EXEMPTION
Name: ____________________________________________________
DOB: __________________
Unit: ______________________________________________________
Phone: ________________
Station/Base: _______________________________________________
Home of Record (legal address claimed for tax purposes):
____________________________________________
____________________________________________
Commander’s Certification:
This individual is permanently assigned to the unit and station identified above, is on active duty
serving in the United States Armed Forces or is in the National Guard or Reserves of the United
States Armed Forces deployed to said unit/station for Military Service for a period of more than
180 days.
_________________________________ ________________________ ____________
Commanding Officer/Executive Officer (Signature) (Date)
or designated Representative

Alarm Systems Ordinance – Adopted November 8, 2016
Town of York
Alarm Systems Ordinance
I. Purpose.
This ordinance recognizes the need for the regulation of the installation and use of
Alarm Systems in order to ensure compatibility of equipment with the facilities of
the Town of York Communications Center, to avoid use of improper equipment,
ensure adequate installation of equipment, to minimize false alarms and to
compensate for the inappropriate use of municipal resources in response to false
alarms, and to clarify the rights and responsibilities of the property owner and of
the Town.
II. Definitions.
As used herein, the following definitions shall apply:
a. Alarm System: any mechanism, equipment or device designed to
automatically transmit a signal, message or warning indicating fire, burglary,
health emergency or like need for public safety assistance, from any mode,
telephone, dialer, private third party monitors, Municipal Fire Alarm etc.,
directly or indirectly to the York Communications Center.
b. Appropriate Departments: the Fire Department for fire or rescue alarms
and the Police Department for alarms of unlawful entry, theft or other
criminal activity.
c. Appropriate Chief: the Chief of the Appropriate Department.
d. Center: the Communications Center for the Town of York.
e. Non-emergency Alarm: any alarm transmitted to the Center when there is
no actual emergency or no other circumstances requiring a response from the
appropriate department; it shall include, but shall not be limited to, false
alarms caused by malfunctioning equipment, accidental or negligent
activation of the alarm, or improperly monitored equipment.
Alarm Systems Ordinance – Adopted November 8, 2016
III. Permit Required.
No person shall install, operate, maintain, alter, or replace an Alarm System within
the Town of York after July 1, 2016, without holding an effective permit from the
Center. Upon receipt of the completed application, the Center will issue a permit
to the owner. Owners of premises served by an existing Alarm System as of July
1, 2016 shall have until July 1, 2017 to obtain a permit.
IV. Application Procedure.
Applications for an Alarm System permit shall be made to the Center by the owner
of the premises to be protected or by the owner’s authorized agent upon forms
prepared by the Town, accompanied by a signed, dated receipt acknowledging that
the owner or owner’s authorized agent has received a copy of this ordinance and is
aware of its terms.
The application form shall contain the name, telephone number and address of the
owner of the premises to be protected along with the designated agent and of the
proposed installer of the Alarm System. The proposed installer must have the
capacity to maintain and service such Alarm System. The application form shall
also contain a description of the principal use of the premises to be protected, a
description of the proposed system and, in case of the Fire Department, the
location of its installation [except that said location shall not be required for single
family or two family homes], and such other data as the Appropriate Chief may
reasonably require in order to ensure the use of proper equipment when responding
to and combating a fire or other emergency.
The Center shall issue a permit upon receipt of a fully completed application form.
V. Prohibited Systems.
No system shall be permitted that automatically calls the Communication Center
telephone lines with an automated message, each alarm shall be reported
individually, and by a person that can answer questions posed by a
Communications Specialist. No system shall be permitted which uses a constant
signal for one type of alarm and a pulsating signal for another.
VI. Alarm Response.
The property owner or their designated agent, as kept on file at the Center, shall
respond to each alarm at the request of the Appropriate Department for the purpose
of securing the premises.
Alarm Systems Ordinance – Adopted November 8, 2016
VII. False Alarms.
Any property owner whose alarm system causes the transmittal of a Nonemergency
Alarm more than four (4) times in a 365 day period, after a 30-day
start-up period for new installations, may be issued a summons for said violation.
Each violation is a separate offense. The Chief of the Appropriate Department
shall give suitable written warning to any permit holder, or to their designated
agent, whose alarm system sends a fourth non-emergency alarm in any consecutive
365 day period by registered mail. In the event an alarm is activated as a result of
a natural or unnatural event beyond the property owner’s control (i.e. disruption of
electrical service due to storm, motor vehicle accident, and the like), no fee shall be
imposed per the discretion of the Chief of the Appropriate Department.
VIII. Permit Revocation.
The Chief of the Appropriate Department may revoke the permit for any Alarm
System in the event that:
a. Payment of any penalty fee is not made within sixty (60) days after the due
date;
b. Any deficiency therein reported to the owner is not corrected within 48
hours, or such extended time as the Chief of the Appropriate Department
may permit;
c. Such Alarm System causes the transmittal of more than 3 non-emergency
alarms in any 24-hour period, or more than 6 non-emergency alarms in any
7-day period, or otherwise interferes with the orderly operation of the
Center;
d. Any data provided in the application form for such system is found to have
been willfully falsified or due to gross negligence of the applicant; and
e. Failure to make reasonable notification of changes to existing pertinent
information contained within the permit application.
No revocation shall become effective until the Chief of the Appropriate
Department has given the permit holder, or their designated agent, actual notice
of the reason for the revocation and reasonable opportunity to dispute the
revocation by registered mail.
Alarm Systems Ordinance – Adopted November 8, 2016
IX. Appeal.
In the event of the refusal to issue or the revocation of any permit hereunder, the
applicant may appeal to the Board of Selectmen or their designee within twelve
(12) business days after the actual notice of such decision is given to the applicant
or their designated agent. The Board of Selectmen or their designee may affirm,
modify or rescind such decision, and their action thereon shall be final and
conclusive without right of further appeal.
X. Violations.
In addition to the foregoing grounds for revocation, the following events shall each
constitute a violation of this ordinance.
a. The installation, operation, maintenance, alteration, or replacement of an
Alarm System in the absence of an effective permit;
b. The falsification of any data provided on an application form for an Alarm
System done willfully or through gross negligence;
c. The release of any information concerning an Alarm System to someone not
associated with the maintenance or operation of the system or with the
enforcement of this ordinance.
XI. Notice of Violation.
Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance shall be subject to a civil
penalty of $100.00 for the first offense, $150.00 for the second offense, and
$250.00 for the third and subsequent offenses.
XII. Waiver / Payment of Fines.
Any person charged with a violation of this section, shall be allowed to waive such
violation and tender to the Town of York the fine amount if paid within 20 days of
issuance of the summons. If the waiver fine is paid, no appearance before a
District Court Judge or other judicial officer shall be required. If the offender pays
the waiver fine, the matter will be closed in the York Police Records system and
listed as a subsequent offense for future violations.
If the offender chooses not to pay the waiver fine he/she shall appear in court on
the specified date to answer for the ordinance violation. If the offender is found to
Alarm Systems Ordinance – Adopted November 8, 2016
have committed the offense in court; fines, applicable court fees, attorney’s fees,
and prosecution costs may apply.
XIII. Government Immunity.
Alarm registration is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract, duty or
obligation, either expressed or implied, of response. Any and all liability and
consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is
hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By
applying for an alarm registration, the alarm user acknowledges that the emergency
response may be influenced by factors such as: the availability of Emergency
Medical Assistance (EMA), priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions,
emergency conditions, staffing levels and prior response history.
XIV: Severability
The provisions of this ordinance are severable. If a court determines that a word,
phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, subsection, section, or other provision is
invalid or that the application of any part of the provision to any person or
circumstance is invalid, the remaining provisions and the application of those
provisions to other persons or circumstances are not affected by that decision.

Town of York, Maine
ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE
Table of Contents
Chapter and Subsections
Section 1 – Purpose
Section 2 – Definitions
Abandoned Animal
Abused
Animal
Animal Control
Animal Control Officer
Animal Shelter
At Large
Beach
Control
Dog
Domestic Animal
Leash
Owner
Responsible Party
Stray
Sunrise
Voice Control
Section 3 – Animal Control Officer
Section 4 – Control of Dogs
Section 5 – Impoundment or Return of At Large Dogs
Section 6 – Disposition of Impounded Animal
Section 7 – Impoundment Fee
Section 8 – Animal Noise
Section 9 – Control Animal Waste
Section 10 – Public Beaches and Restrictions
Section 11 – Other Prohibitions and Restrictions
Section 12 – Dangerous Dogs
Section 13 – Trespass
Section 14 – License and Registration Required
Section 15 – Tags and Stickers
Section 16 – Rabies Tags
Section 17 – Violations/Penalties
Section 18 – Waiver/Payment of Fines
Animal Control Ordinance – Amended May 16, 2015
Page 1 of 10
Town of York, Maine
Section 19 – Severability Clause
Animal Control Ordinance – Amended May 16, 2015
Page 2 of 10
Town of York, Maine
ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE
Section 1 – Purpose
The purpose of this ordinance is to require all animals in the Town of York be kept under the
control of their owner or keeper at all times so that they will not injure persons or other animals,
damage property or create a public health threat.
The provisions of this ordinance that apply to the owner of an animal apply equally to any
person keeping, or having control, custody, or possession of that animal.
Section 2 – Definitions
1. ABANDONED ANIMAL: an animal that has been deserted by its owner or keeper.
2. ABUSED: to treat an animal wrongfully or harmfully that results in injurious or
improper treatment.
3. ANIMAL: every living, sentient creature not a human being.
4. ANIMAL CONTROL: control of dogs, cats and domesticated or undomesticated
animals.
5. ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: any person appointed by the Town of York to enforce
animal control laws.
6. ANIMAL SHELTER: a facility that includes a physical structure, or part of a physical
structure, that provides temporary or permanent shelter to stray, abandoned, abused, or
owner-surrendered animals.
7. AT LARGE: off the premises of the owner and not under the control of any person
whose personal presence and attention would reasonably control the conduct of the dog.
8. BEACH: any beach area within the Town of York which is used by the general public.
9. CONTROL: the power or ability to direct the proper and safe activity of an animal.
Animal Control Ordinance – Amended May 16, 2015
Page 3 of 10
Town of York, Maine
10. DOG: any of large and varied groups of domesticated animals in the canine family.
11. DOMESTIC ANIMAL: animals that normally and customarily share human habitat
and are normally dependant on humans for shelter and/or food, such as, but not limited
to, dogs, cats, cattle, horses, swine, fowl, sheep and goats.
12. LEASH: a hand held device (lead, chain, or cord) which can be used to restrain a dog if
the dog fails to respond to voice commands. In cases where a leash is required by law,
ordinance or by order of a law enforcement officer, the owner or responsible party will
be required to use a leash of 15 foot or less.
13. OWNER: any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning, keeping or
harboring an animal or any person having custody, possession, or control of an animal.
14. RESPONSIBLE PARTY: as used in this ordinance, the term "responsible party" means
any person who has possession or custody of a dog. If a dog is present on a beach in
violation of the restrictions of this section, the owner of the dog and the responsible
party are jointly and severally liable for the violation.
15. STRAY: off the owner’s premises and not under the control of a person.
16. SUNRISE: the event or time of the daily first appearance of the sun above the eastern
horizon. Time for sunrise can be found in local daily newspapers or at the U.S. Naval
Observatory Astronomical Applications Department WEB site at
http://aa.usno.navy.mil/data/docs/RS_OneDay.html
17. VOICE CONTROL: as used in this ordinance, the term "voice control" means that the
dog returns immediately to and remains by the side of the responsible party in response
to the responsible party's verbal command.
If a dog approaches or remains within 10 feet of any person other than the responsible
party, that dog is not under voice control and a violation of this Ordinance occurs unless
such person has communicated to the responsible party by spoken word or gesture that
such person consents to the presence of the dog. In the case that such person approached
by a dog is a minor child, an adult must be present with the child to consent to the
presence of the dog.
Animal Control Ordinance – Amended May 16, 2015
Page 4 of 10
Town of York, Maine
Section 3 – Animal Control Officer
A qualified person(s) shall be employed by the police department who shall be known as and
perform the duties of Animal Control Officer(s). The Animal Control Officer shall be principally
responsible for the enforcement of all laws related to dogs, cats, and other domesticated
animals. The ACO will also handle undomesticated (wild) animal complaints and either handle
locally or refer to the appropriate outside agency for assistance.
Section 4 – Control of Dogs
When off the premises of the owner, a dog shall be on a leash and under control of a person
responsible for the dog’s behavior, except as follows:
1. dogs at use during hunting;
2. dogs used for law enforcement;
3. service dogs;
4. dogs on private property with that property owner’s permission to be unleashed while
within voice control; or
5. dogs at public beaches in accordance with Section 10.
The owner of any dog found in violation of the above provisions shall be subject to the civil
penalties provided in this ordinance.
Section 5 – Impoundment or Return of At Large Dogs
All dogs found at large in violation to Title 7, M.R.S.A., Section 3911 may be impounded at an
animal shelter or returned to the owner, at the discretion of the Animal Control Officer. If the
Animal Control Officer returns the dog to its owner, the owner shall pay a $25.00 (twenty-five
dollars) return fee to the Town of York before the dog is returned. This payment must be made
to the Animal Control Officer, who shall issue a receipt therefore. All fees will be deposited in the
Town of York’s Municipal Animal Welfare Account required by Title 7, M.R.S.A. 3945.
Section 6 – Disposition of Impounded Animal
An owner is entitled to resume possession of any impounded animal provided that all
provisions of this ordinance have been met, and that all impoundment fees due under the
provisions of this ordinance have been paid. Any animal not claimed after the owner has been
notified may be classified as an abandoned animal, and the animal's owner may be subjected to
all civil penalties authorized by this ordinance. If said animal is not claimed by its owner or
Animal Control Ordinance – Amended May 16, 2015
Page 5 of 10
Town of York, Maine
keeper at the expiration of the ten days from the date of impoundment, then the person in
charge of said animal shelter may give away, sell or otherwise humanely dispose of said animal.
Section 7 – Impoundment Fee
An owner may reclaim an impounded animal by first paying to the Town of York, a fee of
$50.00 (fifty dollars) for the 1st offense and $100.00 (one hundred dollars) for subsequent
offenses for each animal impounded. This fee shall be paid at the York Police Department. Fees
must be paid and a receipt from the Police Department must be presented to the animal shelter
before the release of an animal. All fees will be deposited in the Town of York Municipal
Animal Welfare Account required by Title 7, M.R.S.A. 3945.
Section 8 – Animal Noise
Owning, possessing, or harboring any domestic animal that frequently or for continued
duration, makes loud and unreasonable sounds such that it creates a disturbance on other
properties shall be prohibited. For purposes of this ordinance, a dog that barks, bays, cries,
howls, or makes any other noise continuously and/or incessantly for a period of 10 (ten)
minutes or barks intermittently for ½ (one-half) hour or more to the disturbance of any person
at any time of day or night, regardless of whether the dog is physically situated in or upon
private property. However, this shall not include a dog if, at the time the dog is barking or
making any other noise, a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private property
in or upon which the dog is situated, or for any other legitimate cause which teased or
provoked the dog.
Section 9 – Control of Animal Waste
An owner must remove and dispose of any feces left by his/her animal on any sidewalk, street,
beach, public property, or private property (other than the property of the owner of the animal
or of a person who has consented to the presence of the animal on his or her property) and
deposit such feces into appropriate litter receptacle. An owner whose animal is present on any
property from which the animal's feces is required to be removed pursuant to this section must
have in his or her possession a plastic bag or similar container, not part of the human body, for
collecting and removing the feces. This regulation shall not apply to any person who, by reason
of physical handicap, is unable to comply with the requirement.
Animal Control Ordinance – Amended May 16, 2015
Page 6 of 10
Town of York, Maine
Section 10 – Public Beaches – Restrictions
The following restrictions apply to domestic animals on the following beaches: Cape Neddick
Beach, Short Sands Beach, Long Sands Beach, and Harbor Beach:
1. No dogs shall be present on these beaches year round unless the dog is accompanied by
an owner or responsible party who has voice control (see definition) over the dog and
who is carrying a leash in hand, which can be used to restrain the dog. A responsible
party with multiple dogs must have adequate leashes for the number of dogs under his
or her control.
• An owner or responsible party shall be required to leash their dog(s) during this
period if directed by a law enforcement officer due to violations of the voice control
or dog waste provisions of this ordinance.
2. No domestic animals shall be present on these beaches between the hours of 8:00 am.
and 6:00 pm. from May 20th through September 20th.
3. Dogs on these beaches will be required to be on a leash between May 20th and
September 20th between the hours of 6 p.m. and sunrise (see definition)
4. Between May 20th and September 20th dogs will be allowed to be unleashed between
sunrise and 8 a.m. as long as the dog is under the voice control (see definition) of its
owner or responsible party. The requirements of paragraph #1 regarding leashes is in
effect during this period. (The purpose of this exception is to allow individuals to walk,
jog, run, or engage in other physical exercise with their dogs in the early hours of the
morning).
5. Horses and ponies are prohibited from being on these beaches from May 20th to
September 20th, except by written permission of the Board of Selectmen.
6. When otherwise allowed to be present on these beaches pursuant to this section, all
other domestic animals must be under the control of their owner or responsible party at
all times.
Section 11 – Other Prohibitions and Restrictions
1. It will be a violation of this ordinance to maintain or harbor any domestic animal on the
property known as the Cliff Path, pursuant to a written agreement between the Town of
York and the property owners dated November 08, 2002. The Cliff Path includes
Animal Control Ordinance – Amended May 16, 2015
Page 7 of 10
Town of York, Maine
publicly owned sections beginning at York Harbor Beach Parking Area, proceeding in a
northeasterly direction along the shores of York Harbor and the Atlantic Ocean.
2. It will be a violation of this ordinance to allow domestic animals on the property known
as the Fishermen’s Walk that are not on a leash, pursuant to a written agreement
between the Town of York and the property owners dated November 11, 1997. The
Fishermen’s Walk includes publicly owned sections beginning at the Wiggley Bridge
and proceeding in a northeasterly direction along the York River to Stage Neck Road.
Section 12 – Dangerous Dogs
Any person who is assaulted by a dog or any person witnessing an assault against a person or
domestic animal by a dog or a person with knowledge of an assault against a minor by a dog,
may make a written complaint to the Animal Control Officer that the dog is a dangerous dog
within thirty days of the assault,. The Animal Control Officer may issue a civil violation citation
for keeping a dangerous dog pursuant to 7 M.R.S.A. subsection 3952. After issuing the citation
and before a court hearing, if the dog poses an immediate or continuing threat to the public, the
Animal Control Officer shall order the owner of the dog to muzzle, restrain or confine the dog
to the owner's premises or to have the dog at the owner's expense at a place determined by the
Animal Control Officer. If the owner fails to comply with such order, the Animal Control
Officer may apply to the District Court, Superior Court, or a Justice of the Peace pursuant to 7
M.R.S.A. subsection 3952 for an ex parte order for authorization to take possession of the dog
that poses an immediate or continuing threat to the public.
Section 13 – Trespass
An owner of an animal may not allow that animal to enter onto the property of another after the
owner has been warned by the Animal Control Officer or a law enforcement officer that the
animal was found on the property of another.
The owner of an animal is responsible, at the owner's expense, for removing such animal found
trespassing. The Animal Control Officer, may, at the owner's expense, remove and control the
animal if:
• the owner fails to remove the animal after having been notified by the Animal Control
Officer that the animal was trespassing; or the animal is an immediate danger to itself, to
persons or to another's property.
Animal Control Ordinance – Amended May 16, 2015
Page 8 of 10
Town of York, Maine
Any animal so removed shall be subject to the provisions of Sections 5, 6, and 7 of this
ordinance in the same manner as an at large dog.
Section 14 – License and Registration Required
No dog shall be kept within the limits of the Town of York unless such dog is licensed in
accordance with the Statutes of the State of Maine, MRSA sections 3923-A and 3923-C and
regulations of the Town of York. This requirement shall be the responsibility of the owner (see
definition) of the dog(s).
Section 15 – Tags and Stickers
The Town Clerk shall provide with each new license issued for a dog a tag indicating the year
the license is issued and such other information as may be required under 7 MRSA subsection
3922-B. The tag remains with the dog for as long as the dog is kept in the Town of York. At each
license renewal, the Town Clerk shall provide a sticker indicating the year for which the license
is valid. The sticker must be attached to the back of the tag. The owner shall make sure that the
sticker is securely attached to the back of the tag. The owner shall make sure that the tag is
securely attached to a collar of leather, metal or material of comparable strength and that the
collar is worn at all times by the dog for which the license was issued except when hunting, in
training or in an exhibition. When the dog is hunting, in training or in an exhibition, its owner
shall produce proof of license within twenty-four hours upon request by the Animal Control
Officer. If a sticker and tag are lost, the owner shall obtain a new license, tag, and sticker. The
Town Clerk shall issue another license tag and sticker upon presentation of the original license
and payment of one dollar. The Clerk shall retain the one-dollar for a recording fee.
Section 16 – Rabies Tags
Rabies tags obtained from a veterinarian for immunization against rabies must be securely
attached to a collar of leather, metal or material of comparable strength that must be worn by
the dog for which the tag was issued except when the dog is hunting, in training or in an
exhibition or on the premises of the owner. When the dog is hunting, in training or in an
exhibition, its owner shall produce proof of license and proof of rabies immunization within
twenty-four hours upon request of the Animal Control Officer.
Animal Control Ordinance – Amended May 16, 2015
Page 9 of 10
Town of York, Maine
Section 17 – Violations/Penalties
Any person who violates this ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty of $100.00 for the first
offense, $150.00 for the second offense, and $250.00 for the third and subsequent offenses,
except as provided in Section 5 and Section 7.
Section 18 – Waiver / Payment of Fines
Any person charged with a violation of this section, shall be allowed to waive such violation
and tender to the Town of York the fine amount if paid within 20 days of issuance of the
summons. If the waiver fine is paid, no appearance before a District Court Judge or other
judicial officer shall be required. If the offender pays the waiver fine, the matter will be closed
in the York Police Records system and listed as a subsequent offense for future violations.
If the offender chooses not to pay the waiver fine, he/she shall appear in court on the specified
date to answer for the ordinance violation. If the offender is found to have committed the
offense in court, fines, applicable court fees, attorney’s fees, and prosecution costs may apply.
Section 19 – Severability Clause
If any part of this ordinance shall be held invalid, such part shall be deemed severable and the
invalidity thereof shall not affect the remaining parts of this ordinance.
Note: The May 20, 2006 version of this Ordinance was re-created as a Word file by the Community
Development Department on November 3, 2010, and the amendments passed on November 2, 2010 were
made to this document. The mis-match of sections listed in the table of content and in the text was in the
original document. This should be corrected the next time this Ordinance is amended.
Animal Control Ordinance – Amended May 16, 2015
Page 10 of 10

Town of York, Maine
BEACH ORDINANCE
PURPOSE
The purpose of this Ordinance is to regulate and control activities on all Beaches within the limits of the
Town of York, including but not limited to Cape Neddick, Short Sands, Long Sands and Harbor Beach.
Note that the Trustees of Ellis Short Sands Park have full legal authority to manage and control activities
in the Park, which includes Short Sands Beach. To fully understand local regulations which apply at
Short Sands Beach, see also the Ellis Short Sands Park Ordinances. In the case of conflict between the
two ordinances, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
Section 1. Dressing
Dressing, undressing and the changing of clothes are not permitted within the limits of the beach, except
in bathhouses or other structures suitable for this purpose. This does not apply to children 5 years old or
younger.
Section 2-A. Fires
There shall be no fires of any kind on Cape Neddick Beach, Harbor Beach or Short Sands Beach. On Long
Sands Beach there shall be no fires of any kind starting on May 15 and ending on August 15. For the
remainder of the year, from August 16 through May 14, a wood fire may be permitted if both of the
following permits are obtained prior to kindling the fire:
A. Special Event Permit, from the Board of Selectmen.
The following criteria shall apply:
1. The proceeds of any fundraising or sales must go to a charitable organization as defined in MRSA
Title 9 §5003(1);
2. Hours for the fire shall not begin earlier than 5:00 PM and shall not end later than 10:00 PM;
3. The sponsor must clean up all debris after the fire is out, and this shall be completed before 1:00
AM.
4. Not more than one fire on the beach shall be permitted within any single 30-day period. The first
30-day period shall commence on August 16th, and subsequent periods shall follow immediately
upon conclusion of the prior period, with the last terminating on May 14th.
5. The sponsor must pay in advance for the provision of Police and Fire services at the event. This
shall not apply if the Town itself is the event sponsor, or if the Board of Selectmen decides to
waive this requirement. The amount to be paid shall be established by the respective Chiefs. An
account shall be made for each Department for deposit of such funds, and the Chief shall have
authorization to spend such funds to provide such event services.
6. Materials to be burned shall be restricted to those allowed under State law. The event sponsor
shall review such requirements with the Fire Chief with jurisdiction.
Beach Ordinance – Amended May 16, 2015
Page 1
Town of York, Maine
7. At the time of application, the sponsor shall sign a form, to be provided by the Town, which
acknowledges the possibility the event might need to be postponed or cancelled for legal safety
reasons, and which commits the sponsor to cooperate with Town officials to address crowd
control if this occurs.
8. The sponsor shall provide insurance in an amount equal to the maximum recovery allowed under
the Tort Claims Act ($400,000 as of February 1, 2012, but subject to change if the state law is
amended). In addition, the sponsor shall, in writing, agree to indemnify and defend the Town in
the event of any legal action resulting from the event. The sponsor shall provide insurance
documentation to the Fire Chief as late as noon on the day of the event.
B. Open Burning Permit, from the Fire Chief with Jurisdiction.
In addition to the above requirement to obtain a Special Event Permit, State law (Title 12 M.R.S.
§9321-6) requires an Open Burning Permit from the Fire Chief prior to kindling a fire on a beach.
The issuance of a Special Event Permit from the Board of Selectmen cannot supersede the Chief’s
jurisdiction in this matter. Open Burning Permits are not issued prior to the day of the event because
the Chief is required to consider the weather and other relevant factors on the day of the event. State
law also specifies conditions under which the fire would need to be extinguished after being lit. In
short, the sponsor of any event to have a fire on the beach will be dealing with some uncertainty up to
and even during the event. If a fire must be postponed or extinguished because of such safety
concerns, the sponsor of the event must help the Fire Chief explain to attendees the reasons for such
action and must encourage people to respect the Chief’s decision. Failure of the sponsor to cooperate
in this manner shall be a basis for rejecting future applications for Special Event Permits for beach
fires.
Section 2-B. Grills
There shall be no use of grills on Short Sands Beach. On other public beaches there shall be no use of grills
by the public, except for an organized function that requests the use of a grill and which meets all the
following conditions:
1. The sponsor shall cordon off the area around the grill(s) in order to keep the public back a safe
distance, with the particular arrangement to be approved by the Fire Chief with jurisdiction;
2. If food cooked on a grill is to be sold, the proceeds from the event must go to a charitable
organization as defined in MRSA Title 9 §5003(1); and
3. The sponsor must obtain a Special Event Permit from the Board of Selectmen.
Section 3. Alcoholic Beverages
No person shall have in their possession any container of alcoholic beverage, on the public beaches.
(Adopted March 18, 1975)
Section 4. Sleeping on Public Beaches
The use of the public beach for sleeping or camping on prohibited between the hours of 12 midnight and
sunrise.
Beach Ordinance – Amended May 16, 2015
Page 2
Town of York, Maine
Section 5. Surfing
A. Definitions:
Mixed Use Zone: means the area at Long Sands Beach from the road to the sea extending between
the southerly side of the existing staircase at Long Sands General Store (Tax Map 31, Lot 98) to the
northerly end of the beach and from the northerly side of the existing staircase at Beacon Street to
Sun-n-Surf Restaurant (Tax Map 36, Lot 97).
Surf Leash: a urethane cord not less than 5 millimeter in diameter and no greater than 10 feet in length
that connects a person to his or her surfboard.
Swim Zone: means the area at Long Sands Beach from the road to the sea commencing at the
northerly side of the existing staircase at Beacon Street and extending northeasterly to the southerly
side of the existing staircase at the Long Sands General Store (Tax Map 31, Lot 98).
B. Surfing at Short Sands Beach is controlled by the Ellis Short Sands Park Ordinances. At other public
beaches, surfing is prohibited from June 14 to and including Labor Day between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m. EDT, except as provided in subsection C, below.
C. At Long Sands Beach from June 14 to and including Labor Day between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m. EDT:
1. Surfing is prohibited within the Swim Zone.
2. Surfing is permitted within the Mixed Use Zone subject to the following conditions:
(a) A Surf Leash shall be properly engaged at all times when the surfboard is in the water;
(b) Surfers shall maintain a minimum distance of thirty-five feet (35') from any swimmer.
3. On inclement weather days, when there are very few people at the beach, the entire beach can be
temporarily classified Mixed Use to allow surfing in all areas at the discretion of the Parks and
Recreation Director or his designee.
D. The boundaries of the Swim Zone shall be clearly marked using buoys anchored to permanent
moorings and line floats, colored flags, or other methods recommended by the Director of Parks and
Recreation.
Section 6. Playing Games
Beach Ordinance – Amended May 16, 2015
Page 3
Town of York, Maine
The playing of hard or soft baseball, football, soccer, lacrosse, golf, iron horseshoes or any other games
which endanger other persons are prohibited on the beaches from May 1 through October 15 of each
calendar year, except by written permission by the Town of York.
Section 7. Removal of Sand, Rocks, and Plant Life
The removal of any sand, rocks, or plant life is not allowed, except that seaweed may be removed by
special permission of the Town of York.
Section 8. Motor Vehicles, Aircraft, Etc.
Motor vehicles, aircraft, bicycles and motor scooters are prohibited from being on the public beach areas,
except that Town maintenance and emergency vehicles are allowed on all beaches for any emergency
and/or maintenance reasons.
Also, the Town may grant special permission for individuals to drive on the beach for the purpose of
removing seaweed, lobster traps or for other reasons as determined.
Section 9. Trash Disposal
The disposal of diapers, bottles, cans, cigarette butts, garbage or rubbish of any kind is prohibited on all
beaches, except in receptacles placed by the Town along the beaches, for the purpose. Said receptacles
shall not be used for disposal of garbage or refuse which has accumulated in any home, cottage, cabin,
hotel, motel or other like residence.
Section 10. Animals
REF: See Animal Control Ordinance; Section 10. Public Beach – Restriction
Section 10-A. Closure of Beaches
The Town Manager, or in the Town Manager’s absence the Town’s Emergency Management Director or
the Director of Parks and Recreation, shall have the authority to close a public beach in an emergency in
order to protect public health and safety. The order may be issued verbally or in writing, and shall be as
narrow or broad as is necessary to protect the public. Town Lifeguards and/or the Police Department shall
be responsible for enforcing a closure order.
Beach Ordinance – Amended May 16, 2015
Page 4
Town of York, Maine
In this context, “emergency” shall be defined to mean any event which threatens to or actually inflicts
damage to people or property and which requires immediate action to mitigate, prevent, control or contain.
Situations where beach closure may be warranted also include, but are not limited to: any time a Town,
County or State disaster proclamation is in effect; when sharks are sighted in close proximity to a beach;
during times of dangerous rip currents; and when water pollution is excessive. Closures may be limited
or partial, such as closing only one beach with excessive pollution rather than closing all beaches, or
prohibiting swimming but allowing surfing when strong rip currents exist.
Section 11. Penalty / Violations
Any person who shall knowingly violate any of the provisions of this ordinance, and any person who aids,
abets, or assists therein shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a civil penalty of $100.00 for the first
offense, $150.00 for the second offence, and $250.00 for the third and subsequent offenses.
Section 12. Waiver / Payment of Fines
Any person charged with a violation of this section, shall be allowed to waive such violation and tender to
the Town of York the fine amount if paid within 20 days of issuance of the summons. If the waiver fine
is paid, no appearance before a District Court Judge or other judicial officer shall be required. If the
offender pays the waiver fine, the matter will be closed in the York Police Records system and listed as a
subsequent offense for future violations.
If the offender chooses not to pay the waiver fine, he/she shall appear in court on the specified date to
answer for the ordinance violation. If the offender is found to have committed the offense in court, fines,
applicable court fees, attorney’s fees, and prosecution costs may apply.
Section 13. Effective Date
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force immediately upon enactment and once established shall
cancel and/or supersede any conflicting existing Ordinance as a whole or any part thereof relating to the
same subjects.
Section 14. Repeal of Existing Ordinances
This ordinance is intended to replace and repeal the Cape Neddick River Beach Ordinance, the York
Beach Village Corporation Ordinances, Chapter XIII and Chapter XXI and the York Harbor Village
Corporation Ordinances, Chapter 4.
Beach Ordinance – Amended May 16, 2015
Page 5
TOWN OF YORK
BOARD OF ASSESSMENT REVIEW ORDINANCE
Section 1. Establishment.
Pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2526(6) and the Town of York Home Rule Charter
Article IV Section 6, a Board of Assessment Review is hereby established for the
Town of York, Maine.
Section 2. Bylaws.
The Board of Assessment Review will establish bylaws in accordance with Town of
York Home Rule Charter and the laws of the State of Maine. These bylaws will be
subject to approval by the Town of York Board of Selectmen.
Adopted November 6, 2001












Town of York, Maine
Business Licensing Ordinance – Amended November 5, 2019
Page 2 of 22
Table of Contents
Section 1: Purpose and Scope
1.1 Purpose
1.2 Licensed Activities
Section 2: General Provisions
2.1 Licensing Authority
2.2 Licenses Not Transferrable
2.3 License Expiration
2.4 Display of License Placard Required
2.5 Inspections
2.6 Application Fee
2.7 Saving Clause
2.8 Effective Date
Section 3: Application Process
3.1 Application Procedures
3.2 Submittal of Application
3.3 Timing of Application
3.4 Administrative Review of Application
3.5 Public Notice
3.6 Public Hearing
3.7 Decision
3.8 Appeals
3.9 Enforcement
3.10 Penalties
3.11 Waiver/Payment of Fines
Section 4: Standards
4.1 General Standards and Requirements Applicable to All Licenses
4.2 License-Specific Standards and Requirements
4.3 Local Approval for State Licenses
Section 5: Definitions
Town of York, Maine
Business Licensing Ordinance – Amended November 5, 2019
Page 3 of 22
SECTION 1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE
1.1 Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish a unified licensing process and standard for
all types of business licenses which the Town issues. Through this Ordinance the Town
seeks to apply reasonable controls on businesses as it seeks to protect public health,
safety and welfare.
1.2 Licensed Activities
No person or business shall engage in any of the following activities unless they possess
a valid Town business license to do so. Section references point to license-specific
requirements of this Ordinance.
Lodging
• Bed and Breakfast (see §4.2.1)
• Innkeepers (see §4.2.2)
Food and Beverage
• Food Service (see §4.2.3)
• Liquor (see §4.2.4)
• Bottle Club (see §4.2.5)
Entertainment
• Special Amusement (see §4.2.6)
• Dance Hall (see §4.2.7)
• Coin-Operated Amusement (see §4.2.8)
• Bowling Alley (see §4.2.9)
Miscellaneous
• Transient Sellers (see §4.2.10)
• Flea Market (see §4.2.11)
• Junkyard, Automobile Graveyard, and Automobile Recycling Business (see §4.2.12)
• Medical Marijuana License (see §4.2.13)
For local approvals required for State licenses, see also:
• Bingo, Beano and Games of Chance (see §4.3.1)
• Off-premise Catering (see §4.3.2)
Town of York, Maine
Business Licensing Ordinance – Amended November 5, 2019
Page 4 of 22
SECTION 2: GENERAL PROVISIONS
2.1 Licensing Authority
The Board of Selectmen shall serve as the Town’s licensing board.
2.2 Licenses Not Transferrable
A license shall be specific to the applicant and the property, and shall not be transferrable
to another person or property.
2.3 License Expiration
All licenses shall expire one year from the last day of the month of the vote to issue or
renew, except that in the case of an applicant with multiple licenses where the Board shall
ensure that all licenses have a single expiration date to simplify future renewals. In
addition, the Board may, for good cause, shorten the timeframe for which a particular
license is issued.
2.4 Display of License Placard Required
When the Board issues a new license, renews a license, or amends a license, the Town
Manager’s Office shall issue a new printed license placard. This license placard shall be
displayed at the licensed establishment such that it is readily visible to customers, people
at the establishment, and Town officials.
The license placard shall indicate the following information:
• applicant’s name
• establishment name;
• street address of establishment;
• license type(s);
• date of license issuance;
• date of license expiration;
• if applicable, seating capacity or occupancy limits; and
• other limits or restrictions specified by the Board.
2.5 Inspections
Inspections are mandatory for most licensed businesses. The following shall apply.
2.5.1 Required Inspections
Each establishment shall be inspected by Town staff as a condition of the issuance
of new license or for renewal. For each license type, the Ordinance specifies
which departments are required to inspect and describes the frequency and nature
of inspections (see Section 4.2). Submittal of an application to the Town
Manager’s Office constitutes agreement to make the premises available for
inspection during normal working hours. Such inspections shall generally be
conducted prior to action by the Board of Selectmen, but may be deferred by the
Board if the operation is seasonal and not open at the time of application, or for
other good cause.
Town of York, Maine
Business Licensing Ordinance – Amended November 5, 2019
Page 5 of 22
A. Code Inspection. Code inspections are to be conducted by a Code
Enforcement Officer (CEO). The purpose of code inspection is to look for
signs of septic failure/septic tank pumping/grease trap cleaning (as
applicable), to look for code-related problems such as exposed wiring or
faulty plumbing, and to look for compliance with standards and requirements
of this Ordinance and applicable permits and approvals. For a new or
expanded establishment, the CEO shall also verify the possession of a valid
Occupancy Permit from the Town.
B. Fire Inspection. Fire inspections are to be conducted by the fire department
with jurisdiction. The purpose of fire inspection is to ensure initial and
ongoing compliance with life/safety code requirements, with a focus on safe
means of egress, exit signs, emergency lighting, audible alarms, building
sprinkling, provision of fire extinguishers, and other such matters. For a new
or expanded establishment, the fire inspector shall also verify compliance the
possession of any approvals needed from the State Fire Marshal’s Office.
C. Police Inspection. Police inspections are to be conducted by York Police
Officers. The purpose of police inspection is to help prevent violations within
their jurisdiction, such as but not limited to liquor laws and the Noise
Ordinance.
2.5.2 Optional Inspections
Any Town department which has been assigned inspection responsibilities with
respect to license issuance shall also have the authority to make an unannounced
inspection during open hours of the establishment. The license holder shall
accommodate this request unless there is reasonable cause to delay the matter.
2.6 Application Fee
The application fee shall be paid at the time of application submittal, and shall be nonrefundable.
The following shall apply.
2.6.1 New Licenses and Renewals
The fee shall be the sum of the following:
A. $60; plus
B. $30 for each license after the first; plus
C. $50 if a public hearing is required by the Ordinance.
2.6.2 License Amendments
The fee for a license amendment shall be $25.
2.7 Saving Clause
In the event any provision of this Ordinance is found by a court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, this finding shall not affect the remainder of this Ordinance.
2.8 Effective Date
Except as otherwise provided, this code and any subsequent amendments shall take effect
immediately upon approval by the voters of the Town of York.
Town of York, Maine
Business Licensing Ordinance – Amended November 5, 2019
Page 6 of 22
SECTION 3: APPLICATION PROCESS
3.1 Application Procedures
An application shall be submitted to obtain a new license, renew an existing license, or
amend an existing license. The review process is identical for each of these procedures
with the exception of the public hearing (see §3.6).
3.1.1 Application Form and Instructions
The Board shall adopt, and may from time to time amend, an application form and
printed application instructions. These shall be available in the Town Manager’s
Office and on the Town’s web page.
3.1.2 Transition Period
A. Existing Licenses
Any license issued under prior licensing codes shall remain in effect for either
one year or until the current license expires, whichever occurs first.
B. Applications in Process
Any complete application which has been received by Town staff, but not yet
decided by the Board of Selectmen at the time this Ordinance is enacted or
amended, shall be heard and decided based on the codes in effect at the time
of receipt by Town staff.
C. Exception for Newly Regulated Establishments
In cases where a Town license had not been required of an establishment in
the past, a newly required license shall be obtained no later than 6 months
after the date of enactment of the relevant code provision.
3.2 Submittal of Application
The applicant shall complete and submit to the Town the application form along with all
supplemental information and materials per the instructions included with the form.
Application materials shall be delivered to the Town Manager’s Office by any of the
following means:
3.2.1 Delivered in person to the Town Manager’s Office in Town Hall during normal
business hours; or
3.2.2 Delivered by mail to: Town Manager/License Application, 186 York St., York,
ME 03909
Town of York, Maine
Business Licensing Ordinance – Amended November 5, 2019
Page 7 of 22
3.3 Timing of Application
3.3.1 New Licenses and License Amendments
The application for a new or amended license may be submitted at any time, but
the license must be obtained before the licensed activity is started. Generally it is
best to apply 30 to 60 days in advance of the anticipated start date.
3.3.2 License Renewals
An application for license renewal shall be submitted no sooner than 90 days prior
to expiration of the current license(s). It is advised to apply no later than 30 days
prior the expiration date.
3.4 Administrative Review of Application
The Town Manager’s Office shall initiate an administrative review of the application by
the Departments as specified in this Ordinance. Copies of the application shall be
distributed to: any department which is required to evaluate the application and/or
perform an inspection; the Police Department for information about any criminal record
of the applicant (where applicable); to the Tax Collector for verification that all taxes
have been paid for the property and business in question; and to any applicable utility
district serving the property.
3.5 Public Notice
Prior to the Board meeting at which the application will be considered, the Town
Manager’s Office shall provide public notice in accordance with the following:
3.5.1 Agenda
An agenda for the meeting shall be posted in Town Hall no later than noon the
Friday prior to the Board meeting. This agenda shall identify the name of the
applicant, the name of the property owner (if different than the applicant), the
street address of the property, and the list of licenses being applied for.
3.5.2 Legal Notice if a Public Hearing
If there is to be a public hearing, legal notice of the hearing shall be required.
Such notice shall indicate the same information as included on the agenda, plus
the date, time and place of the hearing. No later than 5 days in advance of the
meeting, the notice shall be: published in a newspaper with general circulation in
Town; posted in at least 2 public places in Town; posted on the Town’s web page;
and listed on the Town’s public access cable television station.
3.5.3 Notice to Applicant
The applicant shall be notified by first-class mail of the Board meeting at which
the Board will act on the application. If there is to be a public hearing, the
applicant shall be asked to attend if a public hearing in case there are questions to
be answered.
3.5.4 Conflicting Provision
In the event there are conflicting requirements in state statute or another
ordinance, the standard which imposes the higher standard for public notification
shall apply.
Town of York, Maine
Business Licensing Ordinance – Amended November 5, 2019
Page 8 of 22
3.6 Public Hearing
The Board shall conduct a public hearing prior to deciding on an application for a new
license or to amend an existing license. The public hearing is an opportunity for the
public to offer input to the Board, either speaking at the hearing or by providing written
comments to be read at the meeting.
3.7 Decision
The Board shall vote to make one of the following decisions.
3.7.1 Approval
The Board shall grant approval of an application when the applicant demonstrates
full compliance with this Ordinance and other applicable Town codes. Conditions
may be imposed by the Board to achieve the purposes of this Ordinance and other
applicable Town codes, as follows:
A. Conditions Precedent. The Board may impose conditions precedent to ensure
the applicant fulfills certain obligations prior to receipt of the license.
(Example: septic tank to be pumped before the license is issued.)
B. Conditions Subsequent. The Board may impose conditions subsequent to
ensure the licensed activity will comply with specified parameters. (Example:
outside lights shall be turned off no later than 30 minutes after the close of
business each night.)
3.7.2 Denial
Except as provided below, the Board shall deny an application that has not
demonstrated compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance and other
relevant Town ordinances. The motion to deny must identify the specific
reason(s) for denial.
A. Life Safety 101 Code. With a corrective plan approved in writing by the Fire
Chief, an applicant may be allowed not more than 3 years to fully remedy
identified Life Safety 101 Code violations, and licenses may be issued during
this time.
B. Consent Agreements. Where a Consent Agreement with the Board of
Selectmen allows a violation to persist for a period of time before being fully
remedied, licenses may be issued during this time.
3.8. Appeals
Any decision, action, or inaction pertaining to this Ordinance by the Board may be
appealed to York County Superior Court, unless otherwise specified by license type per
§4.2. Any appeal must be filed within 30 days of the decision or action being appealed.
3.9 Enforcement
Enforcement of this Ordinance shall be as follows.
3.9.1 Enforcement Responsibilities
Enforcement authority pursuant to this Ordinance varies by license type, and is
specified for each license type as being the Code Enforcement Officer (CEO), a
York Police Officer, or the Fire Chief with jurisdiction or their designee. In the
event CEO enforcement action is required at a time when a CEO is not working, a
Town of York, Maine
Business Licensing Ordinance – Amended November 5, 2019
Page 9 of 22
Police Officer may initiate necessary enforcement action until such time as the
matter can be turned over to a CEO. Reference in this Ordinance to the
enforcement authority of the Fire Chiefs in no way diminishes their authority
under Life Safety 101 and other applicable codes and statutes.
3.9.2 Enforcement Actions
Actions taken to enforce this Ordinance shall generally follow the sequence
provided here, except that steps may be skipped in the event there is an
expectation that delay would cause significant harm to public health or safety.
A. Reminder
When a business fails to obtain a license, renew its license(s) in a timely
manner, or fails to comply with conditions of its license or the provisions of
this Ordinance, the Town Manager’s Office shall contact the person to remind
them of the requirement to obtain a license, renew their license or to comply
with the license requirements. If the lapse in license(s) exceeds 60 days this
matter shall be turned over to the designated enforcement authority for formal
enforcement action.
B. Verbal Warning
Provide a verbal warning to the license holder and any other relevant parties
citing the specific violation and advising them to cease the violation. All
verbal warnings shall be documented in writing following delivery.
C. Notice of Violation
In the event the Verbal Warning does not result in compliance, a Notice of
Violation and Order for Corrective Action shall be issued. This Notice shall
document the violations in terms of actions and code sections violated, and
shall order the violation to cease immediately unless a later deadline is
expressly included. This shall be delivered in person or by any means where
receipt is documented in writing (such as certified mail/return receipt
requested).
D. Board of Selectmen’s Action
In the event the Notice of Violation and Order for Corrective Action does not
result in compliance, the matter shall be documented in writing and turned
over to the Board. For any violation forwarded to the Board and not resolved
within 7 working days thereafter, the Board shall schedule a public hearing on
the matter. Public notice shall meet the requirements as specified in §3.5,
except that the license holder shall be notified by certified mail or an
equivalent means, sent at least 7 days prior to the public hearing. If the Board
chooses to take enforcement action, it shall have the authority to take any of
the following actions, which is not necessarily a sequence of steps but rather a
list of options:
1. Suspend License. The Board may suspend the license(s) for a fixed period
of time not to exceed 30 days. No license may be suspended more than
once per year.
Town of York, Maine
Business Licensing Ordinance – Amended November 5, 2019
Page 10 of 22
2. Revoke License. The Board may revoke the license(s). If revoked, the
license holder shall not re-apply for a new license within 60 days of the
Board’s vote.
3. Prosecute. The Board may initiate any and all actions and proceedings,
either legal or equitable, including seeking injunctions of violations and the
imposition of fines, that may be appropriate and necessary to enforce the
provisions of this Ordinance in the name of the Town. If prosecution is
successful, the Town shall not accept any applications for a new or renewed
license within 120 days of the Court Decision.
3.10 Penalties
Any person who violates this ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty of $100.00 per
day per violation for the first offense, $250.00 per day per violation for the second
offense and subsequent offenses within a 2 year period. The “per day” period shall
begin at the first date on which the violation can be demonstrated.
3.11 Waiver / Payment of Fines
Any person charged with a violation of this section, shall be allowed to waive such
violation and tender to the Town of York the fine amount if paid within 20 days of
issuance of the summons. If the waiver fine is paid, no appearance before a District
Court Judge or other judicial officer shall be required. If the offender pays the waiver
fine, the matter will be closed in the York Police Records system and listed as a
subsequent offense for future violations.
If the offender chooses not to pay the waiver fine, he/she shall appear in court on the
specified date to answer for the ordinance violation. If the offender is found to have
committed the offense in court, fines, applicable court fees, attorney’s fees, and
prosecution costs may apply.
Town of York, Maine
Business Licensing Ordinance – Amended November 5, 2019
Page 11 of 22
SECTION 4: STANDARDS
4.1 General Standards and Requirements Applicable to All Licenses
The following shall be considered prior to any license-related actions by the Board, and
compliance shall be required throughout the license period. Failure to comply with these
standards and requirements shall be a basis for enforcement action pursuant to this
Ordinance.
4.1.1 Character of the Applicant
No license shall be issued to anyone who has not demonstrated good moral
character. In determining good moral character, the Board shall consider all
evidence presented. This shall include, but not be limited to the following:
A. The applicant’s police record, if any. Conviction of a Class D or more serious
crime may be considered as evidence that the applicant lacks good moral
character.
B. The applicant’s past and present compliance with the provisions of this
Ordinance and other applicable Town and State codes, and with requirements
of any utility districts which provide service.
4.1.2 Taxes and Fees Paid
All property taxes, personal property taxes and any Town fees shall be paid in full
before the license is issued. Compliance shall be verified by the Tax Collector
before issuance, renewal or amendment of a license.
4.1.3 On-Site Septic
If the licensed establishment utilizes a septic system, compliance with Town
septic tank pumping requirements shall be required. Compliance shall be verified
by the CEO before the Board issues, renews or amends a license.
4.1.4 Grease Traps
If the licensed establishment utilizes a grease trap, compliance with cleaning
requirements of State and/or local plumbing codes shall be required. Compliance
shall be verified by the CEO before the Board issues, renews or amends a license.
4.1.5 Land Use Compliance
The licensed activity shall occur on a property permitted, approved or
grandfathered for the use. Compliance shall be verified by the CEO before the
Board issues or amends a license.
4.1.6 Code Compliance
All license holders shall comply with all Town codes, including but not limited to
the Noise Ordinance. Compliance shall be verified by the CEO before the Board
issues, renews or amends a license. If a violation has been cited in writing, it
shall be resolved before the Board issues, renews or amends a license.
4.1.7 Life Safety Code Compliance
For any license which requires a fire inspection, the purpose of such inspection
shall be to ensure compliance with Life Safety 101 Code requirements.
Town of York, Maine
Business Licensing Ordinance – Amended November 5, 2019
Page 12 of 22
4.1.8 Nudity
The purpose of this section is to regulate nudity as a form of live entertainment in
those establishments which are licensed under this Ordinance.
A. No license holder shall permit entertainment on the licensed premises,
whether provided by professional entertainers, employees of the
establishment, or any other person, when such entertainment involves any of
the following:
1. the performance of acts, or simulated acts, of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any
sexual acts which are prohibited by law;
2. the actual or simulated touching, caressing, or fondling of the breasts,
buttocks, anus, or genitals; and/or
3. the actual or simulated displaying of the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks,
anus, or any portion of the female breasts at or below the areola.
B. No license holder shall permit any person to remain in or upon the licensed
premises who exposes to any public view any portion of his or her genitals or
anus or any portion of the female breasts at or below the areola.
For the purpose of this section, “display” or “displaying,” and “expose” or
“exposing” shall mean unclothed or un-costumed or not covered by a fully opaque
material.
4.2 License-Specific Standards and Requirements
The following are standards and requirements unique to each type of license issued by the
Town. These are required in addition to other standards specified in this Ordinance. For
other instances when the Board is required to act on a local license (such as but not
limited to closing out sales, billiard rooms, etc.), the Board shall apply the general
standards of this Ordinance and any applicable statutory requirements.
4.2.1 Bed and Breakfast License
This license shall be required for operation of a Bed and Breakfast as defined in
the York Zoning Ordinance. The following shall apply:
A. Inspections Required:
1. Code Inspection - annual.
2. Fire Inspection - annual.
B. Concurrent Food Service License. The Bed and Breakfast License implicitly
includes food preparation, so a separate Food Service License from the Town
shall not be required, but all standards pertaining to the Food Service License
shall apply.
C. Concurrent Liquor License. If liquor is to be sold, a separate Liquor License
is required per Title 28-A M.R.S. §1061-A.
Town of York, Maine
Business Licensing Ordinance – Amended November 5, 2019
Page 13 of 22
D. State Licenses. A State Bed and Breakfast License from the Maine
Department of Health and Human Services shall be required. Possession of a
Lodging Place License or an Eating and Lodging License is not an acceptable
alternative. A license from the Maine State Fire Marshal’s Office shall also
be required.
E. Verification of Use for Transient Occupancy. For license renewals, the code
inspection shall include a review of the records of guest registration and
departure during the prior license year to ensure that all guest stays comply
with requirements for transient occupancy if so limited by the Zoning
Ordinance.
F. Related Laws. See Zoning Ordinance, Section 7.7.
G. Statutory Authority. Home rule authority.
H. Enforcement Authority. CEO and Fire Chief.
I. Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall have jurisdiction to hear appeals of
Board decisions regarding Bed and Breakfast Licenses.
4.2.2 Innkeeper’s License
This license shall be required for operation of a Hotel, Motel or Inn as defined in
the York Zoning Ordinance or Life Safety 101 Code, whichever is more broadly
defined. The following shall apply:
A. Inspections Required:
1. Code Inspection - annual.
2. Fire Inspection - annual.
B. State License. A State Lodging Place License or an Eating and Lodging
License shall be required.
C. Verification of Use for Transient Occupancy. For license renewals, the code
inspection shall include a review of the records of guest registration and
departure during the prior license year to ensure that all guest stays comply
with requirements for transient occupancy if so limited by the Zoning
Ordinance.
D. Related Laws. See Title 30-A M.R.S. §3801 et seq.
E. Statutory Authority. Mandated per Title 30-A M.R.S. §3811.
F. Enforcement Authority. CEO and Fire Chief.
4.2.3 Food Service License
This license shall be required for any person who prepares and offers for sale food
or drink for public consumption on-site (restaurant) or off-site (take-out
restaurant), but not for the preparation of packaged foods. This License was
formerly called the Victualers License. The following shall apply:
Town of York, Maine
Business Licensing Ordinance – Amended November 5, 2019
Page 14 of 22
A. The purpose of this license is solely to ensure compliance with the general
standards imposed on all licensed businesses. This is not a health-related
permit and the Town will not engage in health-related inspection of the
premises because the Town does not have certified health inspectors as would
be required to inspect per Title 22 M.R.S. §2499.
B. Inspections Required:
1. Code Inspection - annual.
2. Fire Inspection - annual.
C. State License. A State Eating Establishment License or an Eating and
Lodging License shall be required per Title 22 M.R.S. §2492(1).
D. Statutory Authority. Home Rule Authority.
E. Enforcement Authority. CEO and Fire Chief.
4.2.4 Liquor License
This license is required for the sale of liquor (as defined in Title 28-A M.R.S. §2)
to be consumed on the premises. The following shall apply:
A. Inspections Required:
1. Fire Inspection - annual.
2. Police Inspection - annual.
B. State License. A Maine Liquor License per Title 28-A M.R.S. §1051(1) from
the Maine Bureau of Alcoholic Beverages and Lottery Operations, or other
state or federal license if the liquor is manufactured on-site, shall be required.
C. Statutory Authority. Title 28-A M.R.S. §1051(2).
D. Enforcement Authority. York Police Department and Fire Chief.
4.2.5 Bottle Club License
This license shall be required for any Bottle Club, as defined in Title 28-A M.R.S.
§2(3). The following shall apply:
A. Additional Public Notice Requirement. See Title 28-A M.R.S. §161-B(2)
because it requires greater public notice than the general standards of this
Ordinance.
B. Inspections Required:
1. Fire Inspection – annual.
2. Police – annual.
C. State Registration. A bottle club shall register annually with the Maine
Bureau of Alcoholic Beverages and Lottery Operations. This shall be verified
by the Police Department prior to license renewal.
Town of York, Maine
Business Licensing Ordinance – Amended November 5, 2019
Page 15 of 22
D. Restriction on Hours of Operation. No bottle club shall operate between the
hours of 2:00 AM and 6:00 AM on January 1st, or between the hours of 1:00
AM and 6:00 AM on other days. The operator of a bottle club shall require all
members, guests or other patrons to vacate the premises by 2:15 AM on
January 1st and by 1:15 AM on all other days.
E. Related Laws. See Title 28-A §161-162.
F. Statutory Authority. Title 28-A M.R.S. §161-B(4).
G. Enforcement Authority. York Police Department and Fire Chief.
H. Appeals. The Maine Bureau of Alcoholic Beverages and Lottery Operations
shall have jurisdiction to hear appeals of actions by the Board per Title 28-A
M.R.S. §161-B(4). Appeals relating to administration or enforcement shall be
filed with the York County Superior Court.
4.2.6 Special Amusement License
This license shall be required for an establishment where liquor is sold for on-site
consumption and which also provides live music, dancing, and/or entertainment
of any kind. The following shall apply:
A. Inspections Required:
1. Code Inspection – annual.
2. Fire Inspection – annual.
3. Police Inspection – annual.
B. State License. State Liquor License is required. If dancing is involved, a
Dance Hall license from the Maine State Fire Marshal shall also be required.
To be verified annually for license renewal.
C. Performance Standard. Music, dancing and entertainment shall occur entirely
indoors, and all doors and windows shall be closed after 9:00 PM and before
9:00 AM. Establishments with Special Amusement Licenses that date back
prior to the establishment of this standard shall be vested in their right to
continue with past practice provided there has been no gap of 2 years or more
in their past licensing.
D. Concurrent Licenses. Town Liquor License shall also be required.
E. Related Laws. Title 28-A M.R.S. §1054.
F. Statutory Authority. Title 28-A M.R.S. §1054(2).
G. Enforcement Authority. CEO, York Police Department and Fire Chief.
H. Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall have jurisdiction to hear appeals - see
Town of York Home Rule Charter Article IV, Section 7(C)(4) and Title 28-A
M.R.S. §1054(8).
Town of York, Maine
Business Licensing Ordinance – Amended November 5, 2019
Page 16 of 22
4.2.7 Dance Hall License
This license shall be required for any establishment with public dancing that is
subject to State licensing under Title 8 M.R.S. §161, unless that establishment has
a Special Amusement License. The following shall apply:
A. Inspections Required:
1. Fire Inspection - annual.
2. Police Inspection - annual.
B. State License. A permit from the State Fire Marshal shall be required.
C. Statutory Authority. Home rule authority.
D. Enforcement Authority. York Police Department and Fire Chief.
4.2.8 Coin-Operated Amusement License
This license shall be required for any pin ball machines or video games offered
for public entertainment for a fee. The following shall apply:
A. Inspections Required:
1. Police Inspection - annual.
B. Number of Devices. This license shall not limit the number of devices at a
particular location, nor shall the application fee be based on the number of
devices.
C. Statutory Authority. Generally see Title 8 M.R.S. §441 – 450. Requirement
for this license is established in Title 8 M.R.S. §441. For specific
authorization for the Board to issue such licenses, see Title 8 M.R.S. §446-A.
D. Copy of License to Police Department. Upon issuance of a Coin-Operated
Amusement License, a copy of the License shall be forwarded to the York
Police Department per Title 8 M.R.S. §448.
E. Enforcement Authority. York Police Department.
4.2.9 Bowling Alley License
This license shall be required for the operation of any bowling alley. The
following shall apply:
A. Inspections Required:
1. Fire Inspection - annual.
A. Statutory Authority. Title 8 M.R.S. §2.
B. Enforcement Authority. CEO and Fire Chief.
Town of York, Maine
Business Licensing Ordinance – Amended November 5, 2019
Page 17 of 22
4.2.10 Transient Sellers License
This license shall be required of any Transient Seller. The following shall apply.
A. Inspections Required: none.
B. Definitions. In the context of Transient Sellers Licenses, the definitions of
Title 32, M.R.S. §14701 shall apply, except as provided below:
1. Transient Seller. Any person who engages in the business of selling
merchandise and/or services to consumers by means of personal contact
and who does not have, for the purposes of carrying on such business, any
permanent place of business within the Town of York. This shall not
include:
• a person who sells at public fairs, expositions or bazaars;
• a person who sells exclusively by mail contact, except for a person
who offers merchandise or money prizes free of charge, such as
contest prizes or gifts for answering a survey, but who requires the
recipient to pay something of value in order to participate in this offer,
including, but not limited to entrance fees, processing fees or handling
changes; or
• a member selling on behalf of a public service organization;
• a supervised lender as defined in Title 9-A M.R.S. §1-301(39).
2. Public Service Organization. Any organization classified as a 501.C.3
under the Internal Revenue Code, and other non-profit and community
service groups such as the Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, American Legion,
Rotary Club, public school groups and religious organizations.
C. Police Department Review. Prior to issuance of a Transient Sellers License,
input from the Police Department shall be obtained regarding the proposed
activity.
D. Performance Standards. The following shall apply:
1. Registration. Licensees shall be registered with the Maine Department of
Professional and Financial Regulations.
2. Identification. When engaged in transient sales, licensees or an
agent/designee shall carry a current Maine Transient Sellers registration,
and a picture ID approved by the York Police Department, attached to the
outside of their clothing and clearly visible at all times.
3. Hours of Solicitation. Solicitation of door-to-door sales shall only take
place Monday through Saturday between the hours of 9:00 AM and 5:00
PM, but no later than sunset.
4. License Duration. The Board shall determine the duration for this license
based on the needs of the applicant and the recommendation of the Police
Department. In no case shall this exceed the limit established in §2.3.
E. Related Laws. Title 32 M.R.S. §14701-14716.
Town of York, Maine
Business Licensing Ordinance – Amended November 5, 2019
Page 18 of 22
F. Statutory Authority. Title 32 M.R.S. §14705 and home rule authority.
G. Enforcement Authority. York Police Department.
4.2.11 Flea Market License
This license shall be required for operation of a flea market, as defined in the
York Zoning Ordinance. The following shall apply.
A. Inspections Required: none.
B. Public Safety Review. Prior to issuance of a new or amended Flea Market
License, input from the Police Department and Fire Department of jurisdiction
shall be obtained regarding the layout of the flea market and each of the
performance standards listed below.
C. Performance Standards. In addition to any requirements imposed by other
Town codes, the following shall apply:
1. Access. There shall be only one vehicular access to the site unless more
are requested by Police or Fire to improve public safety.
2. Control Along Road Frontage. All road frontage, except at the entrance,
shall be curbed, fenced or otherwise barricaded to control unauthorized
vehicle access to the site.
3. On-Site Parking. Three on-site customer parking spaces shall be provided
per vendor.
4. Sanitary Facilities. Separate male and female sanitary facilities shall be
provided for public use.
5. Storage. All displays, tables, goods, rubbish containers, chairs and other
such materials shall be stored within a building when sales are not
occurring.
D. Related Laws. See Zoning Ordinance.
E. Statutory Authority. Home rule authority.
F. Enforcement Authority. CEO.
4.2.12 Junkyard, Automobile Graveyard, and Automobile Recycling Business
License
This license shall be required for the establishment, operation or maintenance of a
junkyard, automobile graveyard, and/or automobile recycling business, as these
terms are defined in Title 30-A M.R.S. §3751. The following shall apply:
Town of York, Maine
Business Licensing Ordinance – Amended November 5, 2019
Page 19 of 22
A. Inspections Required:
1. Code Inspection – annual.
2. Fire Inspection – annual.
3. Police Inspection – annual.
B. Statutory Authority. Title 30-A M.R.S. §3753.
C. Related Laws. See also the Zoning Ordinance, and Title 30-A M.R.S. §3751-
3760, and Title 29-A M.R.S. §1101-1112.
C. Enforcement Authority. CEO, York Police Department and Fire Chief.
4.2.13 Medical Marijuana Grower License
This license shall be required for a Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary or
Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facility. The following shall apply:
A. Inspections Required:
1. Police Inspection – at initial licensing to ensure security meets State
requirements.
B. Definitions.
1. Marijuana: As defined in State Administrative Rules (10-144 CMR
Chapter 122), §1, “Marijuana.”
2. Medical Marijuana Caregiver: A person or an assistant of that person that
provides care for a qualifying patient in accordance with Title 22, Chapter
558-C: Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act, section 2423-A, subsection
2.
3. Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary. An entity registered under
MRS Title 22, Chapter 558-C: Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act
section 2425-A that acquires, possesses, cultivates, manufactures, delivers,
transfers, transports, sells, supplies or dispenses marijuana or related
supplies and educational materials to qualifying patients and the
caregivers of those patients.
4. Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facility. A facility used for cultivating,
processing, and/or storing medical marijuana by a medical marijuana
caregiver at a location which is not the medical marijuana caregiver’s
primary year-round residence or their patient’s primary year-round
residence; the facility can also be used for the production, blending,
infusing, compounding or other preparation of marijuana concentrate and
marijuana products, including, but not limited to, marijuana extraction or
preparation by means of chemical synthesis. A Medical Marijuana
Manufacturing Facility shall be either a registered tier 1 or tier 2
Town of York, Maine
Business Licensing Ordinance – Amended November 5, 2019
Page 20 of 22
manufacturing facility that may contain a person(s) authorized to engage
in marijuana extraction as specified under section 2423-F of Title 22,
Chapter 558-C: Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act.
5. Medical Marijuana Product: A product composed of harvested marijuana
and other ingredients that is intended for medical use. "Marijuana product"
includes, but is not limited to, an edible marijuana product, a marijuana
ointment and a marijuana tincture. Medical Marijuana Product" does not
include Marijuana Concentrate.
6. Medical Marijuana Testing Facility: A public or private laboratory that:
a. Is authorized in accordance with section 2423-A, subsection 10 to
analyze contaminants in and the potency and cannabinoid profile
of samples; and
b. Is accredited pursuant to standard ISO/IEC 17025 of the
International Organization for Standardization by a 3rd-party
accrediting body or is certified, registered or accredited by an
organization approved by the department.
C. State Authorization. Prior to issuance, renewal or amendment of a License, the
applicant must demonstrate State of Maine authorization under the Maine Use
of Medical Marijuana Program. Loss of such State authorization shall
automatically invalidate the Town-issued License.
D. Related Laws. See: Zoning Ordinance; Title 22 M.R.S. Chapter 558-C, Maine
Medical Use of Marijuana Act; 10-144 C.M.R. Chapter 122, Rules Governing
the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Program.
E. Statutory Authority. Home rule authority.
F. Enforcement Authority. York Police Department.
4.3 Local Approval For State Licenses
For any State license which requires local approval but for which no local license is
required, the Board of Selectmen shall place the request on a meeting agenda and shall
act on that item without the need for any local application, fee or public hearing.
4.3.1 Bingo, Beano and Games of Chance License
To obtain necessary State licenses, local approval is required for any
organizations which offer bingo, beano and/or games of chance. The Board
typically issues an annual blanket approval for all organizations which offer these
games to help streamline the process for all parties. The following shall apply:
A. State License. Licenses from the Chief of the Maine State Police - Bingo and
Beano License per Title 17 M.R.S. §312, and/or Games of Chance License per
Title 17 M.R.S. §1832. These licenses are issued after local approval.
Town of York, Maine
Business Licensing Ordinance – Amended November 5, 2019
Page 21 of 22
B. Statutory Requirement for Local Approval. Regarding Bingo and Beano – see
Title 17 M.R.S. §313. Regarding Games of Chance – see Title 17 §1832(4).
For general standards see Title 17 M.R.S. §311-329 (bingo & beano) and
§1831-1846 (games of chance).
C. Enforcement Authority. York Police Department.
4.3.2 Off-Premise Catering License
This license is required for an establishment with a Liquor License to sell liquor at
a location other than their licensed place of business, such as at a catered event.
This approval is specific to the caterer, the date of the event, and the property.
The following shall apply:
A. State License. State Liquor License and Special Permit for Catering
Privileges. The Special Permit is not available before local approval is
granted.
B. Related Law. See Commercial Functions on Residential Lots Accessory to
Residential Use – Zoning Ordinance §7.17, if applicable.
C. Designation of Authority to Town Manager and Reduced Public Notice
Requirement. Because these approvals may be required with very little
advance notice, the Town Manager shall be designated to provide local
approval without advance public notice on behalf of the Board, as allowed by
Title 28-A M.R.S. §1052(4)(G). The Board shall receive copies of any such
approvals granted by the Town Manager at or before the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the Board.
D. Statutory Authority. Title 28-A M.R.S. §1052.
D. Enforcement Authority. York Police Department.
Town of York, Maine
Business Licensing Ordinance – Amended November 5, 2019
Page 22 of 22
SECTION 5: DEFINITIONS
The following definitions shall apply in this Ordinance:
APPLICANT: During the application process, “applicant” is defined as follows:
1. The principal owner of the establishment is the applicant. If a corporation is the principal
owner, then the principal stockholder of the corporation is the applicant.
2. If the principal owner is not primarily responsible for the actual operation of the
establishment, then the person (or people) primarily responsible for the actual operation
of the establishment shall be included as a co-applicant.
BOARD: The Board of Selectmen.
CEO: Code Enforcement Officer. Any of the individuals appointed by the Board of Selectmen
to fulfill duties of code enforcement within the Town.
CONDITION PRECEDENT: A condition imposed at the time of approval, with which the
applicant shall comply before the license is issued.
CONDITION SUBSEQUENT: A condition imposed at the time of approval, with which the
applicant shall comply after the approval is issued.
FIRE DEPARTMENT: Either the York Beach Fire Department or the York Village Fire
Department, whichever has jurisdiction at the location of the licensed activity.
LICENSE: A grant of authority from the Board to an applicant and their establishment to
conduct a particular activity on a particular property pursuant to this Ordinance and/or state law.
LICENSE AMENDMENT: A change to the activity being licensed.
LICENSE HOLDER: Same as “Applicant,” but after completion of the application process and
issuance of the license.






Amended5/11/2015
COLLECTION, TRANSPORTATION AND DISPOSAL
OF REFUSE FROM RESIDENCES
RULES AND REGULATIONS
(SolidWaste Collection, Recycling and Disposal Ordinance)
SECTION 1.0 IMPLEMENTATION OF REFUSE COLLECTION PROGRAM.
The Board of Selectmen shall contract with a Town hauler to provide for the
regular collection of refuse from residences as stipulated by the Solid Waste
Collection, Recycling and Disposal Ordinance and shall ensure that a disposal
facility is provided for the Town hauler to dispose of the refuse.
SECTION 2.0 ACCEPTABLE MATERIALS FOR RESIDENTIAL TRASH
AND REFUSE AND BULKY WASTE COLLECTION
The Town hauler shall collect the following materials from residences through
the Town provided residential curbside collection refuse service.
2.1 The portion of domestic solid waste that is generated by residences on a
day-to-day basis and which is not subject to Town mandatory recycling
program requirements including, but not limited to: garbage, magazines,
cartons, cardboard, cloth, ceramics, dishes, cups, ovenware, light bulbs,
window panes, foils, pans, plastic items (not PET #1 or HDPE #2), and
other similar materials.
2.2 Household furniture, such as couches, chairs, tables, bureaus, bed frames,
fans, television and radios.
2.3 Discarded rugs, only if they are rolled and tied.
2.4 Shrubbery, brush, or tree limbs, if they are tied or containerized in
bundles not more than (4) feet in length and sixty (60) pounds in weight
and are able to be handled by one person. These materials shall not
include leaves or grass clippings.
2.5 Brick, mortar, plaster, cement and wooden boards from small home
repairs, construction, demolition or remodeling if it is placed in a suitable
container or tied together in lengths and weights that will fit into a
packer-type vehicle and can be handled by one person.
1
Amended5/11/2015
2.6 Mattresses, which must be rolled an tied. Box springs, provided wooden
box springs are broken down into suitable lengths and these materials
either bundled or tied into no greater than four foot lengths.
2.7 Small appliances, such as toasters and vacuum cleaners.
2.8 Lumber, which must be cut and tied into bundles which are no greater
than 4 feet in length, 2 feet in width, and 50 pounds in weight.
2.9 Household doors and windows, except picture windows. Glass must be
taped for safety.
SECTION 3.0 UNACCEPTABLE MATERIALS FOR RESIDENTIAL
REFUSECOLLECTION.
Itshall be unlawf ul for residences to place the following materials at curbside for
the purpose of residential refuse collection.
3.1 Leaves and grass clippings.
3.2 Glass, including clear, brown and green, that is subject to mandatory
curbside collection recycling program requirements for residences.
3.3. Aluminum, including aluminum cans and other all-aluminum products,
that is subject to mandatory curbside collection recycling program
requirements for residences.
3.4 Steel cans, including all cans containing ferrous metals and the tops of
these cans, that are subject tomandatory curbside collection recycling
programrequirements for residences.
3.5 Newspaper,mixed paper,magazines, boxboard and corrugated
cardboard that is subject to mandatory curbside collection recycling
program requirements for residences.
3.6 Plastic, including #1 PET and #2 HDPE plastic containers, that are subject
to mandatory curbside collection recycling program requirements for
residences.
3.7 Hazardous Waste, as defined by the Solid Waste Collection, Recycling and
Disposal Ordinance. This ordinance language reads: "Waste with
inherent properties which make such waste dangerous to manage by
ordinary means, including, but not limited to, chemicals explosives,
2
Amended5/11/2015
pathological wastes, radioactive waste, toxic wastes and other wastes
defined as hazardous at any time by the State of Maine or the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended, or other Federal,
State or local laws, regulations, orders, or other actions promulgated or
taken with respect thereto."
3.8 Liquid Waste, as defined by the Solid Waste Collection, Recycling and
Disposal Ordinance. This ordinance language reads: /1All unwanted or
discarded material with sufficient liquid content to be free flowing,
including by way of example and not by limitation, waste motor oil,
antifreeze, paints, motor fuels, solvents, rinse water and septic tank
sludge".
3.9 White Goods and ScrapMetal as defined by the Solid Waste Collection,
Recycling and Disposal Ordinance. This ordinance language reads: /1All
large appliances, including by example and not by limitation, stoves,
refrigerators, freezers, washing machines, clothes dryers, dishwashers and
air conditioners, and all scrap metal, including by example and not by
limitation, wire, metal fencing, sheet metals, clean metal barrels and bar
stock".
3.10 Wet Wastes, as defined by the Solid Waste Collection, Recycling and
Disposal Ordinance. This ordinance language reads: "Wastes that
represent either: a) water that has percolated through and/ or mixed with
trash causing the water to become a waste leachate; or b) trash which,
because of high moisture content, is unacceptable due to an insufficient
BTU content per pound".
3.11 Large diameter tree limbs and any size tree truck or stump.
3.12 Unacceptable Waste, as defined by the SolidWaste Collection, Recycling
and Disposal Ordinance. his ordinance language reads: "Unacceptable
waste includes the following materials: a) hazardous waste; b) bulk
demolition or construction debris from building and roadway projects or
locations; c) liquid wastes; d) abandoned or junk vehicles; e) dead animals
or portions thereof or other pathological wastes; f) water treahnent
residues; g) h·ee stumps; h) tannery sludge; i) waste oil; and j) discarded
"white goods" such as freezers, refrigerators, washing machines, etc.".
SECTION 4.0 METHOD OF COLLECTION
The collection of refuse from residences shall be subject to the following
requirements.
3
Amended5/11/2015
4.1 COLLECTION SCHEDULE. The Town shall contract with a Town hauler
to provide curbside collection of refuse from residences once every week
Collection is subject to the limitations described in Section 2.2.3 of the
"Solid Waste Collection, Recycling and Disposal Ordinance".
4.2 PLACEMENT FOR COLLECTION OF REFUSE CONTAINERS: Each
residence shall place all refuse in a Town approved container. The
container(s) shall be placed at the back edge of the property side of the
sidewalk (blocking of a sidewalk is prohibited), or where there is no
sidewalk, three (3) to ten (10) feet from the edge of pavements or unpaved
road, before 7:00 A.M. on the day of collection, but not before 4:00 A.M. of
the scheduled day of pick-up service.
4.3 PLACEMENTFORCOLLECTIONOFOTHERMATERIALS. Materials
other than refuse which are subject to the Town curbside collection service
shall be placed at the back edge of the property side of the sidewalk
(blocking of sidewalk is prohibited), or where there is no sidewalk, three
(3) to ten (10) feet from the edge of the pavement or unpaved road.
Materials shall be placed at curbside before 7:00 A.M. on the day of
collection, and shall not be placed at curbside before dusk of the day
before scheduled pick-up service.
SECTION 5.0 REFUSE COLLECTION CONTAINER
All refuse shall be placed in a tied plastic bag which may be placed in a covered
metal or plastic canmanufactured for the purpose of storing Refuse. Containers
shall not have a capacity greater than thirty (30) gallons nor weigh, when filled,
more than sixty (60) pounds. The only exceptions to this requirement are
identified inSection 2.0, Subsections 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.6, 2.7, 2.8, and 2.9 of these
Rules and Regulations. The preparation of the materials identified in
Subsections 2.2 through 2.9 for Refuse collection must comply with the c
requirements identified in these respective subsections.
SECTION 6.0 FEE FOR COLLECTION SERVICE
The Town shall pay al costs incurred by the Town hauler to collect, transport and
dispose of refuse collected from residences.
SECTION 7.0 DESIGNATED TOWN OFFICIAL
The Town Public Works Director is the Town designated official for management
of the Town service to collect, transport and dispose of refuse from residences.
4
Amended5/11/2015
SECTION 8.0 DISTURBANCE OF REFUSE CONTAINERS AND REFUSE.
No person shall disturb a refuse container or the refuse contained within that has
been placed at curbside for collection. This prohibition shall not apply to
materials identified in Sections 2.2, 2.3, 2.7 and 2.9 of these Rules and
Regulations.
SECTION 9.0 PENALTIES
The Town hauler, members of the York Recycling Committee and the designated
Town solid waste official(s) may examine any ref use materials or containers that
are placed at curbside for collection to ensure compliance with the Town "Solid
Waste Collection, Recycling and Disposal Ordinance" and applicable Rules and
Regulations. The designated Town solid waste official(s) shall institute action for
violations.
Any person, firm or corporation who violate any provision of the Ordinance shall be
subject to a fine of $100.00 for each violation. Each day such a violation is continued is a
separate offense.
SECTION 10 – WAIVER/PAYMENT OF FINES
Any person charged with a violation of this section, shall be allowed to waive such
violation and tender to the Town of York the fine amount if paid within 20 days of
issuance of the summons. If the waiver fine is paid, no appearance before a District Court
Judge or other judicial officer shall be required. If the offender pays the waiver fine, the
matter will be closed in the York Police Records system and listed as a subsequent offense
for future violations.
If the offender chooses not to pay the waiver fine, he/she shall appear in court on the
specified date to answer for the ordinance violation. If the offender is found to have
committed the offense in court, fines, applicable court fees, attorney’s fees, and
prosecution costs may apply.
5
Amended5/11/2015
>Regulations adopted by Selectmen 4/22/91
>Amendments to Regulations adopted by Selectmen, 3/22/94.
Amendments address implementing bulky waste curbside pick-up)
>Amendments to Regulations adopted by Selectmen, 11/14/95
Amendments addressing mixed paper, magazines, boxboard & corrugated cardboard)
>Amendments to Regulations adopted by Selectmen, 5/11/2015
(Amendments addressing penalties and waiver/payment of fines)
RECY1.DOC (ORDINANCES - W) 11/17/95 djb
6

Adopted 4/22/91
Commercial Waste
Rules and Regulations
(Solid Waste &Collection, Recycling and
Disposal Ordinance)
In accordance with Section 6.2 of the Solid Waste Collection, Recycling a nci
Disposal Ordinance, the Town of York Board of Selectmen hereby resolves
to establish guidelines for the collection, disposal and recycling of solid
waste generated by commercial establishments and to adopt the following
1ules and regulations to govern the collection, disposal and recycling of
solid waste by commercial establishments. These rules and regulations
shall be entitled "Rules and Regulations to Govern the Collection, Disposal
and Recycling of Solid Waste Generated by Commercial
Establishments".
COMWAST.DOC (Ordinances)
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION, RECYCLING AND DISPOSAL
ORDINANCE
RULES & REGULATIONS TO GOVERN THE COLLECTION AND
DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE
GENERATED BY COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION 1.0 Requirement to Collect and Dispose of Solid Waste Genera ted
by Commercial Establishments.
All Commercial Establishments are required to ensure that all solid wastes
generated by or located on the premises of their Commercial Establishment t are
properly collected, transported, and/ or disposed in accordance with the
provisions of the Town of York Solid Waste Collection, Recycling and Disposal
Ordinance.
SECTION 2.0 R e q u i r eme n t to Use a Licensed Commercial Hauler to
Collect, Transport and Dispose of SolidWaste
All Commercial Establishments are required to use a Commercial Hauler
licensed by the Town of York to provide for the collection, transportation and
disposal of solid waste generated by or located on the premises of any
Commercial Establishment. The licensing of the Commercial Hauler by the
Town shall comply with Sections 6.3 and 6.41 of the Town Solid Waste
Collection, Recycling and Disposal Ordinance.
SECTION 3.0 Requirement to Use Town Provided Disposal Facility
All Commercial Establishments shall dispose of solid waste that is genera ted by
or located on the premises of their Commercial Establishment at the Disposal
Facility which is designated by the York Board of Selectmen. The designated
Disposal Facility is the Turnkey Landfill located in Rochester, New Hampshire.
SECTION 4.0 Payment of Collection, Transportation & Disposal Costs
4.1 Collection and Transportation Costs. In accordance with Section 6.4.4 of
the Town of York Solid Waste Collection, Recycling and Disposal Ordinance, the
Town of York shall not be responsible for the operation or the cost of collectionon
and tra nsportation of solid waste generated by or located on the premises of a
Commercial Establishment.
4.2 Disposal Costs. In accordance with Section 6.4.5 of the Town of York Sol id
Waste Collection, Recycling and Disposal Ordinance, the Town of York shall
apply tipping fees for Refuse genera ted by or located on the premises of a
Commercial lEstablishment that is delivered to a Town designated Disposal Facility
by a
Town licensed Commercial Hauler. As further stipulated in the Ordinance, the
Town shall not be responsible for such tipping fees if the waste or Refuse is
disposed at any location other than a Town designated Disposal Facility of if the
Refuse has been mixed wi th waste collected from outside the Town.
SECTION 5.0 Mandatory Separation
All Commercial Establishments are required to separate specific materials from
the Solid Waste stream for Recycling purposes.
5.1 Materials to Separate. The following materials are subject to mandatory
Recycling requirements: corrugated cardboard, newspaper, magazines, ca talogs,
telephone books and mixed pa per including "junk mail" shall be recycled.
Commercial Establishments are encouraged to voluntarily recycle other
recyclable materials.
5.2 Requirement to Recycle. Commercial Establishments shall recycle all the
items identified in section 5.1whenever these items are free of contamination.
Contamination shall be defined as whenever the handling of the recyclable item
places an owner or agent of the owner at a health or safety risk.
5.3 Requirement to Provide Information to Customers. All Commercial
Establishments shall provide programs to its customers that are designed to
encourage recycling. The Town may require evidence of such programs to assess
compliance with this requirement. Examples of programs that are in use at
several York businesses include the placement of recycling receptacles for
customer use and the publishing of informational brochures.
5.4 Effective Da te. Section 5.0 of these Rules and Regulations shall become
effective on 7/1/96.
SECTION 6.0 Designated Town Official
The Town Public Works Director is the Town designated official for the
management of the Town program to require Commercial Establishments to
collect, transport and dispose of solid waste in accordance with the provisions of
the Town of York Solid Waste Collection, Recycling and Disposal Ordinance.
SECTION7.0 Penalties
The Town Public Works Director, the Town designated official for the
management of this program, shall institute action for any violations.
Any person, firm or corporation who violate any provision of the Ordinance shall be
subject to a fine of $100.00 for each violation. Each day such a violation is continued is a
separate offense.
SECTION 8.0 Waiver / Payment of Fines
Any person charged with a violation of this section, shall be allowed to waive such
violation and tender to the Town of York the fine amount if paid within 20 days of
issuance of the summons. If the waiver fine is paid, no appearance before a District Court
Judge or other judicial officer shall be required. If the offender pays the waiver fine, the
matter will be closed in the York Police Records system and listed as a subsequent offense
for future violations.
If the offender chooses not to pay the waiver fine, he/she shall appear in court on the
specified date to answer for the ordinance violation. If the offender is found to have
committed the offense in court, fines, applicable court fees, attorney’s fees, and
prosecution costs may apply.
SECTION 9.0 Effective Date
These Rules and Regulations shall become effective as of 12:00 A.M., 4/22/ 91.
R-COMEST.DOC (DOCS)
Amendment tu SOLIDWASTE COLLECTION, RECYCLING AND DISPOSAL ORDINANCE RULES & REGS. TOGOVERN THE
COLLECTION & DISPOSAL OFSOLIDWASTE GENERATED BY COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS 4/5/96, 5/11/2015


E911 ORDINANCE
Town of York, Maine
1. PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to enhance the easy and rapid location of properties by law
enforcement, fire, rescue, and emergency medical services personnel, and to enhance the
efficiency of public and private delivery services (i.e. mail, heating fuel, parcels, etc.) in the Town
of York, Maine.
2. AUTHORITY
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to and consistent with the Municipal Home Rule Powers as
provided for in Article VIII, Part 2, Section 1 of the Constitution of the State of Maine and Title
30-A M.R.S.A., Section 3001.
3. ADMINISTRATION
This ordinance shall be administered by the Assessor’s Office. The Assessor’s Office is
authorized to and shall assign names to roads and numbers to properties, both on existing and
proposed roads, in accordance with this ordinance. The Assessor’s Office shall also be responsible
for maintaining official records pertaining to this ordinance.
4. NAMING SYSTEM
All roads that serve two or more properties shall be named regardless of whether the ownership is
public or private. A "road" refers to any highway, road, street, avenue, lane, private way, or
similar paved, gravel, or dirt thoroughfare. "Property "refers to any property on which a more or
less permanent structure has been erected or could be placed. Assignment of a road name shall not
constitute or imply acceptance of the road as a public way. The following criteria shall govern the
naming of roads:
A. No two roads shall be given the same name (e.g. no Brookside Drive and Brookside
Lane).
B. No two roads should have similar sounding names (e.g. Beech Drive and Beach Drive,
Beech Drive and Peach Drive, etc.).
C. Each road shall have the same name throughout its entire length.
D. The owner of the road shall post road signs at intersections.
5. NUMBERING SYSTEM
Numbers shall be assigned every 50 (fifty) feet or according to minimum frontage requirements
along both sides of the road, with even numbers appearing on the left side of the road and odd
numbers appearing on the right side of the road, ascending from the number origin. The following
criteria shall govern the numbering system:
A. All number origins shall begin on US Route1 at the York/Kittery Town Line and proceed
outwards from the intersection of the primary road. For dead end roads, numbering shall
originate at the intersection of the adjacent road and terminate at the dead end. For
circles, numbering shall follow the right side of the road. Cul-de-sacs are not considered
circles and follow conventional street numbering procedure.
B. The number assigned to each structure shall be that of the numbered interval falling
closest to the driveway.
C. Every structure with more than one principle use or occupancy shall have a separate unit
number (not character) for each use or occupancy (i.e. 235 Maple Drive, Unit 1, Unit 2,
etc.).
6. COMPLIANCE
All owners of structures shall display and maintain the assigned numbers in the following manner:
A. Number on the Structure or Residence. Where the residence or structure is within 50
(fifty) feet of the edge of the road right-of-way, the assigned number shall be displayed
on the front of the residence or structure near the front door or entry.
E911 Ordinance – Amended May 16, 2015
B. Number at the Street Line. Where the residence or structure is over 50 (fifty) feet from
the edge of the road right-of-way, the assigned number shall be displayed on a post,
fence, wall, the mail box or some structure at the property line next to the walk or access
drive to the residence or structure.
C. Size and Color of Number. The numbering shall be a minimum of four (4) inches in
height and of a color that is a visible contrast to the surface upon which it is mounted.
D. Every person whose duty is to display the assigned number shall remove any different
number that might be mistaken for, or confused with, the number assigned in
conformance with this ordinance.
E. Interior location. All residents and other occupants are requested to post the assigned
number and road name to their telephone for emergency reference.
F. Compliance Deadline. Compliance shall be required within 30 days of either the
effective date or receipt of notification from the Town regarding structure numbering.
7. NEW CONSTRUCTION
Whenever any residence or other principal structure is built, it shall be the duty of the new owner
to obtain an assigned number from the Town prior to occupancy of the building.
8. EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall become effective as of November 6, 2001.
9. ENFORCEMENT
This ordinance shall be the responsibility of the York Police Department to enforce.
10. VIOLATIONS/PENALTIES
Any person who violates this ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty of $25.00 for the first
offense, $50.00 for the second offence and $100.00 for the third and subsequent offenses.
11. WAIVER/PAYMENT OF FINES
Any person charged with a violation of this section, shall be allowed to waive such violation and
tender to the Town of York the fine amount if paid within 20 days of issuance of the summons.
If the waiver fine is paid, no appearance before a District Court Judge or other judicial officer
shall be required. If the offender pays the waiver fine, the matter will be closed in the York
Police Records system and listed as a subsequent offense for future violations.
If the offender chooses not to pay the waiver fine, he/she shall appear in court on the specified
date to answer for the ordinance violation. If the offender is found to have committed the offense
in court, fines, applicable court fees, attorney’s fees, and prosecution costs may apply.
E911 Ordinance – Amended May 16, 2015

Town of York, Maine
Ellis Short Sands Park Ordinances – Revised May 14, 2018
Page 1 of 10
ELLIS SHORT SANDS PARK
The area known as Ellis Short Sands Park is the result of a generous gift of private
individuals who owned this land in 1887. On August 15 of that year, the following
persons deeded this property under a “Deed of Trust” to be used as a park:
Ellen N. Ellis
Hazen Z. Ellis
Carlos Moseley
Nellie Moseley
William G. Garmon
Mary J. Garmon
The Park is a tribute to their interest and foresight in the future of York Beach,
Maine.
An additional portion of the land was also deeded, in the same manner, in
November 1979 by Martha F. Gordon.
Ellis Short Sands Park is an entity owned by, and maintained within the
boundaries of, the York Beach Village Corporation. With the dissolution of the
Corporation in 1977, it is now owned by the Town of York. However, under the “Deed
of Trust” it is to be forever under the management and control of a board of five (5)
trustees.
Past and present Trustees include the following:
Past Present
Vincent D. Adjutant John F. Matthews
Kenneth S. Campbell William H. Burnham
Martin G. Chase Andrew T. Furlong, Jr.
Lawrence R. Ellis John A. Garfield
Alpheus D. Spiller Richard E. Boston
Edward M. Ellis
Dexter T. Spiller
Elwyn R. Boston
John F. Garfield
Peter B. Ellis
Town of York, Maine
Ellis Short Sands Park Ordinances – Revised May 14, 2018
Page 2 of 10
ELLIS SHORT SANDS PARK ORDINANCES
PURPOSE
The purpose of these ordinances is to regulate and control activities within Ellis
Short Sands Park at York Beach, Maine. These ordinances shall not apply to any
person or entity working on behalf of the Park Trustees, nor to any public
emergency services provider in the course of their duties.
GENERAL ORDINANCES
The following ordinances and conditions shall apply throughout all areas
comprising the Park:
A. Dressing, undressing and the changing of clothes are
not permitted within the Park except in Bathhouses or
structures suitable for this purpose. This does not apply
to children five (5) years of age or younger.
B. Fires of any sort, open or contained, are not permitted.
C. Alcoholic beverages of any kind are not permitted
D. Solicitation, collecting, advertising and/or vending are
prohibited within the Park.
E. Overnight parking, sleeping or camping within the Park
is prohibited.
F. Removal of sand, rocks or plant life of any kind is
prohibited.
G. Littering: the disposal of diapers, bottles, cans, cigarette
butts, garbage or rubbish of any kind is prohibited,
except in receptacles placed in the Park for said
purpose. Said receptacles shall not be used for disposal
of garbage or refuse which has accumulated in any
home, cottage, cabin, hotel, motel or other like
residence.
H. Animal Waste: an owner or any person in control of an
animal must remove and dispose of any feces left by
his/her animal. Such feces shall be collected in a
plastic bag or similar container and deposited into an
appropriate litter receptacle.
Town of York, Maine
Ellis Short Sands Park Ordinances – Revised May 14, 2018
Page 3 of 10
I. Hours of Operation: the Park shall be opened to
pedestrians and vehicles from 4:00am until 1:00am and
shall be closed between the hours of 1:00am and
4:00am.
J. Skateboards shall be prohibited in the Park.
K. In 2007 the Town of York Selectmen designated Ellis
Short Sands Park as one of many Safe Zones in the
community. State Law imposes more strict penalties on
drug dealers and sex offenders for violations in these
safe zones. In 2007 The Ellis Short Sands Park
Trustees adopted the Selectmen’s decision to name
Ellis Short Sands Park as a Safe Zone.
DESCRIPTION
For the purpose of the following ordinances, Ellis Short Sands Park (“the Park”)
is divided into four (4) areas as follows:
Area I Bathing Beach - the area between the Boardwalk (so
called) and the Atlantic Ocean
Area II Children’s Playground and Basketball Court - the area
adjacent to the southeasterly edge of the parking lot
Area III Vehicle Parking - the hard-surfaced area with delineated
parking spaces on the northwesterly end of the Park
Area IV Grassed Areas, Boardwalk and Walkways - the area
southeasterly of the Children’s Playground and Vehicle
Parking, between Ocean Avenue and the Boardwalk (so
called), including the Boardwalk and all pedestrian
walkways within the Park
Section 1 AREA I BATHING BEACH - the following restrictions and
conditions shall apply to Area I of the Park:
A. Playing of games such as hard or softball, football,
soccer, volleyball, lacrosse, golf, iron horseshoes,
Frisbee tossing or any other game or pursuit that may
endanger other persons is prohibited from May 1
through October 15 of each year.
Town of York, Maine
Ellis Short Sands Park Ordinances – Revised May 14, 2018
Page 4 of 10
B. Powered aircraft, toys or models shall not be operated.
C. Motorized vehicles, motor scooters and bicycles are
prohibited except by special permission from the Ellis
Short Sands Park Trustees.
D. The following restrictions apply to domestic animals on
Short Sands Beach:
a. No dogs shall be present on the beach year
round unless the dog is accompanied by an
owner or responsible party who has voice
control (see definition in the Town of York
Animal Control Ordinance) over the dog and
who is carrying a leash in hand, which can be
used to restrain the dog. A responsible party
with multiple dogs must have adequate leashes
for the number of dogs under his or her control.
Note: An owner or responsible party shall be
required to leash their dog(s) during this period
if directed by a law enforcement officer due to
violations of the voice control or dog waste
provisions of this ordinance.
b. No domestic animals shall be present on the
beach between the hours of 8:00am and 6:00pm
from May 20th through September 20th.
c. Dogs on the beach will be required to be on a
leash between May 20th and September 20th
between the hours of 6:00pm and sunrise (see
definition).
d. Between May 20th and September 20th dogs will
be allowed to be unleashed between sunrise and
8:00am as long as the dog is under the voice
control of its owner or responsible party. The
requirement of paragraph “a” regarding leashes
is in effect during this period (The purpose of
this exception is to allow individuals to walk,
jog, run, or engage in other physical exercise
with their dogs in the early hours of the
morning).
Town of York, Maine
Ellis Short Sands Park Ordinances – Revised May 14, 2018
Page 5 of 10
e. Horses and ponies are prohibited from being on
the beach from May 20th to September 20th
except by written permission of the Ellis Short
Sands Park Trustees.
f. When otherwise allowed to be present on the
beach pursuant to this section, all other domestic
animals must be under the control of their owner
or responsible party at all times.
E. Surfing and the use of surfboards are prohibited from
May 1 to October 15.
Section 2 AREA II CHILDREN’S PLAYGROUND AND BASKETBALL
COURT - The following restrictions and conditions shall
apply to Area II of the Park:
A. Equipment within the Playground is reserved for use by
children TWELVE (12) years of age or younger.
B. Children under the age of six (6) years of age must be
escorted by a person fifteen (15) years of age or older.
C. Animals of any kind are prohibited.
D. Smoking and/or eating are prohibited.
E. Hours of operation shall be 7am to 9:00pm year round
or as otherwise posted by the Park Trustees to assure
public safety, as during maintenance, special events, or
emergencies.
Section 3 AREA III VEHICLE PARKING - the following restrictions and
conditions shall apply to Area III of the Park:
A. Pedestrians shall have the right of way over all
vehicular traffic at all times.
B. Dates of Multi-Space Meter Operation (Kiosks):
Parking of vehicles shall be controlled by parking
kiosks beginning May 15 and continuing through
Town of York, Maine
Ellis Short Sands Park Ordinances – Revised May 14, 2018
Page 6 of 10
October 15 of each season between the hours of 8:00am
and 10:00 pm.
C. Kiosk fees: The parking rate shall be $2.00 per hour
and maximum $15.00 per day 4:00 am to 1:00 am.
D. Marked Parking Spaces: The Trustees shall have
markings painted or placed upon curbs and/or
pavement. It shall be unlawful and a violation to this
ordinance to park vehicles across any such line or
marking or to park said vehicle in such a position that
the same shall not be entirely within the area so
designated by such lines and/or markings.
E. Depositing Fees in Kiosks: When any vehicle shall be
parked in any space which is designated in accordance
with the provisions of this ordinance, the operator of
said vehicle shall, upon entering said parking space,
immediately purchase time for the designated space.
Failure to purchase time and put kiosk into operation
for the designated space shall constitute a violation of
this ordinance and shall subject such operator to the
penalty prescribed hereafter.
F. Tampering with Kiosks: It shall be unlawful and a
violation of the provisions of this ordinance for any
person to deface, injure, tamper with, open and/or
willfully break, destroy and/or impair any parking kiosk
installed under the provisions of this ordinance.
G. Slugs: It shall be unlawful and a violation of the
provisions of this ordinance to deposit or cause to be
deposited in any kiosk any slug, device, metallic
substitute and/or any other substitute for a coin of the
United States or Dominion of Canada.
H. Duties of Meter Officer: It shall be the duty of the
police officers of the Town of York, or other such
agent(s) as designated in writing by the Park Trustees,
acting in accordance with instructions issued by the
Park Trustees to report the following information
applicable to any motor vehicle in violation of this
ordinance: parking space number, state license plate
number, time of day and any other facts and/or
knowledge that may be necessary for a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending such
Town of York, Maine
Ellis Short Sands Park Ordinances – Revised May 14, 2018
Page 7 of 10
violation(s). Each such police officer or agent shall
also attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner or
operator thereof that such vehicle has been parked in
violation of provision of this ordinance.
I. Fines and Penalties: Each owner or operator may,
within ten (10) days of the time such notice was
attached to such vehicle, pay to the York Police
Department the sum of thirty-five ($35.00) . The
failure of such owner or operator subject to the penalty
to make such payment within the ten (10) days shall
render such owner or operator subject to the penalty of
fifty dollars ($50.00) for and in full satisfaction of such
violation.
J. Collection of Revenue: The Park Trustees shall
designate such collectors and establish such methods as
may be necessary for the proper collection of all coins
monies deposited in kiosks. Such collectors shall be
only such employees as may be bonded by a sum of not
less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for their
duties. All monies so collected, meaning and including
fines and penalties, shall be deposited with the Town of
York.
K. Use of Revenue: All monies collected from parking
meters and received from fines and penalties from any
ordinance violations, shall be used exclusively for the
general operation, maintenance and improvement of the
Park at the direction of the Park Trustees.
L. Speed Limit: Vehicular traffic shall not exceed fifteen
(15) miles per hour, and shall proceed with caution at
all times and yield to pedestrian right of way.
M. Animals: Dogs, horses and/or any other domesticated
animals are prohibited outside the owner’s vehicle,
except that dogs restrained by a hand leash may be
allowed.
N. Commercial Vehicles: Commercial vehicles and
equipment are prohibited except where required for
maintenance and service of the Park
Town of York, Maine
Ellis Short Sands Park Ordinances – Revised May 14, 2018
Page 8 of 10
O. The use of Frisbees and the playing of other games that
which may endanger other persons are prohibited from
May 1 through October 15 of each year.
Section 4 AREA IV GRASSED AREAS, BOARDWALK and WALKWAYS -
The following restrictions and conditions shall apply to
Area IV of the Park:
A. Pedestrians shall have exclusive right of way within
these areas.
B. Motor vehicles, motor scooters and/or skateboards are
prohibited. Bicycles are not allowed within the gazebo
or pavilion.
C. Powered aircraft, including toys and models, shall not
be operated in these areas.
D. Playing of games such as hard or softball, football,
volleyball, soccer, lacrosse, golf iron horseshoes or any
other games that may endanger persons are prohibited
from May1 through October 15 of each year.
E. Dogs, cats, horses and/or any other domesticated
animals are prohibited except that dogs restrained by a
hand leash may be allowed.
Section 5 Damaging, vandalizing and/or defacing within the confines
of the Park is considered a criminal offense.
Section 6 VIOLATIONS/PENALTIES
Any person who violates this ordinance shall be subject to
civil penalty of $100.00 for the first offense, $150.00 for
the second offense, and $250.00 for the third and
subsequent offenses.
Section 7 WAIVER/PAYMENT OF FINES
Any person charged with a violation of this section, shall
be allowed to waive such violation and tender to the Town
of York the fine amount if paid within 20 days of issuance
of the summons. If the waiver fine is paid, no appearance
before a District Court Judge or other judicial officer shall
be required. If the offender pays the waiver fine, the matter
Town of York, Maine
Ellis Short Sands Park Ordinances – Revised May 14, 2018
Page 9 of 10
will be closed in the York Police Records system and listed
as a subsequent offense for future violations.
If the offender chooses not to pay the waiver fine, he/she
shall appear in court on the specified date to answer for the
ordinance violation. If the offender is found to have
committed the offense in court, fines, applicable court fees,
attorney’s fees, and prosecution costs may apply.
Section 8 These ordinances shall be in full effect upon approval by
the Ellis Short Sands Park Trustees and adoption by the
York Board of Selectmen. All preexisting ordinances, parts
of ordinances or regulations are hereby superseded.
Section 9 Amendment Procedure: Any amendment of these
ordinances shall be made as follows:
A. Because of the legal authority of the Ellis Short
Sands Park Trustees, the first step for any
proposed amendment is approval by the
Trustees. Upon voting to approve a proposed
amendment, the Trustees shall forward the
proposed amendment to the Board of Selectmen
for adoption as a town ordinance.
B. Upon receipt, the Board of Selectmen shall
conduct a public hearing on the Trustees’
proposed amendment.
C. Following the public hearing, the Board of
Selectmen shall vote to either adopt or reject the
proposed amendment. If adopted, the amended
ordinances shall take effect immediately. If
rejected, the then-current ordinances shall
remain in effect.
Town of York, Maine
Ellis Short Sands Park Ordinances – Revised May 14, 2018
Page 10 of 10
ELLIS SHORT SANDS PARK TRUSTEES Dated of Approval: 03/22/2011
John F. Matthews
William H. Burnham
Andrew T. Furlong, Jr.
John A. Garfield
Richard E. Boston
BOARD OF SELECTMEN Date of Adoption: 04/25/2011
Tracy Jackson-McCarty
Mary Andrews
Michael L. Estes
Edward W. Little

Town of York, Maine
Emergency Management Ordinance
Section 1. Title and Authority
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the Town of York's
Emergency Management Ordinance. It is authorized by 37B M.R.S. 781 - 834 as
may be amended.
Section 2. Intent and Purpose
A. It is the intent and purpose of this ordinance to establish an Office that will insure
the complete and efficient utilization of all the Town's facilities to combat
emergencies and disasters as defined herein.
B. The Town of York's Emergency Management Of f ic e will be the coordinating
agency for all activity in connection with civil emergency preparedness.
C. This ordinance will not relieve any town department of its normal legal
responsibilities or authority nor will it adversely affect the work of any
volunteer agency organized for relief in disaster emergencies.
D. This ordinance shall be administered in conjunction with the appropriate elements of
the Emergency Plan.
Section 3. Definitions
A. "Emergency Management" means the preparation for and the carrying out of all
emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily
responsible, to minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters or
catastrophes caused by enemy attacks, sabotage, riots or other hostile action, or by
fire, flood, earthquake or other natural or man-made causes. These functions include
without limitation, fire fighting, police, medical, health, emergency welfare, rescue,
engineering, warning and communications services; evacuation of persons from
stricken areas; economic stabilization; allocation of critical materials in short supply;
emergency transportation; existing or properly assigned functions of infrastructure
protection; other related to civilian protection and additional activities necessary to
the preparation for the carrying out of these functions.
B. "Disaster" means the occurrence of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of
life or property resulting from any natural or man-made cause, including, but not
limited to, fire, flood, earthquake, windstorm, wave action, oil spill, or other water
contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air
contamination, hazardous materials incident, blight, drought, critical material
Emergency Management Ordinance – Amended May 16, 2015
Page 1 of 5
Town of York, Maine
shortage and explosion; said occurrence(s) being of significant scope as to exceed
the normal ability of the town's resources tomitigate, respond to or recover from.
C. "Emergency" means any event which threatens to or actually inflicts damage to
people or property and which requires immediate action to mitigate, prevent,
control, contain or from which normal recovery is beyond the scope of the normal
resources of the town.
D. "Emergency Preparedness Forces" shall mean the employees, equipment and
facilities of all town departments, boards, and agencies; in addition, the term
includes all volunteer personnel, equipment and facilities contributed by or
obtained from volunteer persons or agencies.
E. "Emergency Preparedness Volunteer" shall mean any person duly registered,
identified, and appointed by the Town of York's EmergencyManagement Director.
F. "Director" shall mean the Town of York’s Emergency Management Director.
G. “Office” shall mean the Town of York’s Emergency Management Office.
H. “Emergency Plan” shall mean the Town of York’s Emergency Plan.
Section 4. Organization and Operation
A. Organization. The Director is hereby authorized to organize the Office utilizing to
the fullest extent possible the existing departments and agencies of the town.
B. Operation. The Director shall be th e executive head of the Office. The Director
shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen. The Director shall head the Office
and shall work under the general supervision of the Town Manager with the
concurrence of the Board of Selectmen. In emergency situations, the Director is
authorized to hire assistants and employees. Such hires shall be temporary and
shall not be considered full-time employees of the Town.
C. Administration. The Director shall administer the Office in accordance with the
provisions of this ordinance, the provisions of the Emergency Plan and any other
related policies adopted by the Board of Selectmen and the provisions of any
applicable state and federal laws and rules which may apply in a particular
emergency situation.
Section 5. Emergency Proclamation.
Whenever a local disaster exists or appears imminent, the Town Manager, or in the event
of his or her absence, the Chairperson of the Town of York's Board of Selectmen
Emergency Management Ordinance – Amended May 16, 2015
Page 2 of 5
Town of York, Maine
shall, by proclamation, declare that fact and that an emergency exists in the Town of
York. A copy of the proclamation shall be posted in the same manner as a warrant calling
a town meeting, with the return to be made by the person posting it and a copy of the
proclamation provided to the Town Clerk who shall retain it as a permanent record of the
Town.
Section 6. Emergency Powers and Duties
A. During any period when a local disaster has been proclaimed or when the
Governor has proclaimed a disaster pursuant to 37B M.R.S. 742, the Director may
promulgate such regulations as deemed necessary to protect life and property and
preserve critical resources. Such regulations may include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(1) Regulations prohibiting or restricting the movement of vehicles in order to
facilitate the work of Emergency Preparedness forces or to facilitate the mass
movement of persons from critical areas within the Town.
(2) Regulations pertaining to the movement of persons deemed vulnerable to
disaster or at risk.
(3) Such other regulations as may be necessary to preserve public health and
safety.
B. The Director may obtain vital supplies, equipment and other properties found
lacking and needed for the protection of health, life and property of the people and
may bind the Town for the fair value thereof.
C. The Director may require emergency services of any Town Officer or employee.
If regular Town forces are deemed inadequate, the Director may require the
services of such other personnel as can be obtained including citizen volunteers.
All duly authorized persons rendering emergency services shall be entitled to all
privileges and immunities provided by law.
D. The Board of Selectmen is authorized to compensate volunteer/call personnel for
time spent during a declared emergency involving the Town of York.
Section 7. Termination of Emergency
Whenever the Town Manager, or in the event of her or his absence, the Chairperson
of the Board of Selectmen, is satisfied that a local emergency or disaster no longer
exists, he or she shall terminate the emergency proclamation by posting another
proclamation so stating. The proclamation shall be posted in the same manner as the
original one with a copy to the Town Clerk. Local representatives of the news media
shall be advised of the termination of the emergency as soon as is practicable.
Emergency Management Ordinance – Amended May 16, 2015
Page 3 of 5
Town of York, Maine
Section 8. Duties of the Director
The Director shall be responsible to the Town Manager in regards to all phases of
Emergency Preparedness activity. The Director shall be responsible for planning,
coordinating and operating the Emergency Preparedness activity within the Town. The
Director shall maintain liaison with county, state and federal authorities and the
authorities of nearby municipalities to insure the most effective response to an
emergency. The duties of the Director shall include but not be limited to the
following:
A. Coordinating the recruitment of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the
personnel and facilities of the Town for response in an emergency.
B. Development of plans for the immediate use of all the facilities, equipment,
manpower and other resources of the Town for the purpose of minimizing or
preventing damage to persons and property; and protecting and restoring to
usefulness government services and public utilizes necessary for the public health,
safety and welfare.
C. Negotiating and concluding voluntary agreements with owners or persons in
control of buildings or other property for Emergency Preparedness purposes
and identifying suitable buildings for use as public shelters.
D. Through use of educational programs, informing the Town's population about
Emergency Preparedness matters and advising as to what actions should be
taken during an emergency to protect life and property.
E. From time to time, conducting public practice alerts and drills to familiarize
the Town's population with emergency response procedures.
F. Assuming such authority and conducting such activity as the Town Manager or
the Board of Selectmen may direct to promote and better execute Emergency
Preparedness activities.
Section 9. Emergency Plan
An Emergency Plan shall be adopted annually by the Board of Selectmen. An initial
draft Plan shall be prepared by the Director and the Town Manager. The Board of
Selectmen may amend this Plan prior to adoption. The Plan shall complement this
Ordinance and shall provide the framework within which Emergency Response
activities shall happen.
Emergency Management Ordinance – Amended May 16, 2015
Page 4 of 5
Town of York, Maine
Section 10. Violations
It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person to obstruct, hinder or delay
any member of the Emergency Preparedness Forces as herein defined in the
enforcement of any provision of this ordinance or any regulation promulgated under
its authority. Any person, firm or corporation found to have violated any provision of
this ordinance or any regulation promulgated under its authority in a court with
jurisdiction to act on a complaint from the Town shall be subject to a civil penalty of
$100.00 for the first offense, $150.00 for the second offense, and $250.00 for the third
and subsequent offenses.
Section 11. Waiver/Payment of Fines
Any person charged with a violation of this section, shall be allowed to waive such
violation and tender to the Town of York the fine amount if paid within 20 days of
issuance of the summons. If the waiver fine is paid, no appearance before a District
Court Judge or other judicial officer shall be required. If the offender pays the waiver
fine, the matter will be closed in the York Police Records system and listed as a
subsequent offense for future violations.
If the offender chooses not to pay the waiver fine, he/she shall appear in court on the
specified date to answer for the ordinance violation. If the offender is found to have
committed the offense in court, fines, applicable court fees, attorney’s fees, and
prosecution costs may apply.
Section 12. Severability
Should any provision of this ordinance be declared invalid for any reason by a court with
jurisdiction to do so, such a declaration shall not affect the validity of other provisions
of this ordinance or the ordinance as a whole it being the legislative intent that the
provisions of this ordinance shall be severable and shall remain valid not withstanding
such a judicial declaration against one provision.
Section 13. Conflicting Ordinances, Orders, Policies and Regulations
At all times during declared periods of emergency, the provisions of this ordinance shall
supersede all existing ordinances, orders, policies and regulations insofar as the later
may be inconsistent therewith.
Section 14. Effective Date
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon this passage by the voters at an annual
or special town meeting in the Town of York.
Emergency Management Ordinance – Amended May 16, 2015
Page 5 of 5

Town of York, Maine
FIREARMS SAFETY ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF YORK,MAINE
As Amended on May 16, 2015
Adopted by the Town of York, November 7th, 2000
SECTION 1 – TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known as the Firearms Safety Ordinance of the Town of York,
Maine.
SECTION 2 – PURPOSE
This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA § 3001 and the home rule authority
of the Town in order to provide safety to the population and the property of the Town and to
recognize responsible wildlife management.
SECTION 3 – DEFINITIONS
Firearm – “firearm” includes any instrument used in the propulsion of projectiles by action
of gunpowder or gas exploded or released within it.
Rifle – a firearm designed to be fired from the shoulder; firing center fire fixed ammunition,
propelling a single projectile through a rifled bore. Included in this definition of “rifle” are
those firearms commonly known as .22 Rim Fire Magnums and firing .22 Rim Fire Magnum
fixed ammunition.
SECTION 4 – REGULATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS
The following regulations and restrictions shall apply:
A. Restriction by Zone
Except as otherwise permitted by Paragraph 3, the discharge of firearms shall be
geographically restricted as follows:
Zone A – No discharge of firearms.
Zone B – No Restrictions except for Rifles, which shall be restricted during the State
of Maine open firearms season on deer.
Zone C – No restrictions.
The boundaries of all Zones shall be as defined on the “Firearms Safety Ordinance –
York, Maine; Effective Date: November 5, 2013” and a “Detailed Firearms Discharge
Map for the Lake Carolyn/Phillips Pond Area: November 5, 2013.” Written descriptions
Firearms Safety Ordinance – Amended May 16, 2015
Page 1 of 5
Town of York, Maine
of the zones are included in Appendix A, Zone Descriptions. In cases of conflict between
the map and the written descriptions, the map shall prevail.
B. Proximity to Dwellings and Occupied Structures
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge firearms of any kind or description in the
Town of York within 100 yards of a dwelling or occupied structure or which causes the
projectile(s) from such firearm to come within 100 yards of a dwelling or occupied
structure without having received prior consent from the owner and/or occupants of said
dwelling or occupied structure.
C. Exceptions
1. With prior written permission of the York Police Department, it shall be lawful to
discharge a firearm for rodent/pest control in Zone A.
2. Landowners, and their dependants, residing in Zone B on 25 or more contiguous
acres of agricultural, forested, or undeveloped land, are exempt from Section 4.A. of
this Ordinance while on said land.
3. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to prohibit the use of legal firearms
when justified for the protection of human life or property.
4. This Ordinance shall not be construed to prohibit the discharge of firearms by duly
authorized law enforcement officers in the proper exercise of their governmental
duties.
SECTION 5 – INDIVIDUAL RESPONSIBILITY
While the Town of York and other entities provide awareness and educational materials, it
remains the sole responsibility of the individual to fully familiarize him/her self with this
Ordinance and to comply with its requirements.
SECTION 6 – PUBLIC NOTICE
Upon adoption, the York Selectmen shall make all reasonable efforts to assure that the public
is made aware of the existence of this Ordinance. Signs shall be posted and maintained on
roads entering the Town of York at or near the Town line; on Route 1, Route 103, Bartlett
Road, Betty Welch Road, Frost Hill Road, Brixham Road, Route 91, Bell Marsh Road,
Mountain Road, Ogunquit Road, Shore Road, Pine Hill Road, Clay Hill Road, Chases Pond
Road near the Spur Road, and Route One north and south of the Spur Road.
SECTION 7 – ADMINISTRATION
A. Savings Clause
If any portion of this Ordinance is found to be invalid, it shall not affect the remainder of
this Ordinance.
B. Enforcement
Enforcement shall be the responsibility of the York Police Department.
Firearms Safety Ordinance – Amended May 16, 2015
Page 2 of 5
Town of York, Maine
C. Amendment
This Ordinance may be amended following the procedures specified in the Town of York
Home Rule Charter. Amendments shall become effective upon adoption unless
otherwise specified on the ballot question.
SECTION 8 – VIOLATION AND PENALTIES
Any person who violates this ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty of $100.00 for the
first offense, $250.00 for the second offense, and $500.00 for the third and subsequent
offenses. Each violation shall be considered a separate offense, and may be assessed whether
or not the violation was willful. In addition to police officers, employees of the Town of
York authorized to conduct inspections or investigations are hereby declared to be lawful
enforcement officers authorized to issue or file citations for violations under this Ordinance.
SECTION 9 –WAIVER/PAYMENT OF FINES
Any person charged with a violation of this section, shall be allowed to waive such violation
and tender to the Town of York the fine amount if paid within 20 days of issuance of the
summons. If the waiver fine is paid, no appearance before a District Court Judge or other
judicial officer shall be required. If the offender pays the waiver fine, the matter will be
closed in the York Police Records system and listed as a subsequent offense for future
violations.
If the offender chooses not to pay the waiver fine, he/she shall appear in court on the
specified date to answer for the ordinance violation. If the offender is found to have
committed the offense in court, fines, applicable court fees, attorney’s fees, and prosecution
costs may apply.
Ordinance Adopted: November 7, 2000
Ordinance Amended: May 16, 2015
November 5, 2013
Firearms Safety Ordinance – Amended May 16, 2015
Page 3 of 5
Town of York, Maine
Appendix A
Zone Descriptions
Zone A - NO DISCHARGE ZONE
(HIGHLIGHTED IN RED ON MAP)
The “No Discharge Zone” includes all of the areas on the map highlighted in red. The northern
boundary of the zone starts at the Atlantic Ocean and follows the northerly side of the Cape
Neddick River west to its intersection with Shore Road then north to the intersection of River
Road then west on River Road to RTE 1. The western boundary of the zone starts at the
intersection of River Road and RTE 1 and proceeds south on RTE 1 to the Spur Road
intersection where it then proceeds west to the intersection with RTE 95 (Maine Turnpike) and
the Spur Road. The western boundary then proceeds south along RTE 95 to the York River. The
southerly boundary starts at RTE 95 and follows the south side of the river east to its intersection
with Seabury Road at Sewall’s Bridge. The boundary then follows Seabury Road east to the
intersection of RTE 103 proceeds to Brave boat Harbor Road east to the intersection with
Western Point Road and then proceeds east along the river’s south side to the Atlantic Ocean .
The eastern boundary of this zone is the Atlantic Ocean. Additionally there is a “No Discharge
Zone “established for the water bodies referred to as Phillips Pond and Lake Carolyn both
located on Shore Road. This zone includes the water body and a buffer within 3oo feet around
those water bodies.
ZONE B - SHOTGUN ONLY
(HIGHLIGHTED IN GREEN ON MAP)
The “Shotgun Only Zone” includes all of the areas highlighted in green on the map. There all
several different areas of the Town included in this zone. The first section is located east of Shore
Road to the Atlantic Ocean from its intersection with the Cape Neddick River north to Ogunquit
line. This section also includes the area known as the Pine Mountain Subdivision. This
subdivision is the area located west of Shore Road from the intersection of Shore Road west
along Sylvan Circuit to Pine Mountain Road to the intersection with Shore Road (all area within
these boundaries). Another section covers the area west of Route 95 from the Mountain Road
overpass west to the intersection of Mountain Road then south along Chases Pond Road ,
Scituate Road and Bog Road to the intersection with Fall Mill Road. The boundary then travels
west along Fall Mill Road to the intersection of Route 91 and then proceeds west on RTE 91 to
the to the intersection of Scotland Bridge Road where it then travels south on Scotland Bridge
Road to the York River. The last section encompasses an area west on RTE 1 between it and RTE
95 (Maine Turnpike) from the Spur Road north on RTE 1 to its intersection with Newtown Road.
The boundary follows Newtown Road to the point where the road ends next to RTE 95 and
includes all land east of RTE 95 from that point back along RTE 95 to the Spur Road
intersection. The last section covers an area starting from the Atlantic Ocean south of the York
River to the Kittery town line then west to the Eliot town line and then north along the Eliot town
line to the York River.
Firearms Safety Ordinance – Amended May 16, 2015
Page 4 of 5
Town of York, Maine
ZONE C - UNRESTRICTED ZONE
(HIGHLIGHTED IN YELLOW ON MAP)
All areas within the Town of York highlighted in yellow on the map allow for unrestricted use of
firearms.
ZONE D – SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
(HIGHLIGHTED IN ORANGE ON MAP)
Several exceptions to the town’s firearms ordinance are areas under either state or federal law
which are highlighted in orange. One would be the area of posted “State Game Preserve” land
which prohibits hunting of any kind under state statute. This section includes the area east of
RTE 95 from the Clay Hill Road overpass following the Josias River to the Ogunquit town line
and then proceeding along that line back to RTE 95. The second area involves land under the
control of the Rachel Carson National Wildlife Refuge which allows hunting under a special
permit rule. This area is located between RTE 103 and Brave Boat Harbor Road and Raynes
Neck Road extending to the Kittery line.
Firearms Safety Ordinance – Amended May 16, 2015
Page 5 of 5

Town of York, Maine
Fireworks Ordinance
1. Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to control the use and sale of consumer
fireworks in order to protect public health, safety and welfare.
2. Authority. The Town has authority to enact an ordinance to prohibit or restrict the sale or
use of consumer fireworks per Title 8 M.R.S. §223-A.
3. Definitions. Terms used in this Ordinance shall be those defined in Title 8 M.R.S. §221-A.
In addition, the following shall apply.
Consumer Fireworks – has the same meaning as in 27 Code of Federal
Regulations, Section 555.11 or subsequent provision, but includes only
products that are tested and certified by a 3rd-party testing laboratory as
conforming with the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission
standards, in accordance with 15 United States Code, Chapter 47. “Consumer
fireworks” does not include the following products:
A. Missile-type rockets, as defined by the State Fire Marshal by rule;
B. Helicopters and aerial spinners, as defined by the State Fire Marshal by
rule; and
C. Sky rockets and bottle rockets. For purposes of this paragraph, “sky rockets and
bottle rockets” means cylindrical tubes containing not more than 20 grams of
chemical composition, as defined by the State Fire Marshal by rule, with a
wooden stick attached for guidance and stability that rise into the air upon
ignition and that may produce a burst of color or sound at or near the height of
flight.
Use – The lighting or other setting off of consumer fireworks.
4. Prohibition. The use and/or sale of consumer fireworks shall be prohibited within the
Town of York. (Note that use and sale of fireworks which are not included within the State
definition of consumer fireworks, including but not limited to bottle rockets and sky
rockets, are expressly prohibited or regulated by State law even though not addressed by
this Ordinance. In short, just because you can buy something elsewhere does not mean you
can use or sell it in York.)
5. Administration and Enforcement. The York Police Department shall administer and
enforce this Ordinance.
6. Penalties. Penalties shall be as follows:
A. Fine – Use of Consumer Fireworks. Use of consumer fireworks in violation of this
ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty of $100.00 for the first offense, $150.00
for the second offense, and $250.00 for the third and subsequent offenses within a 2
year period.
Fireworks Ordinance – AMENDED May 16, 2015
Page 1 of 2
Town of York, Maine
B. Fine – Sale of Consumer Fireworks. Sale of consumer fireworks in violation of this
ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty of $500.00 for the first offense plus
attorney costs, $1,000.00 for the second offense plus attorney costs, and $1,500.00
plus attorney costs for the third and subsequent offenses with a 2 year period.
C. Seizure of Fireworks. The Town may seize consumer fireworks that it has probable
cause to believe are to be used or sold in violation of this Ordinance. All fireworks
lawfully seized under this Ordinance shall be forfeited to the State per Title 8 M.R.S.
§237(2).
7. Waiver/Payment of Fines. Any person charged with a violation of this section, shall be
allowed to waive such violation and tender to the Town of York the fine amount if paid
within 20 days of issuance of the summons. If the waiver fine is paid, no appearance
before a District Court Judge or other judicial officer shall be required. If the offender pays
the waiver fine, the matter will be closed in the York Police Records system and listed as a
subsequent offense for future violations.
If the offender chooses not to pay the waiver fine, he/she shall appear in court on the
specified date to answer for the ordinance violation. If the offender is found to have
committed the offense in court, fines, applicable court fees, attorney’s fees, and prosecution
costs may apply.
8. Appeals. Appeals with respect to this Ordinance shall be taken to York County Superior
Court within 30 days.
9. Saving Clause. In the event any provision of this Ordinance is found by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, this finding shall not affect the remainder of this
Ordinance.
10. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall take effect on the date of passage by the voters.
11. Copy Provided to the State Fire Marshal. Per Title 8 M.R.S. §223-A(2), the Town Clerk
shall file a copy of this Ordinance, and any amendment thereto, with the State Fire Marshal
within 60 days of the relevant public vote.
Ordinance Adopted: May 19, 2012
Fireworks Ordinance – AMENDED May 16, 2015
Page 2 of 2

Town of York, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance: Amended May 19, 2012
1
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
Amended 5/19/2012
CONTENTS
ARTICLE PAGE
I. PURPOSE AND ESTABLISHMENT................................................................................ 2
II. PERMIT REQUIRED......................................................................................................... 2
III. APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.......................................................................................... 2
IV. FEES ................................................................................................................................... 4
V. REVIEW STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
APPLICATIONS ................................................................................................................ 5
VI. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ...................................................................................... 6
VII. CONDITIONAL USE REVIEW...................................................................................... 14
VIII. CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE................................................................................ 15
IX. REVIEW OF SUBDIVISIONS AND DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS ........................ 15
X. APPEALS AND VARIANCES........................................................................................ 16
XI. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES ............................................................................. 18
XII. VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY ................................................................................ 18
XIII. CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES................................................................... 18
XIV. DEFINITIONS.................................................................................................................. 19
XV. ABROGATION ................................................................................................................ 24
Town of York, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance: Amended May 19, 2012
2
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE AND ESTABLISHMENT
Certain areas of the Town of York, Maine are subject to periodic flooding, causing serious damages to
properties within these areas. Relief is available in the form of flood insurance as authorized by the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968.
Therefore, the Town of York, Maine has chosen to become a participating community in the National
Flood Insurance Program, and agrees to comply with the requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended) as delineated in this Floodplain Management Ordinance.
It is the intent of the Town of York, Maine to require the recognition and evaluation of flood hazards in
all official actions relating to land use in the floodplain areas having special flood hazards.
The Town of York has the legal authority to adopt land use and control measures to reduce future flood
losses pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA, Sections 3001-3007, 4352 and 4401-4407.
The National Flood Insurance Program, established in the aforesaid Act, provides that areas of the Town
of York having a special flood hazard be identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
that floodplain management measures be applied in such flood hazard areas. This Ordinance establishes a
Flood Hazard Development Permit system and review procedure for development activities in the
designated flood hazard areas of the Town of York, Maine.
The areas of special flood hazard, Zones A, AE, AO, and/or VE, are identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a report entitled "Flood Insurance Study - Town of York, Maine, York County,"
dated June 17, 2002 with accompanying "Flood Insurance Rate Map" dated June 17, 2002, which are
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE II - PERMIT REQUIRED
Before any construction or other development (as defined in Article XIV), including the placement of
manufactured homes, begins within any areas of special flood hazard established in Article I, a Flood
Hazard Development Permit shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer except as provided in
Article VII. This permit shall be in addition to any other permits, which may be required pursuant to the
codes and ordinances of the Town of York, Maine.
ARTICLE III - APPLICATION FOR PERMIT
The application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement
Officer and shall include:
A. The name, address and phone number of the applicant, owner, and contractor;
B. An address and a map indicating the location of the construction site;
C. A site plan showing location of existing and/or proposed development, including but not limited to
structures, sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, areas to be cut and filled, and lot
dimensions;
D. A statement of the intended use of the structure and/or development;
Town of York, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance: Amended May 19, 2012
3
E. A statement of the cost of the development including all materials and labor;
F. A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed;
G. Specification of dimensions of the proposed structure and/or development;
[Items H-K.3. apply only to new construction and substantial improvements.]
H. The elevation in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), or to a locally
established datum in Zone A only, of the:
1. base flood at the proposed site of all new or substantially improved structures, which is
determined:
a. in Zones AE, AO, and VE from data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study - Town of
York, Maine," as described in Article I; or,
b. in Zone A:
(1) from any base flood elevation data from federal, state, or other technical sources (such
as FEMA’s Quick-2 model, FEMA 265/July 1995), including information obtained
pursuant to Article VI.K. and IX.D.;
(2) from the contour elevation extrapolated from a best fit analysis of the floodplain
boundary when overlaid onto a USGS Quadrangle Map or other topographic map
prepared by a Professional Land Surveyor or registered professional engineer, if the
floodplain boundary has a significant correlation to the elevation contour line(s); or, in
the absence of all other data,
(3) to be the elevation of the ground at the intersection of the floodplain boundary and a
line perpendicular to the shoreline which passes along the ground through the site of the
proposed building.
2. highest and lowest grades at the site adjacent to the walls of the proposed building;
3. lowest floor, including basement; and whether or not such structures contain a basement; and,
4. level, in the case of non-residential structures only, to which the structure will be flood proofed;
I. A description of an elevation reference point established on the site of all developments for which
elevation standards apply as required in Article VI;
J. A written certification by a Professional Land Surveyor or registered professional engineer, that the
base flood elevation and grade elevations shown on the application are accurate;
K. The following certifications as required in Article VI by a registered professional engineer or
architect:
1. a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 81-65, 08/99, as amended), to verify that the
floodproofing methods for any non-residential structures will meet the floodproofing criteria of
Article III.H.4.; Article VI.G.; and other applicable standards in Article VI;
Town of York, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance: Amended May 19, 2012
4
2. a V-Zone Certificate to verify that the construction in coastal high hazard areas, Zone V and VE,
will meet the criteria of Article VI.P.; and other applicable standards in Article VI;
3. a Hydraulic Openings Certificate to verify that engineered hydraulic openings in foundation
walls will meet the standards of Article VI.L.2.a.;
4. a certified statement that bridges will meet the standards of Article VI.M.;
5. a certified statement that containment walls will meet the standards of Article VI.N.;
L. A description of the extent to which any water course will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development; and,
M. A statement of construction plans describing in detail how each applicable development standard in
Article VI will be met.
ARTICLE IV - FEES
A. Schedule of Fees.
Fees shall be charged for all permits and approvals required pursuant to this Ordinance.
1. The Board of Selectmen shall adopt a schedule of fees for applications. The Board of
Selectmen may amend the schedule as necessary. A public hearing shall be required prior
to adoption or amendment.
2. Fees shall reflect the costs associated with the Town’s cost of processing and administering
applications, including but not limited to secretarial time, postage, copying, supplies,
recording of meeting minutes, in-house staff reviews, and archiving of records, but not
including outsourced professional reviews because those costs are addressed separately
(see §IV.B).
3. The fees collected may be utilized as user-fees by the department or board that administers
the application process if expressly authorized by the Board of Selectmen in their adopted
Schedule of Fees.
4. The fees collected pursuant to this Ordinance shall be in addition to those fees required
pursuant to other Town ordinances and regulations, and shall be in addition to required
reimbursement for outsourced assistance.
B. Reimbursement for Outsourced Assistance.
The Town shall be authorized to secure independent professional assistance to ensure proper and
thorough review of applications, and construction inspection of approved projects. The applicant
shall pay the full cost of this professional service. Such costs shall be in addition to the
application fee (see §IV.A). All money received shall be deposited in a Town account. Any funds
not spent on such services shall be returned to the applicant. Failure to reimburse the Town for the
full cost of such assistance shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance and shall be grounds for
Town of York, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance: Amended May 19, 2012
5
suspending application review, issuance of a stop work order, or other necessary action as
provided for in this Ordinance.
ARTICLE V - REVIEW STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
APPLICATIONS
The Code Enforcement Officer shall:
A. Review all applications for the Flood Hazard Development Permit to assure that proposed
developments are reasonably safe from flooding and to determine that all pertinent requirements of
Article VI (Development Standards) have been, or will be met;
B. Utilize, in the review of all Flood Hazard Development Permit applications:
1. the base flood data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study - Town of York, Maine," as
described in Article I.;
2. in special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data are not provided, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and
floodway data from federal, state, or other technical sources, including information obtained
pursuant to Article III.H.1.b.; Article VI.K.; and Article IX.D., in order to administer Article VI
of this Ordinance; and,
3. when the community establishes a base flood elevation in a Zone A by methods outlined in
Article III.H.1.b., the community shall submit that data to the Maine Floodplain Management
Program in the State Planning Office.
C. Make interpretations of the location of boundaries of special flood hazard areas shown on the maps
described in Article I of this Ordinance;
D. In the review of Flood Hazard Development Permit applications, determine that all necessary permits
have been obtained from those federal, state, and local government agencies from which prior
approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344;
E. Notify adjacent municipalities, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Maine
Floodplain Management Program in the State Planning Office prior to any alteration or relocation of
a water course and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency;
F. If the application satisfies the requirements of this Ordinance, approve the issuance of one of the
following Flood Hazard Development Permits, based on the type of development:
1. A two-part Flood Hazard Development Permit for elevated structures. Part I shall authorize the
applicant to build a structure to and including the first horizontal floor only above the base flood
level. At that time the applicant shall provide the Code Enforcement Officer with a second
Elevation Certificate completed by a Professional Land Surveyor or registered professional
engineer based on the Part I permit construction, “as built”, for verifying compliance with the
elevation requirements of Article VI, paragraphs F, G, H, or P. Following review of the
Elevation Certificate data, which shall take place within 5 working days of receipt of the
Town of York, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance: Amended May 19, 2012
6
application, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue Part II of the Flood Hazard Development
Permit. Part II shall authorize the applicant to complete the construction project; or,
2. A Flood Hazard Development Permit for Floodproofing of Non-Residential Structures that are
new construction or substantially improved non-residential structures that are not being elevated
but that meet the floodproofing standards of Article VI.G.1.a.,b., and c. The application for this
permit shall include a Floodproofing Certificate signed by a registered professional engineer or
architect; or,
3. A Flood Hazard Development Permit for Minor Development for all development that is not new
construction or a substantial improvement, such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or
additions, whose value is less than 50% of the market value of the structure. Minor development
also includes, but is not limited to: accessory structures as provided for in Article VI.J., mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or
materials, deposition or extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or
water supply facilities that do not involve structures; and non-structural projects such as bridges,
dams, towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves, and piers.
For development that requires review and approval as a Conditional Use, as provided for in this
Ordinance, the Flood Hazard Development Permit Application shall be acted upon by the Planning Board
as required in Article VII.
G. Maintain, as a permanent record, copies of all Flood Hazard Development Permit Applications,
corresponding Permits issued, and data relevant thereto, including reports of the Board of Appeals on
variances granted under the provisions of Article X of this Ordinance, and copies of Elevation
Certificates, Floodproofing Certificates, Certificates of Compliance and certifications of design
standards required under the provisions of Articles III, VI, and VIII of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE VI - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
All developments in areas of special flood hazard shall meet the following applicable standards:
A. All Development - All development shall:
1. be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation (excluding piers and
docks), collapse or lateral movement of the development resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
2. use construction materials that are resistant to flood damage;
3. use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage; and,
4. use electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment, and other service
facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during flooding conditions.
B. Water Supply - All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems.
Town of York, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance: Amended May 19, 2012
7
C. Sanitary Sewage Systems - All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed and
located to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges from the
system into flood waters.
D. On Site Waste Disposal Systems - On site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed
to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during floods.
E. Watercourse Carrying Capacity - All development associated with altered or relocated portions of
a watercourse shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner that no reduction occurs in the
flood carrying capacity of the watercourse.
F. Residential - New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure located
within:
1. Zone AE shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least two feet above the
base flood elevation.
2. Zone AO shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwater
away from the proposed structures.
3. Zone AO shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent
grade:
a. at least two feet higher than the depth specified in feet on the community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map; or,
b. at least three feet if no depth number is specified.
4. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least two feet above the
base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article III.H.1.b.; Article V.B.; or
Article IX.D.
5. Zone VE shall meet the requirements of Article VI.P.
G. Non-Residential - New construction or substantial improvement of any non-residential structure
located within:
1. Zone AE shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least two feet above the
base flood elevation, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities shall:
a. be flood proofed to at least two feet above the base flood elevation so that below that
elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the
effects of buoyancy; and,
c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing design
and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for
meeting the provisions of this section. Such certification shall be provided with the
application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit, as required by Article III.K. and shall
Town of York, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance: Amended May 19, 2012
8
include a record of the elevation above mean sea level to which the structure is
floodproofed.
2. Zone AO shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwater
away from the proposed structures.
3. Zone AO shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent
grade:
a. at least two feet higher than the depth specified in feet on the community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map; or,
b. at least three feet if no depth number is specified; or,
c. together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be floodproofed to meet the elevation
requirements of this section and floodproofing standards of Article VI.G.1.
4. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least two feet above the
base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article III.H.1.b.; Article V.B.; or
Article IX.D., or
a. together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities meet the floodproofing standards of
Article VI.G.1.
5. Zone VE shall meet the requirements of Article VI.P.
H. Manufactured Homes - New or substantially improved manufactured homes located within:
1. Zone AE shall:
a. be elevated such that the lowest floor (including basement) of the manufactured home is at
least two feet above the base flood elevation;
b. be on a permanent foundation, which may be poured masonry slab or foundation walls, with
hydraulic openings, or may be reinforced piers or block supports, any of which support the
manufactured home so that no weight is supported by its wheels and axles; and,
c. be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to:
(1) over-the-top ties anchored to the ground at the four corners of the manufactured home,
plus two additional ties per side at intermediate points (manufactured homes less than
50 feet long require one additional tie per side); or by,
(2) frame ties at each corner of the home, plus five additional ties along each side at
intermediate points (manufactured homes less than 50 feet long require four additional
ties per side).
(3) all components of the anchoring system described in Article VI.H.1.c.(1)&(2) shall be
capable of carrying a force of 4800 pounds.
Town of York, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance: Amended May 19, 2012
9
2. Zone AO shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwater
away from the proposed structures.
3. Zone AO shall have the lowest floor (including basement) of the manufactured home elevated
above the highest adjacent grade:
a. at least two feet higher than the depth specified in feet on the community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map; or,
b. at least three feet if no depth number is specified; and,
c. meet the anchoring requirements of Article VI.H.1.c.
4. Zone A shall:
a. be elevated on a permanent foundation, as described in Article VI.H.1.b., such that the
lowest floor (including basement) of the manufactured home is at least two feet above the
base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article III.H.1.b.; Article
V.B; or Article IX.D.; and
b. meet the anchoring requirements of Article VI.H.1.c.
5. Zone VE shall meet the requirements of Article VI.P.
I. Recreational Vehicles - Recreational Vehicles located within:
1. Zone AE shall either:
a. be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,
b. be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use
if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or,
c. be permitted in accordance with the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured
homes" in Article VI.H.1.
2. Zone VE shall meet the requirements of either Article VI.I.1.a. or b., or Article VI.P.
J. Accessory Structures - Accessory Structures, as defined in Article XIV, located within Zones AE,
AO, and A, shall be exempt from the elevation criteria required in Article VI.F. & G. above, if all
other requirements of Article VI and all the following requirements are met. Accessory Structures
shall:
1. be 500 square feet or less and have a value less than $3000;
2. have unfinished interiors and not be used for human habitation;
3. have hydraulic openings, as specified in Article VI.L.2., in at least two different walls of the
accessory structure;
Town of York, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance: Amended May 19, 2012
10
4. be located outside the floodway;
5. when possible be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of floodwaters and be placed further from the source of flooding than is the
primary structure; and,
6. have only ground fault interrupt electrical outlets. The electric service disconnect shall be
located above the base flood elevation and when possible outside the Special Flood Hazard Area.
K. Floodways -
1. In Zone AE riverine areas, encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvement, and other development shall not be permitted within a regulatory floodway which
is designated on the community's “Flood Insurance Rate Map,” unless a technical evaluation
certified by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such
encroachments will not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
2. In Zones AE and A riverine areas, for which no regulatory floodway is designated,
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other
development shall not be permitted in the floodway as determined in Article VI.K.3. unless a
technical evaluation certified by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating
that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing
development and anticipated development:
a. will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
point within the community; and,
b. is consistent with the technical criteria contained in Chapter 5 entitled "Hydraulic Analyses,"
Flood Insurance Study - Guidelines and Specifications for Study Contractors, (FEMA 37/
January 1995, as amended).
3. In Zones AE and A riverine areas for which no regulatory floodway is designated, the regulatory
floodway is determined to be the channel of the river or other water course and the adjacent land
areas to a distance of one-half the width of the floodplain as measured from the normal high
water mark to the upland limit of the floodplain.
L. Enclosed Areas Below the Lowest Floor - New construction or substantial improvement of any
structure in Zones AE, AO, and A that meets the development standards of Article VI, including the
elevation requirements of Article VI, paragraphs F, G, or H and is elevated on posts, columns, piers,
piles, "stilts," or crawl spaces may be enclosed below the base flood elevation requirements provided
all the following criteria are met or exceeded:
1. Enclosed areas are not "basements" as defined in Article XIV;
2. Enclosed areas shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement
must either:
Town of York, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance: Amended May 19, 2012
11
a. be engineered and certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or,
b. meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(1) a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of the enclosed area;
(2) the bottom of all openings shall be below the base flood elevation and no higher than
one foot above the lowest grade; and,
(3) openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the entry and exit of floodwaters automatically without any
external influence or control such as human intervention, including the use of electrical
and other non-automatic mechanical means;
3. The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation; and,
4. The enclosed areas are usable solely for building access, parking of vehicles, or storage.
M. Bridges - New construction or substantial improvement of any bridge in Zones AE, AO, A, and VE
shall be designed such that:
1. when possible, the lowest horizontal member (excluding the pilings, or columns) is elevated to at
least two feet above the base flood elevation; and
2. a registered professional engineer shall certify that:
a. the structural design and methods of construction shall meet the elevation requirements of
this section and the floodway standards of Article VI.K.; and
b. the foundation and superstructure attached thereto are designed to resist flotation, collapse
and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all
structural components. Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base
flood.
N. Containment Walls - New construction or substantial improvement of any containment wall located
within:
1. Zones AE, A, and VE shall:
a. have the containment wall elevated to at least two feet above the base flood elevation;
b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the
effects of buoyancy; and,
c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the
provisions of this section. Such certification shall be provided with the application for a
Flood Hazard Development Permit, as required by Article III.K.
Town of York, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance: Amended May 19, 2012
12
2. Zone AO shall have adequate drainage paths around containment walls on slopes, to guide
floodwater away from the proposed walls.
3. Zone AO shall have the top of the containment wall elevated above the highest adjacent grade:
a. at least two feet higher than the depth specified in feet on the community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map; or,
b. at least three feet if no depth number is specified; and,
c. shall meet the requirements of Article VI.N.1.b. & c.
O. Wharves, Piers and Docks - New construction or substantial improvement of wharves, piers, and
docks are permitted in Zones AE, AO, A, and VE, in and over water and seaward of the mean high
tide if the following requirements are met:
1. wharves, piers, and docks shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations;
and
2. for commercial wharves, piers, and docks, a registered professional engineer shall develop or
review the structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction.
P. Coastal Floodplains -
1. All new construction located within Zones AE, A, and VE shall be located landward of the reach
of mean high tide except as provided in Article VI.P.6.
2. New construction or substantial improvement of any structure located within Zone Vl-30 or VE
shall:
a. be elevated on posts or columns such that:
(1) the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding the
pilings or columns) is elevated to two feet above the base flood elevation;
(2) the pile or column foundation and the elevated portion of the structure attached thereto
is anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the effects of wind
and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components; and,
(3) water loading values used shall be those associated with the base flood. Wind loading
values used shall be those required by applicable state and local building standards.
b. have the space below the lowest floor:
(1) free of obstructions; or,
(2) constructed with open wood lattice-work, or insect screening intended to collapse under
wind and water without causing collapse, displacement, or other structural damage to
the elevated portion of the building or supporting piles or columns; or,
Town of York, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance: Amended May 19, 2012
13
(3) constructed with non-supporting breakaway walls which have a design safe loading
resistance of not less than 10 or more than 20 pounds per square foot.
c. require a registered professional engineer or architect to:
(1) develop or review the structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction,
which must meet or exceed the technical criteria contained in the Coastal Construction
Manual, (FEMA-55/June, 2000); and,
(2) certify that the design and methods of construction to be used are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the criteria of Article VI.P.2.
3. The use of fill for structural support in Zone VE is prohibited.
4. Human alteration of sand dunes within Zone VE is prohibited unless it can be demonstrated that
such alterations will not increase potential flood damage.
5. The enclosed areas may be used solely for parking vehicles, building access, and storage.
6. Conditional Use - Lobster sheds and fishing sheds may be located seaward of mean high tide
and shall be exempt from the elevation requirement in Article VI.G. only if permitted as a
Conditional Use following review and approval by the Planning Board, as provided in Article
VII, and if all the following requirements and those of Article VI.A., VI.K., and VI.L. are met:
a. The conditional use shall be limited to low value structures such as metal or woodsheds 200
square feet or less and shall not exceed more than one story. In the A or AE zones, the floor
area limit shall not apply, but in the event the use as a Lobster Shed or Fishing Shed ceases
for 2 or more years then the building shall be razed.
b. The structure shall be securely anchored to the wharf or pier to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement due to the effect of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all
building components.
c. The structure will not adversely increase wave or debris impact forces affecting nearby
buildings.
d. The structure shall have unfinished interiors and shall not be used for human habitation.
e. Any mechanical, utility equipment and fuel storage tanks must be anchored and either
elevated or floodproofed to two feet above the base flood elevation.
f. All electrical outlets shall be ground fault interrupt type. The electrical service disconnect
shall be located on shore above the base flood elevation and when possible outside the
Special Flood Hazard Area.
Town of York, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance: Amended May 19, 2012
14
ARTICLE VII - CONDITIONAL USE REVIEW
The Planning Board shall hear and decide upon applications for conditional uses provided for in this
Ordinance. The Planning Board shall hear and approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove all
applications for conditional uses. An applicant informed by the Code Enforcement Officer that a
Conditional Use Permit is required shall file an application for the permit with the Planning Board.
A. Review Procedure for a Conditional Use Flood Hazard Development Permit
1. The Flood Hazard Development Permit Application with additional information attached
addressing how each of the conditional use criteria specified in the Ordinance will be satisfied,
may serve as the permit application for the Conditional Use Permit. In addition, the applicant
shall complete the standard Planning Board application form available from the Town. As is the
case for all applications to the Planning Board in York, the property owner shall be considered
the applicant for purposes of administration and enforcement of this Section of the Ordinance.
Further, there shall be no more than one active Planning Board application on a property at any
time. An application shall be considered active beginning at the initial submittal of an
application, and shall end when the Planning Board reaches its final decision on the application
and either: 1) if no appeal is filed, when the appeal deadline expires, or 2) if an appeal is filed,
when all activity relating to the appeal is completed and the matter is resolved. (Amended
11/4/03)
2. Before deciding any application, the Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on the
application within thirty days of their receipt of the application.
3. If the Planning Board finds that the application satisfies all relevant requirements of the
ordinance, the Planning Board must approve the application or approve with conditions within
45 days of the date of the public hearing.
4. A Conditional Use Permit issued under the provisions of this Ordinance shall expire if the work
or change involved is not commenced within 180 days of the issuance of the permit by the
Planning Board.
5. The applicant shall be notified by the Planning Board in writing over the signature of the
Chairman of the Planning Board that flood insurance is not available for structures located
entirely over water or seaward of mean high tide.
B. Expansion of Conditional Uses
1. No existing building or use of premises may be expanded or enlarged without a permit issued
under this section if that building or use was established or constructed under a previously issued
Conditional Use Permit or if it is a building or use which would require a Conditional Use Permit
if being newly-established or constructed under this Ordinance.
Town of York, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance: Amended May 19, 2012
15
ARTICLE VIII - CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
No land in a special flood hazard area shall be occupied or used and no structure, which is constructed or
substantially improved, shall be occupied until the Code Enforcement Officer subject to the following
provisions issues a Certificate of Compliance:
A. For New Construction or Substantial Improvement of any elevated structure the applicant shall
submit to the Code Enforcement Officer:
1. an Elevation Certificate completed by a Professional Land Surveyor or registered professional
engineer, for compliance with Article VI, paragraphs F, G, H, or P and,
2. for structures in Zone VE, certification by a registered professional engineer that the design and
methods of construction used are in compliance with Article VI.P.2.
B. The applicant shall submit written notification to the Code Enforcement Officer that the development
is complete and complies with the provisions of this ordinance.
C. Within 10 working days, the Code Enforcement Officer shall:
1. review the required certificate(s) and the applicant’s written notification; and,
2. upon determination that the development conforms with the provisions of this ordinance, shall
issue a Certificate of Compliance.
ARTICLE IX - REVIEW OF SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS
The Planning Board shall, when reviewing subdivisions and other proposed developments that require
review under other federal law, state law or local ordinances or regulations and all projects on 5 or more
disturbed acres, or in the case of manufactured home parks divided into two or more lots, assure that:
A. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
B. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages.
C. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
D. All proposals include base flood elevations, flood boundaries, and, in a riverine floodplain, floodway
data. These determinations shall be based on engineering practices recognized by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
E. Any proposed development plan must include a condition of plan approval requiring that structures
on any lot in the development having any portion of its land within a Special Flood Hazard Area are
to be constructed in accordance with Article VI of this ordinance. Such requirement will be included
in any deed, lease, purchase and sale agreement, or document transferring or expressing an intent to
transfer any interest in real estate or structure, including but not limited to a time-share interest. The
condition shall clearly articulate that the municipality may enforce any violation of the construction
requirement and that fact shall also be included in the deed or any other document previously
Town of York, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance: Amended May 19, 2012
16
described. The construction requirement shall also be clearly stated on any map, plat, or plan to be
signed by the Planning Board or local reviewing authority as part of the approval process.
ARTICLE X - APPEALS AND VARIANCES
The Board of Appeals of the Town of York may, upon written application of an aggrieved party, hear and
decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by, or failure to act by, the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board in the
administration of the provisions of this Ordinance.
The Board of Appeals may grant a variance from the requirements of this Ordinance consistent with state
law and the following criteria:
A. Variances shall not be granted within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge would result.
B. Variances shall be granted only upon:
1. a showing of good and sufficient cause; and,
2. a determination that should a flood comparable to the base flood occur, the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, public expense, or
create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances; and,
3. a showing that the issuance of the variance will not conflict with other state, federal or local laws
or ordinances; and,
4. a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in "undue hardship," which in this
sub-section means:
a. that the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is granted; and,
b. that the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not to the
general conditions in the neighborhood; and,
c. that the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality; and,
d. that the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner.
C. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief, and the Board of Appeals may impose such conditions
to a variance, as it deems necessary.
D. Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvements, or other development for
the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
1. other criteria of Article X and Article VI.K. are met; and,
Town of York, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance: Amended May 19, 2012
17
2. the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during
the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
E. Variances may be issued for the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of Historic
Structures upon the determination that:
1. the development meets the criteria of Article X, paragraphs A. through D. above; and,
2. the proposed repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration will not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as a Historic Structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
F. Any applicant who meets the criteria of Article X, paragraphs A. through E. shall be notified by the
Board of Appeals in writing over the signature of the Chairman of the Board of Appeals that:
1. the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in greatly
increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 per $100 of insurance
coverage;
2. such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property; and,
3. the applicant agrees in writing that the applicant is fully aware of all the risks inherent in the use
of land subject to flooding, assumes those risks and agrees to indemnify and defend the
municipality against any claims filed against it that are related to the applicant's decision to use
land located in a floodplain and that the applicant individually releases the municipality from any
claims the applicant may have against the municipality that are related to the use of land located
in a floodplain.
G. Appeal Procedure for Administrative and Variance Appeals
1. An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by an aggrieved
party within thirty days after receipt of a written decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or
Planning Board.
2. Upon being notified of an appeal, the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, as
appropriate, shall transmit to the Board of Appeals all of the papers constituting the record of the
decision being appealed.
3. The Board of Appeals shall schedule a public hearing on the appeal within sixty days of its
receipt of an appeal request.
4. The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
5. The Board of Appeals shall decide all appeals within thirty days after the close of the hearing,
and shall issue a written decision on all appeals.
6. The Board of Appeals shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer a report of all variance
actions, including justification for the granting of the variance and an authorization for the Code
Enforcement Officer to issue a Flood Hazard Development Permit, which includes any
conditions to be attached to said permit.
Town of York, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance: Amended May 19, 2012
18
7. Any aggrieved party who participated as a party during the proceedings before the Board of
Appeals may take an appeal to Superior Court in accordance with State laws within forty-five
days from the date of any decision of the Board of Appeals.
ARTICLE XI - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance
pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA § 4452.
B. The penalties contained in Title 30-A MRSA § 4452 shall apply to any violation of this Ordinance.
C. In addition to any other actions, the Code Enforcement Officer, upon determination that a violation
exists, shall submit a declaration to the Administrator of the Federal Insurance Administration
requesting a denial of flood insurance. The valid declaration shall consist of;
1. the name of the property owner and address or legal description of the property sufficient to
confirm its identity or location;
2. a clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in violation of a cited State or local law,
regulation, or ordinance;
3. a clear statement that the public body making the declaration has authority to do so and a citation
to that authority;
4. evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the violation and the prospective
denial of insurance; and,
5. a clear statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant to Section 1316 of the National
Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended.
ARTICLE XII - VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY
If any section or provision of this Ordinance is declared by the courts to be invalid, such decision shall not
invalidate any other section or provision of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE XIII - CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
This Ordinance shall not in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with any other
applicable rule, ordinance, regulation, bylaw, permit, or provision of law. Where this Ordinance imposes
a greater restriction upon the use of land, buildings, or structures, the provisions of this Ordinance shall
control.
Town of York, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance: Amended May 19, 2012
19
ARTICLE XIV - DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Ordinance shall have the same meaning
as they have at common law and to give this Ordinance its most reasonable application. Words used in
the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular. The word "may" is permissive; "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
Accessory Structure - means a small-detached structure that is incidental and subordinate to the principal
structure.
Adjacent Grade - means the natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
Area of Shallow Flooding - means a designated AO zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of Special Flood Hazard - means the land in the floodplain having a one percent or greater chance
of flooding in any given year, as specifically identified in the Flood Insurance Study cited in Article I of
this Ordinance.
Base Flood - means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year, commonly called the 100-year flood.
Basement - means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Breakaway Wall - means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended
through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing
damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
Building - see Structure.
Certificate of Compliance - A document signed by the Code Enforcement Officer stating that a structure
is in compliance with all of the provisions of this Ordinance.
Code Enforcement Officer - any person or board responsible for performing the inspection, licensing,
and enforcement duties required by a particular statute or ordinance.
Conditional Use - means a use that because of its potential impact on surrounding areas and structures is
permitted only upon review and approval by the Planning Board pursuant to Article VII.
Development - means any change caused by individuals or entities to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction of buildings or other structures; the construction of
additions or substantial improvements to buildings or other structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading,
paving, excavation, drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials; and the storage, deposition,
or extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities.
Town of York, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance: Amended May 19, 2012
20
Elevated Building - means a non-basement building
a. built, in the case of a building in Zones AE, A, or AO, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the
case of a building in Zone VE, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the
elevated floor, elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns, post, piers, or "stilts;"
and
b. adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to
two feet above the magnitude of the base flood.
In the case of Zones AE, A, or AO, Elevated Building also includes a building elevated by means of fill
or solid foundation perimeter walls with hydraulic openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of flood waters, as required in Article VI.L. In the case of Zone VE, Elevated Building also
includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of elevated building, even though the lower area is
enclosed by means of breakaway walls, if the breakaway walls meet the standards of Article VI.P.2.b.(3).
Elevation Certificate - An official form (FEMA Form 81-31, 07/00, as amended) that:
a. is used to verify compliance with the floodplain management regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program; and,
b. is required for purchasing flood insurance.
Flood or Flooding - means:
a. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
2. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
b. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of
erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or
suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a
severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or
by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in paragraph
a.1. of this definition.
Flood Elevation Study - means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if
appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - means an official map of a community, on which the Federal
Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study - see Flood Elevation Study.
Floodplain or Flood-prone Area - means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from
any source (see flooding).
Town of York, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance: Amended May 19, 2012
21
Floodplain Management - means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive
measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works, and floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain Management Regulations - means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building
codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance,
and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or
local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
Floodproofing - means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real
property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents.
Floodway - see Regulatory Floodway.
Floodway Encroachment Lines - mean the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal, state, and
local floodplain maps.
Freeboard - means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of
floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors, such as wave
action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed, that could contribute
to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions.
Functionally Dependent Use - means a use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is
located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities
that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Historic Structure - means any structure that is:
a. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
b. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical
significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of
the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district;
c. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs
which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
d. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation
programs that have been certified either:
1. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or
2. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Locally Established Datum - means, for purposes of this ordinance, an elevation established for a
specific site to which all other elevations at the site are referenced. This elevation is generally not
Town of York, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance: Amended May 19, 2012
22
referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or any other established datum and is used
in areas where Mean Sea Level data is too far from a specific site to be practically used.
Lowest Floor - means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished
or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not
built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements
described in Article VI.L. of this Ordinance.
Manufactured Home - means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term manufactured home also includes park
trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision - means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into
two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean Sea Level - means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate map are referenced.
Minor Development - means all development that is not new construction or a substantial improvement,
such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or additions, whose value is less than 50% of the market value
of the structure. It also includes, but is not limited to: accessory structures as provided for in Article VI.J.,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or
materials, deposition or extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply
facilities that do not involve structures; and non-structural projects such as bridges, dams, towers, fencing,
pipelines, wharves, and piers.
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) - means the national vertical datum, whose standard was
established in 1929, which is used by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). NGVD was based
upon mean sea level in 1929 and also has been called “1929 Mean Sea Level (MSL)”.
New Construction - means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the
effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
100-year flood - see Base Flood.
Recreational Vehicle - means a vehicle which is:
a. built on a single chassis;
b. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, not including slideouts;
c. designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a motor vehicle; and
d. designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Town of York, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance: Amended May 19, 2012
23
Regulatory Floodway -
a. means the channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved
in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than one foot, and
b. when not designated on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map, it is considered to be the
channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas to a distance of one-half the width
of the floodplain, as measured from the normal high water mark to the upland limit of the floodplain.
Riverine - means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special Flood Hazard Area - see Area of Special Flood Hazard.
Start of Construction - means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial improvement or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of
piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not
occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, or modification of any construction element, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
Structure - means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building. A gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground is also a structure.
Substantial Damage - means, damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring
the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement - means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the
start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures, which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
a. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
b. Any alteration of a Historic Structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure, and a variance is obtained from the Board of Appeals.
Variance - means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management
regulation.
Town of York, Maine
Floodplain Management Ordinance: Amended May 19, 2012
24
Violation - means the failure of a structure or development to comply with a community's floodplain
management regulations.
ARTICLE XV - ABROGATION
This ordinance repeals and replaces any municipal ordinance previously enacted to comply with the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended).
Adopted May 18, 2002
Amended November 5, 2002
Amended November 4, 2003
Amended November 8, 2005
Amended May 19, 2012

GENERAL
ASSISTANCE
ORDINANCE
ALSO SEE: GENERAL ASSISTANCE
ORDINANCE APPENDICES
Prepared by Maine Municipal Association
September 2013

TABLE OF CONTENTS
GENERAL ASSISTANCE ORDINANCE
Article I – Statement of Policy ......................................................................................... 1
Article II – Definitions ...................................................................................................... 3
Section 2.1 – Common Meaning of Words .................................................................... 3
Section 2.2 – Special Definitions ................................................................................... 3
Applicant .................................................................................................................. 3
Application Form ...................................................................................................... 3
Basic Necessities .................................................................................................... 3
Case Record............................................................................................................ 4
Categorical Assistance ............................................................................................ 4
Claimant .................................................................................................................. 4
Deficit ...................................................................................................................... 4
Disabled Person ...................................................................................................... 5
Dwelling Unit............................................................................................................ 5
Eligible Person ......................................................................................................... 5
Emergency .............................................................................................................. 5
General Assistance Program ................................................................................... 5
General Assistance Administrator ........................................................................... 5
Household ............................................................................................................... 6
Income ..................................................................................................................... 6
Initial Applicants ....................................................................................................... 8
Just Cause............................................................................................................... 8
Lump Sum Payment ................................................................................................ 8
Material Fact ............................................................................................................ 8
Maximum Levels of Assistance ............................................................................... 8
Misconduct .............................................................................................................. 8
i
Municipality .............................................................................................................. 9
Municipality of Responsibility ................................................................................... 9
Need ........................................................................................................................ 9
Net General Assistance Costs ................................................................................. 9
Period of Eligibility ................................................................................................... 9
Pooling of Income .................................................................................................... 9
Real Estate .............................................................................................................. 9
Recipient ............................................................................................................... 10
Repeat Applicants ................................................................................................. 10
Resident ................................................................................................................ 10
Resources ............................................................................................................. 10
30-Day Need ......................................................................................................... 11
Unforeseen Repeat Applicants .............................................................................. 11
Unmet Need .......................................................................................................... 11
Work Requirements ............................................................................................... 11
Article III – Administrative Rules and Regulations ......................................................... 13
Section 3.1 – Confidentiality of Information ................................................................. 13
Release of Information .......................................................................................... 13
Information from Other Sources; Penalty .............................................................. 13
Misuse of Information ............................................................................................ 14
Section 3.2 – Maintenance of Records ....................................................................... 14
Case Records ........................................................................................................ 14
Retention of Records ............................................................................................. 15
Article IV – Application Procedure ................................................................................. 16
Section 4.1 – Right to Apply ........................................................................................ 16
Who May Apply ..................................................................................................... 16
Application Via Telephone ..................................................................................... 16
Written Application Upon Each Request ................................................................ 16
ii
Applications Accepted; Posted Notice ................................................................... 17
Section 4.2 – Application Interview ............................................................................. 17
Section 4.3 – Contents of the Application ................................................................... 17
Section 4.4 – General Assistance Administrator’s Responsibilities at the Time
of the Application ..................................................................................................... 18
Application Requirements ...................................................................................... 18
Eligibility Requirements ......................................................................................... 19
Applicant Rights ..................................................................................................... 19
Reimbursement/Recovery ..................................................................................... 19
Section 4.5 – Responsibilities of the Applicant at the Time of Application .................. 20
Section 4.6 – Action on Applications ........................................................................... 21
Written Decision ....................................................................................................... 21
Content ..................................................................................................................... 21
Section 4.7 – Withdrawal of an Application ................................................................. 22
Section 4.8 – Temporary Refusal to Accept Application ............................................. 22
Section 4.9 – Emergencies ......................................................................................... 23
Disqualification ......................................................................................................... 23
Assistance Prior to Verification ................................................................................. 24
Telephone Applications ............................................................................................ 24
Limitation on Emergency Assistance ....................................................................... 24
Section 4.10 – Residence .......................................................................................... 26
Moving/Relocating ................................................................................................... 26
Institutions ............................................................................................................... 26
Temporary Housing ................................................................................................. 27
Disputes ................................................................................................................... 27
Article V – Eligibility Factors ............................................................................................ 28
Section 5.1 – Initial Application ................................................................................... 28
Initial Application ...................................................................................................... 28
Subsequent Applicants............................................................................................. 28
iii
Section 5.2 – Eligibility for Categorical Assistance ...................................................... 29
Section 5.3 – Personal Property ................................................................................. 29
a) Liquid Assets ........................................................................................................ 29
b) Tangible Assets ................................................................................................... 30
c) Automobile Ownership ......................................................................................... 30
d) Insurance ............................................................................................................. 31
e) Transfer of Property ............................................................................................. 31
Section 5.4 – Ownership of Real Estate ...................................................................... 31
a) Principal Residence ............................................................................................. 31
b) Other Property ..................................................................................................... 33
Section 5.5 – Work Requirement ................................................................................ 33
Employment; Rehabilitation ...................................................................................... 33
Verification ............................................................................................................... 34
Ineligibility ................................................................................................................. 34
Ineligibility Due to Job Quit or Discharge for Misconduct ......................................... 35
Just Cause ............................................................................................................... 35
Applicant’s Burden of Establishing Just Cause ........................................................ 36
Eligibility Regained ................................................................................................... 36
Dependents .............................................................................................................. 36
Exemptions .............................................................................................................. 37
Section 5.6 – Municipal Work Program ....................................................................... 37
Consent .................................................................................................................... 38
Subtracting Value of Workfare Performed from Client’s GA Debt ............................ 38
Limitations ................................................................................................................ 38
“Workfare First” Policy ............................................................................................. 40
Work-Related Expenses........................................................................................... 42
Disqualification ......................................................................................................... 42
Eligibility Regained ................................................................................................... 42
Reports ..................................................................................................................... 43
iv
Section 5.7 – Use of Resources .................................................................................. 44
Minors ...................................................................................................................... 44
Mental or Physical Disability ..................................................................................... 45
Written Notice; Disqualification ................................................................................. 45
Forfeiture of Benefits ................................................................................................ 46
Section 5.8 – Period of Ineligibility .............................................................................. 46
Work Requirement ................................................................................................... 46
Fraud ........................................................................................................................ 47
Section 5.9 – Unemployment Fraud ........................................................................... 47
Article VI – Determination of Eligibility ........................................................................... 48
Section 6.1 – Recognition of Dignity and Rights ......................................................... 48
Section 6.2 – Determination; Redetermination ............................................................ 48
Section 6.3 – Verification ............................................................................................ 49
Eligibility of applicant; duration of eligibility ............................................................... 49
Applicant’s responsibilities ....................................................................................... 49
Initial Applicants ....................................................................................................... 49
Repeat Applicants .................................................................................................... 50
Unforeseen Repeat Applicants ................................................................................. 50
Overseer’s responsibilities ....................................................................................... 50
Redetermination of eligibility .................................................................................... 51
Penalty for Refusing to Release Information ............................................................ 52
Section 6.4 – Fraud ..................................................................................................... 52
Period of Ineligibility ................................................................................................. 52
Right to a Fair Hearing ............................................................................................. 53
Reimbursement ........................................................................................................ 53
Dependents .............................................................................................................. 53
Section 6.5 – Period of Eligibility ................................................................................. 54
Section 6.6 – Determination of Need .......................................................................... 54
Income for Basic Necessities ................................................................................... 55
v
Use-of-Income Requirements .................................................................................. 56
Calculation of Income and Expenses ....................................................................... 57
Consolidation of Deficit............................................................................................. 58
Section 6.7 – Income .................................................................................................. 58
Income Standards .................................................................................................... 58
Calculation of Income ............................................................................................... 59
Types of Income ....................................................................................................... 59
a) Earned income................................................................................................ 59
b) Income from Other Assistance or Social Services Programs ......................... 60
c) Court-Ordered Support Payments .................................................................. 61
d) Income from Other Sources ............................................................................ 61
e) Earnings of a Son or Daughter ....................................................................... 61
f) Income from Household Members ................................................................... 61
g) The Pooling or Non-Pooling of Income ........................................................... 62
h) Lump Sum Income .......................................................................................... 62
Section 6.8 – Basic Necessities; Maximum Levels of Assistance ............................... 64
Overall Maximum Levels of Assistance .................................................................... 64
Maximum Levels of Assistance for Specific Basic Necessities ................................ 64
A) Food .............................................................................................................. 65
B) Housing ......................................................................................................... 66
Rental Payments to Relatives ....................................................................... 66
Rental Payments to Non-Relatives ................................................................ 67
Mortgage Payments ...................................................................................... 67
Liens .............................................................................................................. 69
Property Taxes .............................................................................................. 70
Housing Maximums ....................................................................................... 71
C) Utilities .......................................................................................................... 72
Electricity Maximums for Households Without Electric Hot Water ................. 72
Electricity Maximums for Households that Use Electrically Heated
Hot Water ................................................................................................. 73
vi
Non-Electric Utilities ...................................................................................... 73
D) Fuel ............................................................................................................... 73
E) Personal Care and Household Supplies ........................................................ 73
F) Other Basic Necessities ................................................................................ 74
1) Clothing ..................................................................................................... 74
2) Medical ...................................................................................................... 74
3) Hospital Bills .............................................................................................. 75
4) Dental ........................................................................................................ 76
5) Eye Care ................................................................................................... 76
6) Telephone Charge ..................................................................................... 77
7) Work-Related Expenses ............................................................................ 77
8) Travel Expenses ........................................................................................ 77
9) Burials, Cremations ................................................................................... 77
10) Capital Improvements ............................................................................... 78
Section 6.9 – Burials; Cremations ............................................................................... 78
Funeral Director Must Give Timely Notice ............................................................. 78
Application for Assistance Shall be Calculated on Behalf of the Deceased ........... 79
The Financial Responsibility of Certain Family Members ...................................... 79
Consideration of the Financial Responsibility of Family Members ......................... 80
Proration of Familial Responsibility ........................................................................ 80
Eight Days to Determine Eligibility ......................................................................... 81
The Municipal Obligation to Pay When Legally Liable Relatives or Others
Can Contribute ................................................................................................ 81
Burial Expenses ..................................................................................................... 81
Cremation Expenses ............................................................................................. 82
Section 6.10 – Notice of Decision ............................................................................... 82
Written Decision .................................................................................................... 82
Contents ................................................................................................................ 82
Disbursement of General Assistance .................................................................... 83
vii
Article VII – The Fair Hearing........................................................................................ 84
Section 7.1 – Right to a Fair Hearing .......................................................................... 84
Section 7.2 – Method of Obtaining a Fair Hearing ...................................................... 84
Written Request ..................................................................................................... 84
Scheduling the Fair Hearing .................................................................................. 85
Section 7.3 – The Fair Hearing Authority .................................................................... 85
Section 7.4 – Fair Hearing Procedure ......................................................................... 86
Claimant’s Failure to Appear ................................................................................. 87
Section 7.5 – The Fair Hearing Decision ..................................................................... 88
Article VIII – Recovery of Expenses ............................................................................. 90
Recipients ................................................................................................................... 90
Recipients Anticipating Workers’ Compensation Benefits ........................................... 90
Recipients of SSI ........................................................................................................ 91
Relatives ..................................................................................................................... 91
Article IX – Severability................................................................................................. 92
Appendixes
Appendix A – GA Overall Maximums
Appendix B – Food Maximums
Appendix C – GA Housing Maximums
Appendix D – Electric Utility Maximums
Appendix E – Heating Fuel
Appendix F – Household & Personal Items
Appendix G –Mileage Rate
Appendix H – Funeral Maximums
Appendix I – Definition of Misconduct (26 MRSA § 1043(23))
viii
ARTICLE I
Statement of Policy
The Municipality of York administers a program of general assistance (GA) available to
all persons who are eligible to receive assistance in accordance with the standards of
eligibility as provided within this ordinance, Department of Health and Human Services
(DHHS) GA policy and in 22 M.R.S.A. § 4301 et seq.
Every effort will be made to recognize the dignity of the applicant while encouraging
self-reliance. The program will strive to help eligible persons achieve self-maintenance
by promoting the work incentive. When possible, it will seek to alleviate needs other
than financial through rehabilitative, preventive and protective services. The general
assistance program will place no unreasonable restrictions on the personal rights of the
applicant or recipient, nor will there be any unlawful discrimination based on sex, age,
race, nationality, religion, sexual orientation or disability. The municipality is committed
to including qualified individuals with disabilities, in municipal services, programs, and
activities. As a result, the municipality will promote a GA program that when viewed in
its entirety, is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities. GA
applicants with physical or mental disabilities that require a reasonable accommodation
in order to access and/or utilize the municipal GA program are encouraged to provide
the municipality with advance notice regarding the accommodation request.
The general assistance administrator will act promptly on all applications for assistance
and requests for fair hearings. GA applicants will be provided information regarding
their rights and responsibilities under the GA program. Within 24 hours of receiving an
application, the administrator will provide the applicant a written decision, whether or not
assistance is granted, that will state the specific reasons for the decision. The
administrator will also provide the applicant written notice that the applicant may appeal
to the municipal fair hearing authority if dissatisfied with the decision. When an
applicant is determined to be eligible, assistance appropriate to the need will be
1
furnished within 24 hours after the completed application is submitted except when the
administrator issues non-emergency assistance conditionally on the successful
completion of a workfare assignment (see section 5.6 of this ordinance).
The administrator will maintain complete and accurate records pertaining to each
applicant and recipient. These records are confidential as a matter of law (see 22
MRSA §4306).
The administrator will post notice stating the day(s) and hours the administrator will be
available. The administrator, or other designated person/entity, will be available to take
applications in the event of an emergency at all other times. A copy of this ordinance
and Maine General Assistance law will be readily available to any member of the public
upon request. Notice to this effect will be posted.
2
ARTICLE II
Definitions
Section 2.1—Common Meaning of Words
Unless otherwise apparent or defined, all words in this ordinance will have their
common meaning.
Section 2.2—Special Definitions
Applicant. A person who has submitted, either directly or through an authorized
representative, an application for general assistance or who has, in an emergency,
requested assistance without first completing an application. In addition, all persons on
whose behalf an authorized application has been submitted or on whose behalf benefits
have been granted shall be considered applicants.
Application Form. A standardized form used by the general assistance administrator for
the purpose of allowing a person to apply for general assistance and confirming the fact
that a person has made application. The application form must be signed by the
applicant to be considered complete.
Basic Necessities. Food, clothing, shelter, fuel, electricity, non-elective essential
medical services as prescribed by a physician, nonprescription drugs, basic telephone
service where it is necessary for medical reasons, property taxes when a tax lien placed
on the property threatens the loss of the applicant’s place of residence, and any other
commodity or service determined essential by the municipality.
“Basic necessities” do not include:
• Phone bills
• Cable or satellite dish
television
• Mail orders
• Vehicle payments
• Credit card debt**
• Furniture
• Loan re-payments**
3
• Cigarettes
• Alcohol
• Pet care costs
• Vacation costs
• Legal fees
• Late fees
• Key deposits
• Security deposits for rental
property(except for those
situations where no other
permanent lodging is
available unless a security
deposit is paid, and a waiver,
deferral or installment
arrangement cannot be made
between the landlord and
tenant to satisfy the need for
the immediate payment of the
security deposit or payment in
full) (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(1)).
**Repayments of loans or credit will be treated as having been spent on basic
necessities when the applicant can provide verification of this fact.
Case Record. An official file containing application forms; correspondence; narrative
records and all other communications pertaining to an applicant or recipient; written
decisions regarding eligibility including reasons for those decisions as well as the types
and amounts of assistance provided; and all records concerning an applicant’s request
for fair hearing and those fair hearing decisions.
Categorical Assistance. All state and federal income maintenance programs.
Claimant. A person who has requested a fair hearing.
Deficit. An applicant’s deficit is the appropriate overall maximum level of assistance for
the household as provided in section 6.8 of this ordinance less the household income as
calculated pursuant to section 6.7 of this ordinance, provided such a calculation yields a
positive number. If the household income is greater than the appropriate overall
maximum level of assistance, the household has no deficit.
4
Disabled Person. A person who is presently unable to work or maintain a home due to
a physical or mental disability that is verified by a physician or qualified mental health
provider.
Dwelling Unit. A building or part thereof used for separate living quarters for one or
more persons living as a single housekeeping unit (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(2)).
Eligible Person. A person who is qualified to receive general assistance from the
municipality according to the standards of eligibility set forth in this ordinance (22
M.R.S.A. § 4301(3)). “Eligible Person” does not include a fugitive from justice as
defined in 15 M.R.S.A. § 201(4).
Emergency. Any life threatening situation or a situation beyond the control of the
individual which, if not alleviated immediately, could reasonably be expected to pose a
threat to the health or safety of a person At the municipality’s option, a situation which is
imminent and which may result in undue hardship or unnecessary cost to the individual
or municipality if not resolved immediately. (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4301(4), 4308(2), 4310).
General Assistance Program. A service administered by a municipality for the
immediate aid of persons who are unable to provide the basic necessities essential to
maintain themselves or their families. A general assistance program provides a specific
amount and type of aid for defined needs during a limited period of time and is not
intended to be a continuing “grant-in-aid” or “categorical” welfare program. This
definition shall not in any way lessen the responsibility of each municipality to provide
general assistance to a person each time that the person is in need and is found to be
otherwise eligible to receive general assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(5)).
General Assistance Administrator. A municipal official designated to receive
applications, make decisions concerning an applicant’s right to receive assistance, and
prepare records and communications concerning assistance. He or she may be an
elected overseer or an authorized agent such as a town manager, welfare director, or
caseworker (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(12)).
5
Household. “Household” means an individual or a group of individuals who share a
dwelling unit. When an applicant shares a dwelling unit with one or more individuals,
even when a landlord-tenant relationship may exist between individuals residing in the
dwelling unit, eligible applicants may receive assistance for no more than their pro rata
share of the actual costs of the shared basic needs of that household according to the
maximum levels of assistance established in the municipal ordinance. The pro rata
share is calculated by dividing the maximum level of assistance available to the entire
household by the total number of household members. The income of household
members not legally liable shall be considered as available to the applicant only when
there is a pooling of income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(6)).
Income. “Income” means any form of income in cash or in kind received by the
household including:
• Net remuneration for services
performed
• Cash received on either
secured or unsecured credit
• Payments received as an
annuity, retirement or
disability benefits
• Veterans’ pensions and/or
benefits
• Retirement accounts or
benefits
• Workers’ compensation
• Unemployment benefits
• Federal and/or state tax
returns
• Benefits under any state or
federal categorical assistance
program such as, TANF,
Supplemental Security
Income, Social Security and
any other payments from
governmental sources (unless
specifically prohibited by any
law or regulation)
• Court ordered support
payments, e.g., child support
• Income from pension or trust
funds
• Household income from any
other source, including
relatives or unrelated
household members
• Student loans
• Rental income
6
The following items shall not be considered as income or assets that must be liquidated
for the purposes of deriving income:
1) Real or personal income-producing property, tools of trade, governmental
entitlement specifically treated as exempt assets by state or federal law;
2) Actual work-related expenses, whether itemized or by standard deduction, such
as taxes, retirement fund contributions, union dues, transportation costs to and
from work, special equipment costs and child care expenses; or
3) Earned income of children below the age of 18 years who are full-time students
and who are not working full time.
In determining need, the period of time used as a basis for the calculation shall
be a 30-day period commencing on the date of the application. This prospective
calculation shall not disqualify an applicant who has exhausted income to
purchase basic necessities, provided that the income does not exceed the
income standards established by the municipality (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)).
4) Certain public benefit programs are specifically exempt from being counted as
income for purposes of GA. These programs include:
• Food Stamps (7 USCS § 2017(b))
• Li-Heap (42 USCS § 8624)
• Family Development Accounts (22 M.R.S. § 3762)
• Americorp VISTA program benefits (42 USCS § 5044 (f))
• Property tax rebates issued under the Maine Property Tax Fairness
Credit program, only so long as the money is spent on basic
necessities. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7))
• Aspire Support Service Payments (10-144 CMR Chapter 323)
7
Initial Applicant. A person who has not applied for assistance in this or any other
municipality is considered an initial applicant.
Just Cause. A valid, verifiable reason that hinders an individual from complying with
one or more conditions of eligibility or from attending a scheduled fair hearing (22
M.R.S.A. § § 4301(8), 4316-A(5)).
Lump Sum Payment. A one-time or typically nonrecurring sum of money issued to an
applicant or recipient. Lump sum payment includes, but is not limited to, retroactive or
settlement portions of social security benefits, workers' compensation payments,
unemployment benefits, disability income, veterans' benefits, severance pay benefits, or
money received from inheritances, lottery winnings, personal injury awards, property
damage claims or divorce settlements. A lump sum payment includes only the amount
of money available to the applicant after payment of required deductions has been
made from the gross lump sum payment. A lump sum payment does not include
conversion of a non-liquid resource to a liquid resource if the liquid resource has been
used or is intended to be used to replace the converted resource or for other necessary
expenses. (22 MRSA § 4301 (8-A)).
Material Fact. A material fact is a fact that necessarily has some bearing on the
determination of an applicant’s general assistance eligibility, and which would, if
disclosed to the administrator, have some determinable effect on the calculation of
eligibility or the issuance of a grant of assistance.
Maximum Levels of Assistance. The amount of financial assistance for a commodity or
service as established in section 6.8 of this ordinance or the actual cost of any such
basic necessity, whichever is less.
Misconduct. For purposes of the GA work requirement (see 22 MRSA §4316-A)
misconduct shall have the same meaning as misconduct defined in 26 MRSA §1043
(23). (See Appendix I of this ordinance for the official definition of misconduct.)
Generally, employees are guilty of misconduct when the employee violates his or her
8
duties or obligations to the employer. Employees who engage in a pattern of
irresponsible behavior to the detriment of the employer’s interest may also be found
guilty of misconduct.
Municipality. Any city, town or plantation administering a general assistance program.
Municipality of Responsibility. The municipality which is financially liable for the support
of an eligible person at the time of application (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4301(9), 4307).
Need. The condition whereby a person’s income, money, property, credit, assets or
other resources available to provide basic necessities for the individual and the
individual’s family are less than the maximum levels of assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § §
4301(10), 4308).
Net General Assistance Costs. Those direct costs incurred by a municipality in
providing assistance to eligible persons according to standards established by the
municipal officers. These do not include the administrative expenses of the general
assistance program (22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4301(11), 4311).
Period of Eligibility. The time for which a person has been granted assistance. The
period of eligibility may vary depending on the type of assistance provided, however, in
no event shall this period extend beyond one month (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(1)).
Pooling of Income. “Pooling of income” means the financial relationship among
household members who are not legally liable for mutual support in which there occurs
any commingling of funds or sharing of income or expenses. Municipalities may by
ordinance establish as a rebuttable presumption that persons sharing the same dwelling
unit are pooling their income. Applicants who are requesting that the determination of
eligibility be calculated as though one or more household members are not pooling their
income have the burden of rebutting the presumed pooling of income.
Real Estate. Any land, buildings, homes, mobile homes and any other things affixed to
the land (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(13)).
9
Recipient. A person who has applied for and is currently receiving general assistance.
Repeat Applicants. All applicants for general assistance that are not initial applicants
are repeat applicants. For purposes of this ordinance repeat and subsequent shall have
the same meaning.
Resident. A person who is physically present in a municipality with the intention of
remaining in that municipality in order to maintain or establish a home and who has no
other residence. A person who applies for assistance in a municipality who is not a
resident of that municipality or any other municipality is the responsibility of the
municipality where the person first applies. That municipality must take an application
and grant assistance to the applicant if he/she is eligible, until he/she establishes a new
residence in another municipality (22 M.R.S.A. § 4307).
Resources. Resources include any program, service, or other sources of support which
are an alternative to or supplement for general assistance. There are two kinds of
resources: “available” and “potential”. Potential resources are programs, services, nonliquid
assets, or trusts that typically require people to apply in writing and/or wait a
period of time before eligibility is determined or the potential income is released.
Potential resources include but are not limited to any state or federal assistance
program, employment benefits, governmental or private pension program, available
trust funds, support from legally liable relatives, child support payments, and jointly held
resources where the applicant or recipient share may be available to the individual
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4317). Potential resources include the TANF (previously known as
AFDC) program, Food Stamps, fuel assistance (HEAP), subsidized housing, and similar
programs.
Available resources include resources which are immediately available to the applicant
or which can be conveniently secured by the applicant without delay, such as cash on
hand or in bank accounts, assets for which there is an immediate and available market,
or support from relatives which is being made available at the time of application and for
10
which the applicant does not have to take any unreasonable steps to secure (e.g.,
relocation beyond the immediate region). At the discretion of the GA administrator a
necessary minimum balance required by a financial institution in order to obtain free
checking or in order to maintain the account shall not be considered an available
resource.
The municipal GA administrator reserves the right to inform GA clients of services,
commodities or facilities made available by private organizations or charities. Although
GA applicants/recipients may be informed of the existence of a charitable resource
and/or organization, GA eligibility shall not be based or conditioned on the use of a
private charitable resource(s).
30-Day Need. An applicant’s 30-day need is the sum of the household’s prospective
30-day costs, from the date of application, for the various basic necessities. For the
purpose of this calculation, the 30-day cost for any basic need shall be the household’s
actual 30-day cost for the basic necessity or the maximum 30-day cost for the basic
necessity as established by this ordinance, whichever is less.
Unforeseen Repeat Applicants. Are repeat applicants who have not applied for
assistance within the last twelve months and who have been regularly employed or
receiving support from a public benefit or private source and who have unexpectedly
become unemployed through no fault of their own or whose benefits (e.g., through an
available resource) have ceased through no fault of their own.
Unmet Need. An applicant’s unmet need is the household’s 30-day need as
established by section 6.6 of the ordinance less the household income as calculated
pursuant to section 6.7 of this ordinance, provided such a calculation yields a positive
number. If the household income is greater than the household’s 30-day need, the
household does not have an unmet need.
Work Requirements. Work requirements are those obligations the municipal
administrator places on applicants for general assistance as directed and/or authorized
11
by 22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A to the extent such obligations ensure a continuing potential
eligibility for general assistance when complied with, result in ineligibility when violated,
and are not merely optional, discretionary, or advisory. Work requirements include
registering for work, looking for work in good faith, accepting all suitable job offers,
maintaining employment, performing workfare, and participating in training, educational,
or rehabilitation programs that will assist the participant in securing employment.
12
ARTICLE III
Administrative Rules and Regulations
The following are rules and regulations for the administration of general assistance.
Section 3.1—Confidentiality of Information
Case records and all other information relating to an applicant or recipient of general
assistance are confidential and will not be disclosed to the general public, unless the
applicant or recipient states in writing what information is to be released (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4306).
Release of Information. Applicants, recipients and their legal representatives have the
right to review their case records. No record will be released to a third party, however,
unless the administrator receives a consent form signed by the applicant expressly
authorizing the release of his or her records to the specified parties. Whenever the
administrator releases any information, he/she will make a notation in the applicant’s file
stating to whom the record was released and the date. The administrator may charge a
reasonable fee for the reproduction of any records when appropriate.
Information from Other Sources; Penalty. Information furnished to the municipality by
the Department of Health and Human Services or any other agency or institution
pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4314, is confidential. The general assistance administrator
will also comply with laws relating to the confidentiality of vital statistic records such as
those concerning birth, marriage and death. (22 M.R.S.A. § 2706).
Any representative of a financial institution (except national banks) or any employer of a
general assistance applicant who refuses to provide necessary information to the
administrator in order to verify an applicant’s eligibility must state in writing the reason
for the refusal. Any such person who refuses to provide information, without just cause,
may be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $25 nor more than $100. Any person,
including the applicant, who knowingly and willfully makes a false representation of a
13
material fact to the administrator is committing a Class E crime (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4314,
4315).
Misuse of Information. Misuse of any information relating to an applicant or recipient is
a punishable offense (22 M.R.S.A. § 42(2)).
Section 3.2—Maintenance of Records
The general assistance administrator will keep complete and accurate general
assistance records (22 M.R.S.A. § 4306). These records are necessary to:
a) provide a valid basis of accounting for municipal expenditures;
b) document and support decisions concerning an applicant or recipient; and
c) ensure the availability of all relevant information in the event of a fair hearing or
judicial review of a decision by the general assistance administrator.
Case Records. The administrator will establish and maintain a separate case record,
either in paper format or digital format for each applicant or recipient. Each case record
will include at least:
• household applications
• budget sheets
• information concerning the
types and amounts of
assistance provided
• narrative statements
describing the nature of the
emergency situation
whenever general assistance
is granted in amounts greater
than the applicant’s
mathematical eligibility (i.e.,
deficit or unmet need,
whichever is less)
• written decisions
• requests for fair hearings and
the fair hearing authority
decisions
• workfare participation records
• repayments to the
municipality
• narrative writings
documenting the need for
general assistance, the
14
results of home visits,
collateral information,
referrals, changes in status
• client authorization(s) for the
release of GA information
and/or reason(s) for the
release of confidential
information
• adjustments in aid, and
suspension or termination of
eligibility
• physician’s documentation
• Supplemental Security
Income (SSI) interim
assistance reimbursement
authorization forms
• vendor forms
Case records will not include information or material that is irrelevant to either the
applicant’s or recipient’s application or the administrator’s decisions.
Retention of Records. General assistance records shall be retained for a minimum of
three full years. The three year period shall coincide with the State’s fiscal year which
begins July 1 and ends on the following June 30. Records may be destroyed after three
years by one of the two preferred methods of destruction for confidential records, i.e.,
supervised shredding, burning or appropriate digital deletion/destruction process. In the
event a client’s records contain SSI reimbursement forms, the client’s records should be
maintained so that the municipality may seek reimbursement.
15
ARTICLE IV
Application Procedure
Section 4.1—Right to Apply
Who May Apply. Anyone may apply for general assistance. The head of the family,
any other responsible household member, or an authorized representative must apply in
person, except in special emergency situations as provided in section 4.9 of this
ordinance or except when the applicant is a resident of an emergency shelter and the
municipality has made an agreement with that emergency shelter to presume shelter
residents to be eligible for general assistance (22 M.R.S.A. §4304(3)). In such cases,
the administrator may require a representative to present a signed statement
documenting that he/she is in fact authorized to apply for general assistance on behalf
of the named applicant. The applicant or representative must complete a written
application and any other required forms so that the administrator can determine
eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4305, 4308). With notice, all members of the household
receiving general assistance may be required to physically present themselves to the
administrator. Note that fugitives from justice are ineligible for general assistance.
Application Via Telephone. When a person has an emergency but is unable to apply in
person due to illness, disability, lack of child care, lack of transportation or other good
cause, and he/she cannot send an authorized representative, the administrator will
accept an application by telephone. The telephone application process will include the
administrator receiving written verification by mail and visiting the applicant’s home with
his or her permission (22 M.R.S.A. § 4304).
Written Application Upon Each Request. Each request for assistance will be
administered in accordance with these guidelines. The administrator will make an
independent determination of eligibility for general assistance each time a person
applies (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4308, 4309).
16
Applications Accepted; Posted Notice. Application forms will be available during regular
business hours at the municipal office and when the general assistance administrator is
conducting interviews with applicants. Notice will be posted stating when and where
people may apply for assistance and the name of the administrator available to take
emergency applications at all other times. In addition, the posted notice shall include
the fact that the municipality must issue a written decision on all applications within 24
hours, and the DHHS toll-free telephone numbers for reporting alleged violations or
complaints. Completed applications will be accepted and interviews given only during
the regular hours established and posted by the administrator. In an emergency,
however, the administrator or his or her designee will be available to accept applications
for assistance whenever necessary (22 M.R.S.A. § 4304).
Section 4.2—Application Interview
Except when it is impractical, the general assistance administrator will interview each
applicant personally before making a decision. The interview will be conducted in
private, although the applicant may be accompanied by a legal representative, friend or
family member.
Section 4.3—Contents of the Application
At a minimum, the application will contain the following mandatory information:
a) applicant’s name, address, date of
birth, Social Security number or
appropriate United States Customs
and Immigration Services (USCIS)
documentation, and phone number;
b) names, date(s) of birth, and Social
Security number(s) or appropriate
USCIS documentation of other
household members for whom the
applicant is seeking assistance;
c) total number of individuals living with
the applicant;
d) employment and employability
information;
17
e) all household income, resources,
assets, and property;
f) household expenses;
g) types of assistance being requested;
h) penalty for false representation;
i) applicant’s permission to verify
information;
j) signature of applicant and date.
In the event an initial applicant is unable to provide identification records (e.g., Social
Security card/number) because the record may have been lost, stolen or misplaced, the
initial applicant may be provided a reasonable amount of time, e.g., five working days, in
order to obtain copies of identification records. Provided the initial applicant makes a
good faith effort to obtain the item/record sought, GA required to cure an immediate
and/or emergency need shall not be withheld. In such cases the municipality may elect
to provide only a prorated amount of GA, e.g., five day’s worth, while the applicant
proceeds to obtain the required information.
Section 4.4—General Assistance Administrator’s Responsibilities at the Time of the
Application
The administrator will make every effort to inform all applicants of their rights and
responsibilities as well as the general program requirements associated with applying
for and receiving general assistance, including application requirements, eligibility
guidelines, applicant rights, and applicant reimbursement obligations.
Application Requirements. The administrator will help the applicant fill out the
application form as described in the preceding section. The administrator will inform the
applicant of any other information or documentation that the applicant will have to
provide in order for the administrator to evaluate the applicant’s eligibility for assistance.
The administrator will fully explain the purpose of any release of information form or
reimbursement agreement before seeking to obtain the applicant’s signature or written
authorization.
18
Eligibility Requirements. The administrator will inform, either verbally or in writing, the
applicant of the eligibility requirements of the program, including:
• the income standard of need;
• the applicant’s ongoing use-of-income, work-related, and resource-related
responsibilities, as described in the section immediately below;
• the financial reduction in assistance that is the consequence of spending
household income on non-basic necessities; and
• the disqualification penalties associated with committing fraud, failing to perform
work-related assignments without just cause, or failing to make a good faith
effort to secure potential resources when the requirement to attempt to obtain
those resources has been explained to the applicant in writing.
Applicant Rights. The administrator will inform all applicants of their rights to:
• review the municipal General Assistance ordinance and Maine General
Assistance law;
• apply for assistance;
• receive a written decision concerning eligibility within 24 hours of applying for
assistance;
• confidentiality;
• contact the DHHS;
• challenge the administrator’s decision by requesting a fair hearing.
Reimbursement/Recovery. The administrator will inform the applicant that he/she must
reimburse the municipality for the amount of general assistance he/she has been
granted in the event of a subsequent ability to pay. The municipality may also, as
appropriate, contact the client’s legal representative to inform him or her of the client’s
obligation to repay the municipality under the GA program. In addition to seeking
repayment from a recipient, the municipality also may recover the amount of assistance
granted to a recipient during the previous 12 months from any relative legally liable for
19
the applicant’s support (spouses, parents of persons under the age of 25, see Article
VIII, “Recovery of Expenses”) (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4318, 4319). Whenever applicable, the
administrator will explain the various liens a municipality may place against a recipient’s
real or personal property, such as the mortgage or capital improvement lien, the
Workers’ Compensation lump sum payment lien, or the SSI “interim assistance
agreement” lien, as these liens are described in Article VIII, “Recovery of Expenses”.
Section 4.5—Responsibilities of the Applicant at the Time of Application
The applicant has the responsibility at the time of each application to provide accurate,
complete and current household information and verifiable documentation concerning:
• Income
• Resources
• Assets
• Employment
• Use of income
• Names and addresses of any relatives legally liable for the applicant’s
support
• Any change in this information from a previous application that would
affect household eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. §4309).
In addition, the applicant must accurately report and provide verifiable documentation
that shows the applicant:
a) has remained employed, if previously employed, and not quit work without
just cause or been discharged from employment for misconduct;
b) has been seeking employment, if previously unemployed or employed on a
part-time basis, has accepted any suitable offer of employment, and has
satisfactorily performed all workfare assignments or had just cause not to
perform those assignments;
20
c) has made use of all available and potential resources when directed in
writing to such a program by the administrator, including, but not limited to,
other government benefit programs or the assistance of liable relatives of
sufficient means; and
d) has participated in any training, retraining, educational or rehabilitative
program when appropriate and when directed in writing to such a program
by the administrator, in order to diminish the applicant’s need for general
assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § §4316-A, 4317).
Section 4.6—Action on Applications
Written Decision. The general assistance administrator will give a written decision to
the applicant concerning his or her eligibility within 24 hours after the applicant submits
a written application. Assistance will be furnished to eligible applicants within that period
except when the municipality is permitted by law (and pursuant to section 5.6 of this
ordinance) to issue assistance conditionally on the successful completion of a workfare
assignment (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4305, 4316-A, 4321). A written decision will be given
each time a person applies, whether assistance is granted, denied, reduced or
terminated.
Content. The written decision will contain the following information:
a) the type and amount of aid the applicant is being granted or the applicant’s
ineligibility;
b) the period of eligibility if the applicant is eligible for assistance;
c) the specific reasons for the decision;
d) the applicant’s right to a fair hearing; and
21
e) the applicant’s right to notify the DHHS if he/she believes the municipality has
acted illegally (22 M.R.S.A. § 4321).
Section 4.7—Withdrawal of an Application
An application is considered withdrawn if:
a) the applicant requests in writing that his or her application be withdrawn; or
b) the applicant refuses to complete or sign the application or any other form
needed by the general assistance administrator.
Section 4.8—Temporary Refusal to Accept Application
Under special circumstances, the general assistance administrator may temporarily
refuse to accept applications. Such circumstances may include, but are not limited to,
the following:
a) When the applicant’s conduct is abusive, disruptive, or harassing, or when the
applicant is under the influence of drugs or alcohol. In these situations, the
applicant will be asked to leave, and if the applicant refuses to leave, the police
may be summoned. The applicant will be informed that an application will only
be accepted when his or her conduct is under control.
b) If the administrator believes that an applicant’s behavior presents a threat to the
health or safety of the public or to a municipal employee, or if such behavior is
violent, or if an applicant has engaged in abusive, disruptive or harassing
behavior and has been required to leave on more than one occasion, then the
applicant may be required to designate a third party to apply for assistance on his
or her behalf and the applicant may be prohibited from entering the municipal
building;
22
c) When a third person applies for assistance on behalf of the applicant that person
may be required to provide written verification that he/she has been duly
authorized to act as a representative for the applicant (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308).
Section 4.9—Emergencies
An emergency is considered to be any life threatening situation or a situation beyond
the control of the applicant which if not alleviated immediately could reasonably be
expected to pose a threat to the health or safety of the applicant or a member of the
household (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(4)). Although they may be considered otherwise
ineligible to receive general assistance, persons who apply for assistance to alleviate an
emergency may be granted assistance, except as provided below, if they do not have
sufficient income and resources to meet an actual emergency need and have not had
sufficient income and resources to avert the emergency (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308).
A municipality may provide emergency assistance when the municipality determines
that an emergency is imminent and that failure to provide assistance may result in
undue hardship and unnecessary costs to either the client or the municipality.
Disqualification. A person who is currently disqualified from receiving General
Assistance due to a violation of sections 5.5, 5.6, 5.7, 5.8, 5.9 or 6.4 of this ordinance is
ineligible to receive emergency assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(2)(A)). However,
dependents of a disqualified person may be eligible for assistance. For the purposes of
this section, “dependents” are defined as: 1) a dependent minor child; 2) an elderly, ill or
disabled person; or 3) a person whose presence is required to provide care for any child
under the age of 6 years or any ill or disabled member of the household (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4309(3)).
In the event one or more members of a household are disqualified and assistance is
requested for the remaining dependents, the eligibility of those dependents will be
calculated by dividing the maximum level of assistance available to the entire household
by the total number of household members.
23
Assistance Prior to Verification. Whenever an applicant informs the administrator that
he/she needs assistance immediately, the administrator will grant, pending verification,
the assistance within 24 hours, provided that:
a) after interviewing the applicant the administrator has determined that the
applicant will probably be eligible for assistance after a verification of information
is completed; and
b) the applicant submits documentation when possible, to verify his or her need.
The administrator may contact at least one other person to confirm the
applicant’s statements about needing emergency assistance. No further
assistance will be authorized until the applicant’s eligibility is confirmed (22
M.R.S.A. § 4310).
Telephone Applications. If a person has an emergency need and cannot apply in
person due to illness, disability, lack of transportation, or other good cause, and if there
is no authorized representative who can apply on behalf of the applicant, the
administrator shall accept an application over the telephone (22 M.R.S.A. § 4304).
The administrator will not grant any assistance as the result of a telephone application if
the applicant refuses to allow the administrator to verify the information either by visiting
his or her home or by mail and the administrator cannot determine his or her eligibility
through any other means.
Limitation on Emergency Assistance. Applicants are not automatically eligible for
emergency assistance. If applicants had income which could have been used to
prevent all or part of an emergency, but they spent that income on items which are not
basic necessities, they will not be eligible to receive general assistance to replace the
misspent money (22 MRSA § § 4308(2) & 4315-A).
All applicants have the responsibility to provide the administrator with verifiable
documentation demonstrating that the applicant did not have sufficient income to avert
24
the emergency situation. According to the following criteria, the administrator may limit
emergency assistance to cover only the difference between the amount of money
necessary for the household to avoid the emergency and the amount of income
available to the household during the applicable time period.
a) The applicable time period shall be the 30 days preceding the application for
emergency assistance, except in those cases where the emergency was created
by a negative account balance for a commodity or service (such as rent,
mortgage or utility payments), and the negative account balance was created
over a longer period of time. In such cases, the applicable time period shall be
the consecutive length of time the account balance has been in the negative.
b) The administrator shall seek from the applicant all information pertinent to the
applicant’s ability to provide for his or her basic necessities for the applicable
time period, including evidence of all income and resources received over that
period of time.
c) The administrator shall calculate all costs for the household’s basic necessities
during the applicable time period, per month, in accordance with the maximum
levels established by this ordinance for the specific basic necessity or the actual
monthly cost, whichever is less, including all costs associated with averting the
particular emergency situation for which the applicant is seeking assistance.
d) From the total household costs for basic necessities during the applicable time
period, the administrator shall subtract the total income and lump sum payments
available to the household for the applicable time period as well as the total
general assistance actually received during the applicable time period.
e) The administrator may restrict the issuance of emergency assistance to the
difference yielded by the computation in subsection (d), even when such a grant
will not totally alleviate the emergency situation.
25
f) The administrator may waive this limitation on emergency assistance in life
threatening situations or for initial applicants; that is, persons who have never
before applied for general assistance.
g) Nothing in these criteria may be construed as prohibiting a municipality from
electing to alleviate an emergency situation in the most cost-effective manner
available, provided such a determination of eligibility for emergency assistance is
in conformance with general assistance law.
Section 4.10—Residence
The administrator shall provide general assistance to all eligible persons applying for
assistance who are residents of this municipality. A resident is a person who has no
other residence and is physically present in this municipality and who intends to remain
here and establish a household.
The municipality also recognizes its responsibility to provide assistance to eligible
persons who apply here and who are not residents of this municipality or any other
municipality. If a person who is not a resident of any municipality applies in this
municipality first, the administrator will determine his or her eligibility and, if eligible, will
grant assistance until he/she establishes a residence in another municipality (22
M.R.S.A. § 4307).
Moving/Relocating. The municipality will not consider moving or transporting an
applicant or recipient into another municipality unless the person requests assistance to
relocate to another municipality. If the administrator determines the applicant is eligible
and grants financial assistance to help with the requested relocation, this municipality
will be responsible for providing assistance to the applicant for 30 days after he/she
moves provided the recipient remains eligible.
Institutions. If a resident of this municipality enters an institution located in another
municipality (such as a group home, shelter, rehabilitation center, nursing home, or
26
hospital) and requests assistance while at the institution, he/she will be the
responsibility of this municipality for up to 6 months after he/she enters the institution if
the conditions of 22 M.R.S.A. § 4307 and §4313 are met. The municipality thereafter
retains responsibility for an applicant in an institution only if the applicant has
maintained a home in this municipality to which he/she intends to return. The
municipality also recognizes its responsibility for applicants residing in an institution in
this municipality if such an applicant had no residence prior to entering the institution
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4307(4)).
Temporary Housing. Hotels/motels and similar places of temporary lodging are
considered institutions if the municipality grants financial assistance for, makes
arrangements for, or advises or encourages an applicant to stay in temporary lodging.
Note: Municipalities which illegally deny housing assistance and, as a result of the
denial, the applicant stays in temporary lodging are responsible for the applicant for up
to 6 months and may be subject to other penalties (22 M.R.S.A. § 4307(4)).
Disputes. When the administrator believes that an applicant is a resident of another
municipality but that municipality disputes its responsibility the administrator will notify
the DHHS in Augusta (287-3654 or 1-800-442-6003). If the applicant applies in this
municipality first, the administrator will determine his or her eligibility and, if eligible, will
grant assistance until the DHHS has concluded which municipality is responsible for
providing assistance. If another municipality was responsible, the DHHS will recover
the amount due from the other municipality. (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4307(5), 4307(6)).
27
ARTICLE V
Eligibility Factors
A person will be eligible for general assistance if he/she is in need and has complied
with the eligibility requirements set forth below.
Section 5.1—Initial Application
Initial Application. For initial applicants, except as provided immediately below, need
will be the sole condition of eligibility. The exception to this general rule, as provided by
law, applies to all applicants, including initial applicants, who are disqualified for a
defined period for quitting employment without just cause or for being discharged from
employment for misconduct (22 M.R.S.A. § 1043 (23)) (see section 5.5 of this
ordinance) and to fugitives from justice as defined in 15 M.R.S.A. § 201(4) (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4301(3)). An initial applicant is a person who has never before applied for general
assistance in any municipality in Maine (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(1)).
“Need” means that the applicant’s income (including prorated income, where
applicable), property, credit, assets or other resources are less than the overall
maximum level of assistance contained in section 6.8 of this ordinance or the
applicant’s 30-day need, whichever is less, and he/she does not have adequate income
or other resources available to provide basic necessities.
Subsequent Applicants. Persons who are not initial applicants are repeat applicants.
Repeat applicants are people who have applied for general assistance at any time in
the past. Repeat applicants are also people on whose behalf a general assistance
application was made at any time in the past, provided that at such a time the applicant
was not a dependent minor in the household. For repeat applicants to be eligible for
general assistance, they must be in need and meet all other eligibility requirements. The
eligibility of repeat applicants may also be adversely affected to the extent they have not
used their income and resources to secure basic necessities.
28
Section 5.2—Eligibility for Categorical Assistance
Receipt of categorical assistance will not disqualify a person from receiving general
assistance if the applicant is otherwise eligible. Benefits received from other assistance
programs will be considered as income when determining need, with the exception of
Food Stamps, which will not be counted as income or resources or otherwise taken into
consideration when determining need (7 U.S.C. § 2017 (b)).
In addition, any fuel assistance (HEAP/ECIP) received by an applicant will not be
considered as income; that is, the administrator will always compute the heating needs
of an applicant who has received HEAP or ECIP as if that applicant paid all costs
associated with his or her fuel needs (42 U.S.C. §8624(f)). The calculation of general
assistance for heating energy needs when an applicant has received HEAP or ECIP
shall be accomplished in accordance with subsection (c) under “Types of Income” at
section 6.7 of this ordinance. For several additional exceptions please refer to the
definition of “Income” in this ordinance (see page 7, subsection 4).
Applicants or recipients must apply for other program benefits within 7 days after being
advised in writing to do so by the general assistance administrator. Persons who,
without just cause, make no good faith effort to obtain a potential resource will be
disqualified from receiving assistance until they make a good faith effort to obtain the
benefit (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
Section 5.3—Personal Property
a) Liquid Assets. No person owning assets easily convertible into cash, including
but not limited to, bank deposits, stocks, bonds, certificates of deposit, retirement
accounts, life insurance policies and other marketable security, will be eligible for
general assistance unless and until he or she uses these assets to meet his or
her basic needs, and thereby exhausts them. At the discretion of the GA
administrator, liquid assets do not mean a reasonable minimum balance
necessary for obtaining free checking. Although one checking account per
29
household may be allowed, any monies over the minimum required to obtain free
checking are to be considered available liquid assets.
b) Tangible Assets. No person owning or possessing personal property, such as
but not limited to: a motor vehicle (except as provided immediately below in
subsection c), or a boat, trailer, recreation vehicle or other assets that are
convertible into cash and are non-essential to the maintenance of the applicant’s
household, will be eligible for general assistance. Exceptions may be made when
a person is making an initial application or is an unforeseeable repeat applicant
as defined in Section 2.2 or when reasonable efforts to convert assets to cash at
fair market value are unsuccessful. Tools of a trade, livestock, farm equipment
and other equipment used for the production of income are exempt from the
above category and are not considered available assets.
c) Automobile Ownership. Ownership of one automobile per household will not
make a person ineligible for assistance if such vehicle is essential for
transportation to employment or for seeking employment, obtaining medical care,
rehabilitation or training facilities, or for any other reason the GA administrator
determines reasonable for the maintenance of the applicant’s household.
Recipients of general assistance who own an automobile with a market value
greater than $8000 may be required, with written, 7-day notice, to make a good
faith effort to trade that automobile for an automobile with a market value of less
than $8000. Any income received by the applicant by virtue of such a trade
down must be used for his or her basic necessities. Failure to liquidate or trade
down the excess value of any automobile asset can result in disqualification (22
M.R.S.A. § 4317).
The municipality will neither pay nor consider as necessary any car payment or
vehicle maintenance cost including insurance for which the applicant is
responsible. However, provided the vehicle value is $8000 or less and the
applicant is utilizing the vehicle for any of the above mentioned “essential”
30
reasons, the municipality in its discretion may choose to not consider reasonable
car payments, reasonable car insurance and reasonable associated costs of
maintenance as “misspent” income. General assistance for travel-related needs
shall be computed in accordance with section 6.8(F)(7), (8) “Work Related/Travel
Expenses.”
d) Insurance. Insurance that is available to an applicant on a non-contributory basis
or that is required as a condition of employment will not be a factor in determining
eligibility for general assistance. Life insurance with a cash surrender value may,
at the discretion of the GA administrator, be considered as a tangible asset.
e) Transfer of Property. Applicants who transfer assets for less than fair market
value to someone else solely for the purpose of establishing eligibility for general
assistance will not be granted general assistance to replace the uncompensated
value of the transferred asset. Assistance will be denied within a 120-day limit up
to the uncompensated value of the asset which was transferred unless the
transfer of asset is fraudulently misrepresented, in which case a 120-day
disqualification will be issued. There will be a presumption that the applicant
transferred his or her assets in order to be eligible for general assistance
whenever property is sold for less than the fair market value or when the transfer
occurred within 30 days prior to applying for general assistance unless the
applicant can demonstrate the existence of a good faith transaction.
Section 5.4—Ownership of Real Estate
a) Principal Residence. For purposes of General Assistance solely, the applicant’s
principal residence, including any adjoining land, is considered an exempt
resource, even if temporarily unoccupied because of employment, job training,
education, illness or disaster, provided there is demonstrated an intent to return.
If the applicant owns land in excess of the minimum lot size for the zone or
district in which the home is located, then that land may be considered a potential
resource if:
31
1. The applicant has received General Assistance for the last 120
consecutive days; and
2. The applicant has the legal right to sell the land (e.g., any mortgagee will
release any mortgage, any co-owners agree to the sale, zoning or other
land use laws do not render the sale illegal or impracticable); and
3. The applicant has the financial capability to put the land into a
marketable condition (e.g., the applicant can pay for any necessary
surveys); and
4. The land is not utilized for the maintenance and/or support of the
household; and
5. A knowledgeable source (e.g., a realtor) indicates that the land in
question can be sold at fair market value, for an amount which will aid
the applicant’s financial rehabilitation; and
6. No other circumstances exist which cause any sale to be unduly
burdensome or inequitable.
If the above conditions are met, then the administrator may condition the receipt
of future assistance on the applicant’s good faith efforts to sell, or render
saleable, land which could be used to provide necessary support for the
applicant (e.g., the applicant owns 100 “excess” acres. Sale of 10 of the acres
would provide for the necessary support and therefore not all the land need be
sold at the present time.) Assistance shall not be denied during the time that the
applicant is making a good faith effort to sell or render saleable the land in
question.
Once the applicant ceases to receive assistance the obligations under this
section shall also cease.
32
b) Other Property. If the applicant or dependents own real property other than that
occupied as the principal residence, continued eligibility will depend on the
applicant making a reasonable effort to:
1. Dispose of the property at fair market value in order to convert the
property into cash which can be applied toward meeting present need; or
2. Obtain a loan against such property which may be used to meet present
need. Applicants who transfer their excess property to a third party in
order to become eligible for general assistance will be ineligible.
If an applicant is granted assistance in the form of a mortgage payment or capital
improvement payment, the municipality may claim a lien against the property.
The lien shall not be enforceable until the time of sale of the property or upon the
death of the recipient (see also section 6.8 of this ordinance) (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4320).
Section 5.5—Work Requirement
All general assistance recipients are required to register for work, look for work, work to
the extent of available employment, and otherwise fulfill the work requirements, unless
the applicant is exempt from such requirements as provided below.
Employment; Rehabilitation. All unemployed applicants and members of their
households who are 16 years of age or older and who are not attending a full-time
primary or secondary school intended to lead to a high school diploma will be required
to accept any suitable job offer and/or meet with job counselors, attend employment
workshops and rehabilitative services, except as provided below (see “Exemptions” ).
Applicants must demonstrate to the administrator that they are available for work and
are actively seeking employment.
A “suitable job” means any job, which the applicant is mentally and physically able to
perform. “Available for work” means that applicants must make themselves available for
33
work during normal business hours prevailing in the area, and show that no
circumstance exists which would prevent them from complying with the work
requirement.
Verification. Unemployed applicants or applicants employed on a part-time basis will be
required to provide verifiable documentation of their pursuit of employment at the time of
each application. At a minimum, such documentation shall consist of a list of the
employers contacted, the date and time of the application contact, and the name of the
employer representative contacted. “Pursuit of employment” means actually submitting
a written application or applying for a job in person when reasonable, or submitting a
written application or letter of inquiry to employers.
For the duration of any repeat applicant’s period of unemployment or partial
employment, the administrator will establish the number of employers per week to
whom each non-exempt applicant shall be required to apply in order to fulfill his or her
work search requirements. The number of weekly employer contacts required by the
administrator shall be reasonably related to the number of potential employers in the
region and the number of hours in the week the applicant has available for work search
activities after considering all time the applicant must devote to existing employment
obligations, workfare obligations, and required classroom or on-site participation in job
training, educational, or rehabilitation programs. Fulfillment of these requirements will
not be expected at the time of the initial application, but will be a condition of eligibility
for subsequent assistance.
Ineligibility. After being granted assistance at the time of initial application, applicants
will be considered ineligible for further assistance for 120 days if they, without just
cause:
a) refuse to register for employment with the Maine Job Service;
b) refuse to search diligently for employment when the search is reasonable and
appropriate; recipients who unreasonably seek work at the same places
34
repeatedly will not be considered to be performing a diligent work search and will
be disqualified;
c) refuse to accept a suitable job offer;
d) refuse to participate in an assigned training, education or rehabilitation program
that would assist the applicant in securing employment;
e) fail to be available for work; or
f) refuse to participate or participate in a substandard manner in the municipal work
program (see section 5.6).
Ineligibility Due to Job Quit or Discharge for Misconduct. No applicant, whether an
initial or repeat applicant, who has quit his or her full-time or part-time job without just
cause or who has been discharged from employment for misconduct (see Appendix I,
26 M.R.S.A. § 1043 (23) for the definition) will be eligible to receive general assistance
of any kind for a 120-day period from the date of separation from employment (22
M.R.S.A. § § 4301(8), 4316-A (1-A)).
Just Cause. Applicants will be ineligible for assistance for 120 days if they refuse to
comply with the work requirements of this section without just cause. With respect to
any work requirement, just cause will be considered to exist when there is reasonable
and verifiable evidence that:
a) the applicant has a physical or mental illness or disability which prevents him/her
from working;
b) the work assignment pays below minimum wages;
c) the applicant was subject to sexual harassment;
d) the applicant is physically or mentally unable to perform required job tasks, or to
meet piece work standards;
35
e) the applicant has no means of transportation to or from work or a training or
rehabilitation program;
f) the applicant is unable to arrange for necessary child care or care of ill or
disabled family members; or
g) any reason found to be good cause by the Maine Department of Labor, or any
other verifiable reason the administrator considers reasonable and appropriate
will be accepted as just cause. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(5)).
Applicant’s Burden of Establishing Just Cause. If the administrator finds that the
applicant has violated a work-related rule without just cause, it shall be the responsibility
of the applicant to establish the presence of just cause (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A).
Eligibility Regained. Persons who are disqualified for 120 days because they violated a
work requirement may regain their eligibility if and only when they become employed or
otherwise satisfy the administrator that they are complying with the work requirement by
fulfilling the work requirement or requirements they violated.
For the purpose of regaining eligibility by becoming employed, “employment” shall mean
employment by an employer as defined in 26 M.R.S.A. § § 1043 et seq., or the
performance of a service for an employer who withholds from the employee a social
security tax pursuant to federal law.
The special provisions regarding the opportunity to regain eligibility after a
disqualification for workfare violations are detailed in section 5.6 of this ordinance, under
“Eligibility Regained”.
Dependents. Failure of an otherwise eligible person to comply with the work
requirements shall not affect the eligibility of any member of the person’s household
who is not capable of working, including:
a) a dependent minor child;
b) an elderly, ill, or disabled person; and
36
c) a person whose presence is required in order to provide care for any child
under 6 years of age or for any ill or disabled member of the household
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(3)).
In the event one (or more) member(s) of a household is disqualified and assistance is
requested for those remaining members of the household who are dependents, the
eligibility of those dependents will be calculated by dividing the maximum level of
assistance available to the entire household by the total number of household members.
Exemptions. The above work requirements do not apply to any person who is elderly,
physically or mentally ill or disabled. Any person whose presence is required to care for
any pre-school age child or for any ill or disabled member of the household is also
exempt from these requirements.
The requirements of this section will not be imposed so as to interfere with an
applicant’s existing employment, ability to pursue a bona fide job offer, ability to attend
an interview for possible employment, classroom participation in a primary or secondary
educational program intended to lead to a high school diploma, classroom or on site
participation in a training program which is either approved by the Department of Labor
or determined by the Department of Labor to be expected to assist the applicant in
securing employment, or classroom participation in a degree-granting program operated
under the control of the Department of Labor.
Section 5.6—Municipal Work Program
Each applicant and any member of the household who is capable of working may be
required to perform work for the municipality, including work for a non-profit
organization, as a condition of receiving assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(2)).
As part of the municipal work program, the municipality can require recipients to
participate in training, education, or rehabilitative programs that will assist the recipient
37
in securing employment. The work requirement provisions found in section 5.5
regarding just cause, dependents, and exemptions also apply to the municipal workfare
program.
Consent. Persons assigned to the work program are required to sign a form stating that
they understand the requirements of general assistance and the work program. Prior to
signing the form, the administrator will read it to the applicants or the applicants will read
it themselves. The form will also state the number of hours the applicants must work
and the hourly rate by means of which the duration of the work assignment is
calculated. In addition, the consent form shall describe the consequences of failing to
adequately perform part or all of the workfare or workfare-first assignment.
Subtracting Value of Workfare Performed from Client’s GA Debt. Pursuant to 22 MRSA
§ 4318 individuals owing the municipality funds for general assistance provided to them
are obligated to repay the municipality when and if they become able (see Article VIII).
However, persons performing workfare shall have the value of the workfare performed
deducted from any and all GA debt including GA liens (e.g., Workers’ Compensation
Settlement, SSI Retroactive Payment, Capital Improvement, Home Mortgage) that
might exist against their settlements, payments or other such property.
Limitations. The work requirement is subject to the following limitations (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4316-A(3)).
1) No person shall, as a condition of eligibility, be required to do any amount of work
that exceeds the value of the net general assistance that the person receives
under municipal general assistance standards. Any person performing work
under this subsection shall be provided with net general assistance, the value of
which is calculated at a rate of at least the prevailing minimum wage under state
or federal law at the time the workfare was performed.
2) No workfare participant shall be required to work for a nonprofit organization if
that work would violate the participant’s basic religious beliefs.
38
3) In no case shall eligible persons performing work under this subsection replace
regular municipal employees.
4) In no case will work performed under this subsection interfere with an eligible
person’s:
a) existing employment;
b) ability to follow up on a bona fide job offer;
c) attendance at an interview for possible employment;
d) classroom participation in a primary or secondary educational program
intended to lead to a high school diploma; or
e) classroom or on site participation in a training program which is approved by
the Department of Labor or determined by the Department of Labor to be
reasonably expected to assist the person in securing employment, or
classroom participation in a degree-granting program administered by the
DHHS or the Department of Labor.
5) In no case may an eligible person be required to work more than 40 hours per
week. An eligible person who has full or part-time employment shall be exempt
from the work requirement to the extent that the work requirement in combination
with his or her regular employment would result in the person working more than
40 hours per week.
6) In no case will an eligible person be required to perform work beyond his or her
capabilities. However, when an illness or disability is claimed, an eligible person
may be required as a condition of receiving assistance to present a doctor’s
statement detailing the extent of the disability or illness (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309).
If the administrator requires a doctor’s statement to verify an applicant’s illness or
disability and the applicant is not currently under the care of a provider, the
municipality may pay for the doctor’s evaluation if the applicant has no means to
pay for the exam. However in such a case the administrator will choose the
doctor. If there is a no-cost or low-cost health care option, the municipality may
elect to refer the client to such a resource. The administrator will not require
39
verification of medical conditions which are apparent or which are of such short
duration that a reasonable person would not ordinarily seek medical attention (22
M.R.S.A. § 4316(5)).
7) In no case may an eligible person with an immediate need (i.e., a person in an
emergency situation who has not been disqualified from receiving assistance for
committing a program violation) be required to perform work under this
subsection prior to receiving general assistance. The administrator shall meet
immediate needs upon receiving written assurance from the eligible person that
he/she is willing to work to maintain eligibility for general assistance. When the
recipient has no immediate need, workfare participation may be required prior to
receiving general assistance in accordance with the following “workfare first”
policy.
“Workfare First” Policy. Under the authority of 22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(2)(D), the
administrator may, in accordance with the following guidelines, require a recipient of
general assistance to perform a workfare assignment prior to the actual issuance of the
general assistance benefit conditionally granted.
1) In no circumstance will emergency general assistance for which an applicant is
eligible be withheld pending the satisfactory performance of workfare.
2) All workfare participants under this policy will be provided a written decision, as
otherwise required by law, within 24 hours of submitting an application for
general assistance and prior to performing any workfare for the municipality
associated with that request for assistance. That written decision must include:
a) a specific description of the amount of general assistance being
conditionally granted to the household, and for which basic needs;
b) the period of eligibility for which the general assistance grant is being
issued (in days or weeks, but not to exceed 30 days);
40
c) the rate, at a dollar-per-hour basis (but not less than the prevailing
minimum wage), upon which the duration of the workfare assignment
is calculated;
d) the actual duration of the workfare assignment that must be performed,
in hours, before the general assistance grant will be actually issued;
e) the specifics of the workfare assignment(s), including the general
nature of the type of work being assigned, location(s) of work-site,
date(s) and time(s) of assigned workfare, workfare supervisors’ names
and contact telephone numbers; and
f) any other pertinent information related to the workfare assignment(s)
the recipient will be expected to perform.
3) As previously provided in this section, all workfare participants under this policy
must sign a consent form that informs the participant of his or her workfarerelated
rights and responsibilities, including the consequences of failing to
perform all or part of the workfare assigned without just cause.
4) If a portion of the workfare-first assignment is satisfactorily performed but there
has been a failure to perform the remainder of the assignment, without just
cause, the administrator shall issue a grant of general assistance in the amount
of the number of workfare hours satisfactorily performed times the hourly rate
used to calculate the duration of the workfare assignment. In addition to any
disqualification penalty that may apply, the remaining value of the conditionally
issued general assistance grant shall be terminated, and notice of the partial
termination, and the reasons therefore, will be issued to the workfare participant
in accordance with section 6.10 of this ordinance.
5) Any amount of the workfare assignment that is not performed because the
workfare participant was temporarily unable to perform the assignment for just
41
cause reasons shall be reassigned or excused at the discretion of the GA
administrator.
Work-Related Expenses. A participant’s expenses related to work performed under this
section will be added to the amount of net general assistance to be provided to the
person (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(2)(E)). The municipality will provide any special clothes
or equipment the recipient needs to perform his or her work assignment.
Disqualification. Any person who either willfully fails to perform or willfully performs
below average standards the work assigned by the municipality, will be ineligible for
assistance for 120 days (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(1)). As soon as the administrator
knows that a recipient failed to fulfill the work assignment, the administrator will notify
the recipient in writing that he/she is disqualified for 120 days starting from the last date
of authorized assistance unless the recipient can show just cause. The burden of
demonstrating a just cause failure to perform a workfare assignment falls on the
workfare participant.
Eligibility Regained. Recipients who are disqualified from receiving assistance because
they have violated the requirements of the municipal work program may regain their
eligibility under the following conditions.
Recipients who fail to complete the first municipal work assignment they have been
given will be disqualified from receiving assistance during the next 120 days, although
dependents in the household may be eligible (see section. 5.5, “Dependents”).
If during the 120-day disqualification period the recipient requests an opportunity to
perform the work assignment which he or she, without just cause failed to perform, the
disqualified recipient will be given one opportunity to regain eligibility. The administrator
will give the recipient a work assignment as soon as possible.
42
If under such a set of circumstances the recipient has an emergency need and the
administrator is unable to schedule a work assignment in time to alleviate the
emergency, the administrator will provide sufficient assistance to the recipient to avert
the emergency. However, the provision of such emergency assistance will not bar the
administrator from subsequently enforcing the previously issued 120-day disqualification
if the recipient fails to regain eligibility by satisfactorily performing the work assignment.
The amount of emergency assistance granted will be considered in the computation of
the total number of hours the recipient must work.
Recipients who have asked for the opportunity to regain their eligibility during a 120 day
disqualification period and who agreed to fulfill the assignment which they previously
failed to perform and who, without just cause, fail to fulfill their municipal work
assignment will be considered to have acted in bad faith. In such a circumstance, the
administrator will enforce the 120-day disqualification for the term of its initial duration.
If a workfare participant regains eligibility under this section but is subsequently
disqualified within the initial 120-day period of ineligibility for failing to comply with the
municipal work program, that participant will be ineligible for a new 120-day period
beginning with the new disqualification date, but will be provided no opportunity to
requalify.
Any recipient who intentionally causes damage to property, harasses or harms other
employees or who otherwise conducts themselves in a disruptive manner and is
discharged by the work supervisor will not be entitled to regain eligibility by returning to
the work program. Eligibility may be regained by otherwise becoming employed and
meeting the definition of need.
Reports. The administrator will itemize the assistance that has been provided to
persons who work for the municipality in reports to the DHHS (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-
A(2)).
43
Section 5.7—Use of Resources
Each applicant has the responsibility to make a good faith effort to utilize every available
or potential resource that may reduce his or her need for general assistance (see
section 2.2 for definition of “Resources”). People who refuse or fail to make a good faith
effort to secure a potential resource after receiving written notice to do so are
disqualified from receiving assistance until they make an effort to secure the resource.
Applicants are required to prove that they have made a good faith effort to secure the
resource (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
Minors. A minor under the age of 18 who has never married and is applying
independently for general assistance and who is pregnant or has a dependent child or
children will be eligible to receive general assistance only if the minor is residing in the
home of his or her parent, legal guardian or other adult relative, in which case the entire
household will be evaluated for eligibility. Exceptions to this limitation on eligibility will
be made when:
1) the minor is residing in a foster home, maternity home, or other adult-supervised
supportive living arrangement; or
2) the minor has no living parent or the whereabouts of the both parents are
unknown; or
3) no parent will permit the minor to live in the parent’s home; or
4) the minor has lived apart from both parents for at least one year before the birth
of any dependent child; or
5) the DHHS determines that the physical or emotional health or safety of the minor
or the minor’s dependent child or children would be jeopardized if the minor and
his or her child or children lived with a parent; or
6) the DHHS determines, in accordance with its regulation, that there is good cause
to waive this limitation on eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(4)).
44
Any person under the age of 25 who is applying independently from his or her parents
for general assistance will be informed that until he or she reaches the age of 25, the
applicant’s parents are still legally liable for his or her support and the municipality has
the right to seek recovery from the parents of the cost of all assistance granted to such
a recipient to the extent his or her parents are financially capable of repaying the
municipality (22 M.R.S.A. § 4319).
With regard to such application, the municipality may seek verification of the applicant’s
need for general assistance by contacting his or her parents. If the applicant’s parents
declare a willingness to provide the applicant with his or her basic needs directly, and
there is no convincing evidence that the applicant would be jeopardized by relying on
his or her parents for basic needs, the administrator may find the applicant not to be in
need of general assistance for the reason that his or her needs can be provided by a
legally liable relative.
Mental or Physical Disability. Any applicant who has a mental or physical disability
must make a good faith effort to utilize any medical or rehabilitative services which have
been recommended by a physician, psychologist or other professional retraining or
rehabilitation specialist when the services are available to the applicant and would not
constitute a financial burden or create a physical risk to the individual.
Written Notice; Disqualification. The administrator will give each applicant written notice
whenever the applicant is required to utilize any specific potential resource(s). Any
applicant who refuses to utilize potential resources, without just cause, after receiving
written 7-day notice will be ineligible for further assistance until he/she has made a good
faith effort to utilize or obtain the resources. General assistance will not be withheld
from the applicant pending receipt of a resource if the applicant has made, or is in the
process of making, a good faith effort to obtain the resource.
45
Forfeiture of Benefits. Any applicant who forfeits receipt of or causes a reduction in
benefits from another public assistance program due to fraud, misrepresentation, a
knowing or intentional violation of program rules or a refusal to comply with that
program’s rules without just cause will be ineligible to receive general assistance to
replace the forfeited benefits. To the extent the forfeited benefits can be considered
income under general assistance law, the worth of the forfeited benefits will be
considered income that is available to the applicant for the duration of the forfeiture.
To the extent the forfeited benefits were provided not in the form of income but, rather,
in the form of a specific, regularly issued resource of a calculable value, that resource,
up to its forfeited value, need not be replaced with general assistance for a period of
120 days from the date of the forfeiture—unless the municipality is prohibited by federal
or state law from considering the forfeited resource as available with respect to local
public assistance programs (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
Section 5.8—Period of Ineligibility
No one will have his or her assistance terminated, reduced, or suspended prior to being
given written notice and an opportunity for a fair hearing (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4321-4322).
Each person will be notified in writing of the reasons for his or her ineligibility, and any
person disqualified for not complying with the ordinance will be informed in writing of the
period of ineligibility.
Work Requirement. Applicants/recipients who do not comply with a work requirement
are disqualified from receiving assistance for a period of 120 days (unless they regain
their eligibility) (see sections 5.5, 5.6). If an applicant/recipient is provided assistance
and does not comply with the work requirement, the applicant/recipient shall be
disqualified for 120 days following the end of the period covered by the grant of
assistance. The administrator shall give recipients written notice that they are
disqualified as soon as the administrator has sufficient knowledge and information to
render a decision of ineligibility.
46
Fraud. People who commit fraud are disqualified from receiving assistance for a period
of 120 days (see section 6.4, “Fraud”). The administrator shall give recipients written
notice that they are ineligible as soon as the administrator has sufficient knowledge and
information to render a decision. If the disqualification for fraud is issued before the
expiration of a grant of assistance, the period of ineligibility shall commence on the day
following the end of the period covered by the grant of assistance. If fraud is discovered
after the period covered by the grant of assistance has expired, the period of ineligibility
will commence on the day of the written notice of ineligibility.
Section 5.9 – Unemployment Fraud
An applicant who is found ineligible for unemployment compensation benefits because
of a finding of fraud by the Department of Labor pursuant to 26 M.R.S.A. § 1051(1) is
ineligible to receive general assistance to replace the forfeited unemployment
compensation benefits for the duration of the forfeiture established by the Department of
Labor. 22 M.R.S.A. § 4317.
47
ARTICLE VI
Determination of Eligibility
Section 6.1—Recognition of Dignity and Rights
Any determination or investigation into an applicant’s eligibility will be conducted in a
manner that will not violate the applicant’s privacy or personal dignity or violate his or
her individual rights.
Section 6.2—Determination; Redetermination
The administrator will make an individual, factual determination of eligibility each time a
person applies or reapplies for general assistance. The administrator will make a
redetermination of eligibility at least monthly but may do so as often as necessary to
administer the program efficiently and meet the needs of the applicants. Upon any
application, the administrator will determine the applicant’s eligibility on the basis of a
30-day prospective analysis, but may elect to disburse that applicant’s assistance
periodically, e.g., weekly, throughout a 30-day period of eligibility pursuant to that initial
eligibility determination.
The administrator may redetermine a person’s eligibility at any time during the period he
or she is receiving assistance if the administrator is notified of any change in the
recipient’s circumstances that may alter the amount of assistance the recipient may
receive. Once a recipient has been granted assistance, the administrator may not
reduce or rescind the grant without giving prior written notice to the recipient explaining
the reasons for the decision and offering the recipient an opportunity to appeal the
decision to the fair hearing authority (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309).
48
Section 6.3—Verification
Eligibility of applicant; duration of eligibility. The overseer shall determine eligibility each
time a person applies or reapplies for general assistance. The period of eligibility will
not exceed one month. At the expiration of this period applicants/recipients may
reapply for assistance and the person's eligibility will be redetermined.
Applicant's responsibilities. Applicants and recipients for general assistance are
responsible for providing to the overseer all information necessary to determine
eligibility. If further information or documentation is necessary to demonstrate eligibility,
the applicant must have the first opportunity to provide the specific information or
documentation required by the overseer. When information required by the overseer is
unavailable, the overseer must accept alternative available information, which is subject
to verification.
Each applicant and recipient has the responsibility at the time of application and
continuing thereafter to provide complete, accurate and current information and
documentation concerning his/her:
• Need
• Income
• Employment
• Use of income
• Expenses
• Assets & liabilities
• Use of available resources
• Household composition
Initial Applicants. Persons who have not applied for assistance in this or any other
municipality are considered initial applicants and must have their eligibility determined
solely on the basis of need. Initial applicants are not subject to eligibility conditions
placed on repeat applicants (see below). However, such applicants are still responsible
for providing the GA administrator with reasonably obtainable documentation adequate
49
to verify that there is a need for assistance. In addition, initial applicants must also
comply with both lump sum and relevant work rules (i.e. job quit).
Repeat Applicants. All applicants for general assistance that are not initial applicants
are repeat applicants. The eligibility of repeat applicants must be determined on the
basis of need and all other conditions of eligibility established by law and this municipal
ordinance.
The administrator will require documentation of a repeat applicant’s income, use of
income, assets and resources plus actual bills and receipts for rent, utilities, fuel,
telephone, medical services and other basic necessities. In addition, repeat applicants
instructed to seek employment shall verify their work search results, e.g., provide a list
of the employers contacted, the date and time of the application contact, and the name
of the employer representative contacted, as required by the GA administrator.
Repeat applicants are also responsible for providing any changes of information
reported on previous applications including changes in his/her household or income that
may affect his/her eligibility.
Unforeseen Repeat Applicants. Unforeseen repeat applicants are applicants who have
not applied for assistance within the last twelve months and who have been regularly
employed or receiving support from a public benefit or private source who have
unexpectedly become unemployed through no fault of their own or whose income
and/or benefits (e.g., through an available resource) have ceased through no fault of
their own. Such unforeseen repeat applicants may be considered initial applicants for
purposes of verification requirements and misspent income if the administrator finds that
imposing the general verification requirements and misspent income rules imposed on
repeat applicants would be unreasonable or inappropriate.
Overseer's responsibilities. In order to determine an applicant's eligibility for general
assistance, the overseer first must seek information and documentation from the
applicant. Once the applicant has presented the necessary information, the overseer is
50
responsible for determining eligibility. The overseer will seek verification necessary to
determine eligibility. In order to determine eligibility, the overseer may contact sources
other than the applicant for verification only with the specific knowledge and consent of
the applicant, except that the overseer may examine public records without the
applicant's knowledge and consent.
Appropriate sources, which the overseers may contact, include, but are not limited to:
• DHHS and any other
department/agency of the
state or non-profit
organizations
• financial institutions
• creditors
• utility companies
• employers
• landlords
• physicians
• persons with whom the
applicant/recipient is a
cohabitant
• legally and non-legally liable
relatives
Assistance will be denied or terminated if the applicant is unwilling to supply the
overseer with necessary information, documentation, or permission to make collateral
contacts, or if the overseer cannot determine that eligibility exists based on information
supplied by the applicant or others.
Redetermination of eligibility. The overseer may redetermine a person's eligibility at any
time during the period that person is receiving assistance if the overseer is informed of
any change in the recipient's circumstances that may affect the amount of assistance to
which the recipient is entitled or that may make the recipient ineligible, provided that
once a determination of eligibility has been made for a specific time period, a reduction
in assistance for that time period may not be made without prior written notice to the
recipient with the reasons for the action and an opportunity for the recipient to receive a
fair hearing upon the proposed change.
51
Penalty for Refusing to Release Information. Any person governed by 22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4314 who refuses to provide necessary information to the administrator after it has
been requested must state in writing the reasons for the refusal within 3 days of
receiving the request. Any such person who refuses to provide the information, without
just cause, commits a civil violation and may be subject to a fine of not less than $25
nor more than $100 which may be adjudged in any court of competent jurisdiction. Any
person who willfully renders false information to the administrator is guilty of a Class E
crime (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4314(5), 4314(6), 4315).
Section 6.4—Fraud
It is unlawful for a person to make knowingly and willfully a false representation of a
material fact to the administrator in order to receive general assistance or cause
someone else to receive general assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4315). False
representation shall consist of any individual knowingly and willfully:
a) making a false statement to the general assistance administrator, either
orally or in writing, in order to obtain assistance to which the applicant or
the applicant’s household is not entitled;
b) concealing information from the general assistance administrator in order
to obtain assistance to which the applicant or applicant’s household is not
entitled; or
c) using general assistance benefits for a purpose other than that for which
they were intended.
No person may be denied assistance solely for making a false representation prior to
being given an opportunity for a fair hearing.
Period of Ineligibility. When the general assistance administrator finds that a person
has knowingly and willfully misrepresented material facts for the purpose of making
52
himself or herself eligible for general assistance, the administrator shall notify that
applicant in writing that he or she has been disqualified from receiving assistance for
120 days. For the purpose of this section, a material misrepresentation is a false
statement about eligibility factor in the absence of which some or all of the assistance
would not be or would not have been granted.
The notification of ineligibility issued by the administrator shall inform the applicant of his
or her right to appeal the administrator’s decision to the fair hearing authority (FHA)
within 5 working days of receipt. The period of ineligibility shall commence on the day
following the end of the period covered by the grant of assistance fraudulently received
or upon the date of notification of ineligibility, whichever is later.
Right to a Fair Hearing. Any applicant who is denied assistance for making a false
representation will be afforded the opportunity to appeal the decision to the fair hearing
authority (FHA) in accordance with Article VII of this ordinance. No recipient shall have
his or her assistance reduced or revoked during the period of eligibility before being
notified and given the opportunity to appeal the decision. Any person who is dissatisfied
with the decision of the FHA may appeal that decision to the Superior Court pursuant to
Rule 80-B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(3)).
Reimbursement. If a recipient does not appeal the decision or if the fair hearing
authority determines that a recipient did make a false representation, the recipient will
be required to reimburse the municipality for any assistance received to which he/she
was not entitled.
Dependents. In no event will the ineligibility of a person under this section serve to
disqualify any eligible dependent in that household (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(3)). In the
event one or more members of a household are disqualified and assistance is
requested for the remaining dependents, the eligibility of those dependents will be
53
calculated by dividing the maximum level of assistance available to the entire household
by the total number of household members.
Section 6.5—Period of Eligibility
The administrator will grant assistance to all eligible persons for a period that is
sufficient to meet their need but in no event may a grant of assistance cover a period in
excess of one month (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309). Upon receiving a completed and signed
application the administrator will determine the applicant’s eligibility on the basis of a
30-day prospective analysis.
When an applicant submits an incomplete or unsigned application, due to the 24-hour
decision requirement placed on the GA administrator, the GA administrator shall render
a notice of “ineligibility” and advise the applicant that he or she has a right to reapply as
soon as he or she has the necessary information and/or as soon as is practicable for
the applicant.
Although eligibility is determined on a 30-day basis, for reasons of administrative
efficiency the administrator may elect to disburse an applicant’s assistance for shorter
periods of time, such as weekly, throughout the 30-day period of eligibility. When the
administrator elects to disburse general assistance for a period of time less than 30
days, subsequent grants of assistance during that 30-day period may be issued
pursuant to the initial determination of need unless the applicant’s financial situation
changes substantially enough to warrant a redetermination of eligibility.
Section 6.6—Determination of Need
The period of time used to calculate need will be the next 30-day period from the date of
application (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)). The administrator will calculate applicants’
expenses according to the actual expense of the basic necessity or the maximum levels
for the specific necessities allowed in section 6.8, whichever is less. The sum of these
54
expenses, as calculated for a prospective 30-day period, is the applicant’s 30-day need.
Applicants will not be considered eligible if their income and other resources exceed
this calculation except in an emergency (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(2)) (see section 4.9 of this
ordinance).
Applicants will also not be considered in need of general assistance if their income,
property, credit, assets or other resources available to provide basic necessities for their
household are greater than the applicable overall maximum level of assistance set forth
in the beginning of section 6.8 (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4301(10), 4305(3-B)). The difference
between the applicant’s income and the overall maximum levels of assistance
established by this ordinance is the applicant’s deficit.
Once an applicant’s deficit has been determined, the specific maximum levels of
assistance for each basic necessity (see Appendixes A-H of this ordinance) shall be
used by the administrator to guide the distribution of assistance for which the applicant
is eligible. The specific maximum levels of assistance for each basic necessity are
intended to be reasonable and sufficient to help recipients maintain a standard of health
and decency (22 M.R.S.A. § 4305(3-A)).
Income for Basic Necessities. Applicants are required to use their income for basic
necessities. Except for initial applicants, no applicant is eligible to receive assistance to
replace income that was spent within the 30-day period prior to an application for
assistance on goods and services that are not basic necessities. All income spent on
goods and services that are not basic necessities will be considered available to the
applicant and combined with the applicant’s prospective 30-day income for the
purposes of computing eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. § 4315-A). Applicants who have
sufficient income to provide their basic necessities but who use that income to purchase
goods or services which are not basic necessities will not be considered eligible for
assistance. Persons who exhaust their income on basic necessities and who still need
55
assistance with other basic necessities will be eligible, provided that their income does
not exceed the overall maximum level of assistance.
Use-of-Income Requirements. The administrator may require that anyone applying for
general assistance provide documentation of his or her use of income. This
documentation can take the form of cancelled checks and/or receipts which
demonstrate that the applicant has exhausted all household income received over the
last 30-day period. Except as is deemed appropriate by the GA administrator for
“unforeseen” repeat applicants (See Section 6.3 of this ordinance), repeat applicants
may be required to verify that expenditure of income was for basic necessities. Income
expended that cannot be verified will generally be considered available and in such
case will be added to the 30-day prospective income.
Allowable expenditures include reasonable shelter costs (rent/mortgage); the cost of
heating fuel, electricity, and food up to the ordinance maximums; telephone costs at the
base rate if the household needs a telephone for medical reasons, the cost of
nonelective medical services as recommended by a physician which are not otherwise
covered by medical entitlement, Hospital Free Care or insurance; the reasonable cost of
essential clothing and non-prescription drugs, and the costs of any other commodity or
service determined essential by the administrator.
Items not considered to be basic necessities and thus will not be allowed in the budget
computation include:
• Internet services
• Cable or satellite television
• Cellular phones
• Cigarettes/alcohol
• Gifts purchased
• Pet care costs
• Costs of trips or vacations
• Paid court fines
• Repayments of unsecured
loans
• Legal fees
• Late fees
• Credit card debt.
56
The municipality reserves the right to apply specific use-of-income requirements to any
applicant, other than an initial applicant, who fails to use his or her income for basic
necessities or fails to reasonably document his or her use of income (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4315-A). Those additional requirements will be applied in the following manner:
1) The administrator may require the applicant to use some or all of his or her
income, at the time it becomes available, toward specific basic necessities. The
administrator may prioritize such required expenditures so that most or all of the
applicant’s income is applied to housing (i.e., rent/mortgage), energy (i.e.,
heating fuel, electricity), or other specified basic necessities;
2) The administrator will notify applicants in writing of the specific use-of-income
requirements placed on them;
3) If upon subsequent application it cannot be determined how the applicant’s
income was spent, or it is determined that some or all of the applicant’s income
was not spent as directed and was also not spent on basic necessities, the
applicant will not be eligible to receive either regular or emergency general
assistance to replace that income; and
4) If the applicant does not spend his or her income as directed, but can show with
verifiable documentation that all income was spent on basic necessities up to
allowed amounts, the applicant will remain eligible to the extent of the applicant’s
eligibility and need.
Calculation of Income and Expenses. When determining eligibility, the administrator will
subtract the applicant’s net income from the overall maximum level of assistance found
at the beginning of section 6.8. If income is greater than the overall maximum level of
assistance, the applicant will not be eligible except in an emergency (see section 4.9).
If income is less than the overall maximum level of assistance, the applicant has a
deficit.
57
The municipality will provide assistance in an amount up to the deficit to the extent the
applicant also has an unmet need and is in need of basic necessities. The municipality
will not grant assistance in excess of the maximum amounts allowed in section 6.8 of
this ordinance for specific basic necessities except in an emergency or when the
administrator elects to consolidate the applicant’s deficit, as provided immediately
below.
Consolidation of Deficit. As a general rule and to the extent of their deficit, applicants
will be eligible for assistance for any basic necessity up to, but not exceeding, the
maximum amount allowed for that necessity in this ordinance or the actual 30-day cost
of the necessity, whichever is less. Under certain circumstances, however, and in
accordance with the following conditions, the administrator may consolidate the
applicant’s deficit and apply it toward a basic necessity in an amount greater than the
ordinance maximum for that necessity.
1) The practice of consolidating the deficit and applying it toward a basic necessity
in amounts greater than the ordinance maximum shall be the exception rather
than the rule;
2) The total general assistance grant cannot exceed the total deficit unless the
applicant is in an emergency situation; and
3) The need for the application of the recipient’s consolidated deficit toward a basic
necessity was not created by the recipient misspending his or her income or
resources in violation of the use-of-income requirements of this ordinance.
Section 6.7—Income
Income Standards. Applicants whose income exceeds the overall maximum level of
assistance provided in section 6.8 shall not be eligible for general assistance except in
an emergency. The administrator will conduct an individual factual inquiry into the
applicant’s income and expenses each time an applicant applies.
58
Calculation of Income. To determine whether applicants are in need, the administrator
will calculate the income they will receive during the next 30-day period commencing on
the date of application, and identify any assets or resources that would alleviate their
need. For all applicants other than initial applicants, the administrator will also consider
as available income any income that was not spent during the previous 30-day period
on basic necessities, as well as any income that was spent on basic necessities in
unreasonable excess of the ordinance maximums for specific basic necessities. If a
household’s income exceeds the amount of the household’s need for basic necessities,
up to the maximum levels contained in section 6.8, applicants will not be considered in
need.
Exceptions will be made in emergency situations, which may necessitate that the
maximum levels be exceeded (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308) (see section 4.9 of this ordinance).
To calculate weekly income and expenses, the administrator will use actual income
received or actual anticipated income.
Types of Income. Income that will be considered in determining an applicant’s need
includes:
a) Earned income. Income in cash or in kind earned by the applicant through
wages, salary, commissions, or profit, whether self-employed or as an employee,
is considered earned income. If a person is self-employed, total income will be
computed by subtracting reasonable and actual business expenses from gross
income. When income consists of wages, the amount computed will be the
income available after taxes, social security and other payroll deductions
required by state, federal, and local law. Rental income and profit from produce
that is sold is considered earned income. Income that is held in trust and
unavailable to the applicant or the applicant’s dependents will not be considered
as earned income.
59
Note: Actual work-related expenses such as union dues, transportation to and
from work, special equipment or work clothes, and child care costs will be
deducted from an applicant’s income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)).
b) Income from Other Assistance or Social Services Programs. State/federal
categorical assistance benefits, SSI payments, Social Security payments, VA
benefits, unemployment insurance benefits, and payments from other
government sources will be considered as income, unless expressly prohibited
by federal law or regulation. Federal law prohibits Food Stamps and fuel
assistance payments made by the Home Energy Assistance Program (HEAP
and EPIC) from being considered income. The value of the food stamps or fuel
assistance will not be used to reduce the amount of general assistance the
applicant is eligible to receive. Although applicants may have only a limited or
reduced need for general assistance for heating fuel or electricity if a recently
received HEAP/ECIP benefit has sufficiently credited their account or otherwise
prevented the fuel-related costs for the prospective 30-day period.
The administrator’s obligation is to always compute the heating needs of an
applicant who has received HEAP or ECIP as if that applicant paid for his or her
total fuel costs. Accordingly, in such cases, the administrator will budget for the
household’s heating energy needs according to actual usage, up to the
ordinance maximums, but the administrator may, with written notice to the
applicant, hold in reserve the heating energy portion of the applicant’s deficit until
such a time during the period of eligibility that the applicant has a demonstrable
need for the disbursement of heating energy assistance; that is, the applicant’s
fuel tank can accept a minimum fuel delivery or the applicant no longer has a
positive credit balance with his or her utility company. The municipality is not
obligated to divert any recipient’s heating energy allowance toward non-heating
purposes solely on the basis of the recipient’s receipt of HEAP/ECIP.
60
Other programs whose income cannot be counted for purposes of GA eligibility
include:
• Family Development Accounts (22 M.R.S. § 3762)
• Americorp VISTA program benefits (42 USCS § 5044 (f))
• Property tax rebates issued under the Maine Property Tax Fairness Credit
program, only so long as the money is spent on basic necessities. (22
M.R.S.A. § 4301(7))
c) Court-Ordered Support Payments. Alimony and child support payments will be
considered income only if actually received by the applicant. The general
assistance administrator will refer cases where support payments are not actually
received to the State Department of Health and Human Services’ Child Support
Enforcement Unit. In order to be eligible for future GA, applicants being referred
to DHHS for such enforcement services shall be required to follow-through with
such services. Because child support payments are considered a resource,
applicants must make a good faith effort to secure such payments.
d) Income from Other Sources. Payments from pensions and trust funds will be
considered income. Payments from boarders or lodgers will be considered
income as will cash or in-kind contributions provided to the household from any
other source, including relatives (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)).
e) Earnings of a Son or Daughter. Earned income received by sons and daughters
below the age of 18 who are full-time students and who are not working full-time
will not be considered income. The unearned income of a minor in the household
will be considered available to the household.
f) Income from Household Members. Income from household members will be
considered available to the applicant, whether or not the household member is
legally obligated for the support of the applicant, if the household members pool
61
or share their income and expenses as a family or intermingle their funds so as
to provide support to one another.
g) The Pooling or Non-Pooling of Income. When two or more individuals share the
same dwelling unit but not all members of the household are applying for general
assistance, the administrator shall make a finding under a rebuttable
presumption that the entire household is pooling income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(12-
A)).
One or more applicants for assistance can successfully rebut the presumption
that all household income is being pooled by providing the administrator with
verifiable documentation affirmatively demonstrating a pattern of non-pooling for
the duration of the shared living arrangement. Such documentation would
include evidence of the entire household expenses as well as bank statements,
cancelled checks, receipts, landlord statements or other vendor accounts clearly
supporting a claim that the applicant has been and is presently solely and entirely
responsible for his or her pro-rata share of household costs.
If the applicant is unable to successfully rebut the municipality’s presumption that
all household income is being pooled, eligibility of the entire household will be
determined based on total household income. If the applicant successfully
rebuts the municipality’s presumption that all household income is being pooled,
the applicant’s eligibility will be determined on the basis of his or her income and
his or her pro-rata share of actual household expenses.
h) Lump Sum Income. A lump sum payment received by any GA applicant or
recipient prior or subsequent to the date of application for general assistance will
be considered as income available to the household. However, verified required
payments (i.e., any third party payment which is required as a condition of
receiving the lump sum payment, or any payments of bills earmarked for the
62
purpose for which the lump sum payment was made) and any amount of the
lump sum payment which the applicant can document was spent on basic
necessities, as described below, will not be considered available income.
Where a household receives a lump sum payment at any time prior or
subsequent to the date of application for general assistance, the administrator
will assess the need for prorating an applicant’s eligibility for general assistance
according to the following criteria (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7), (8-A)):
1) identify the date the lump sum payment was received;
2) subtract from the lump sum payment all required payments;
3) subtract from the lump sum any amount the applicant can demonstrate was
spent on basic necessities, including all basic necessities as defined by the
general assistance program such as: reasonable payment of funeral or
burial expenses for a family member; any reasonable travel costs related to
the illness or death of a family member; repair or replacement of essentials
lost due to fire, flood or other natural disaster; repair or purchase of a motor
vehicle essential for employment, education, training or other day-to-day
living necessities. Repayments of loans or credit, the proceeds of which
can be verified as having been spent on basic necessities; and payment of
bills earmarked for the purpose for which the lump sum is paid must also be
subtracted. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7), (8-A));
4) add to the remainder all income received by the household between
the date of receipt of the lump sum payment and the date of
application for general assistance; and
5) divide the sum created in subsection (4) by the verified actual
monthly amounts for all of the household's basic necessities. 22
M.R.S.A. § 4305(3-B)
63
This dividend represents the period of proration determined by the
administrator to commence on the date of receipt of the lump sum payment.
The prorated sum for each month must be considered available to the
household for 12 months from the date of application or during the period of
proration, whichever is less.
The household of an initial applicant that is otherwise eligible for emergency
assistance may not be denied emergency assistance to meet an immediate
need solely on the basis of the proration of a lump sum payment. (22 MRSA
§ 4308)
Section 6.8—Basic Necessities; Maximum Levels of Assistance
Overall Maximum Levels of Assistance. Notwithstanding any of the maximum levels of
assistance for specific basic necessities listed in Appendices B-H of this ordinance, an
applicant’s eligibility for general assistance will be first determined by subtracting his or
her income from the overall maximum level of assistance designated in Appendix A for
the applicable household size (22 M.R.S.A. § 4305 (3-B)). The difference yielded by
this calculation shall be the applicant’s deficit.
Applicants will be eligible for general assistance up to the calculated deficit to the extent
the applicant is unable to otherwise provide the basic necessities essential to maintain
themselves or their families. Applicants with no deficit shall be found ineligible for
general assistance unless they are in an emergency, in which case eligibility for
emergency general assistance will be determined according to section 4.9 of this
ordinance.
Maximum Levels of Assistance for Specific Basic Necessities. The municipality will
grant assistance to eligible applicants for basic necessities according to the maximum
levels for specific types of assistance set forth below. The administrator, in consultation
with the applicant, may apply the amount of the applicant’s deficit toward assistance
64
with any one or combination of necessities not to exceed the total deficit. These
maximum levels will be strictly adhered to unless the administrator determines that
there are exceptional circumstances and an emergency is shown to exist, in which case
these absolute levels will be waived in order to meet immediate needs. In all cases
either the actual expenses the applicant incurs for basic necessities or the maximum
amount allowed in each category, whichever is less, will be used in determining need.
In roommate situations, the applicant’s need for common living expenses for rent, fuel,
electricity, etc., will be presumed to be reduced by an amount equal to the other
household members’ proportionate fair share of the common living expenses. No
applicant will be allowed to claim a need for any expense which has been or will be paid
by another person. In addition, as a general rule the municipality will not provide a
benefit toward a basic need by paying a bill that is issued to a person not living with the
applicant’s household or that has otherwise been incurred by a person who has not
been found eligible to receive assistance.
Temporary exceptions to this general rule may be made by the administrator in the
following circumstances: (1) a recent, unplanned separation has occurred in the
household resulting in the sustained or permanent absence of a former household
member in whose name the bill was customarily issued; (2) the applicant and members
of the applicant’s household were or will be the sole recipients of the commodities or
services covered by any bill to be paid or partially paid with general assistance; and (3)
the applicant will make a good faith effort to direct the vendor to issue future bills in the
name of the applicant or other responsible person residing in the household.
A) Food. The administrator will provide food assistance to eligible persons up to the
allowed maximum amounts designated by the U.S.D.A. Thrifty Food Plan for the
appropriate household size.
For this purpose, the municipality hereby incorporates by reference the U.S.D.A.
Thrifty Food Plan, as distributed by the Maine Department of Health and Human
65
Services on or about October of each year. See Appendix B of this ordinance for
the current year’s food maximums.
In determining need for food the administrator will not consider the value of the food
stamps an applicant receives as income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301.7(A); 7 U.S.C.
§2017(b)). The municipality will authorize vouchers to be used solely for approved
food products.
The administrator will exceed the maximums when necessary for households having
members with special dietary needs. The administrator may require a doctor’s
statement verifying there is a special dietary need requiring an expenditure for food
that is greater than the ordinance maximums.
B) Housing. The administrator will provide assistance with rent or mortgage payments
that are reasonable and/or within the allowed maximum levels. See Appendix C of
this ordinance for the current year’s housing maximums. It is the applicant’s
responsibility to find suitable housing, although the administrator may help the
applicant find housing when appropriate. The administrator will inform the applicant
of the allowed housing maximums to assist the applicant in his or her search for
housing. The allowed maximum for any applicant will be the categorical housing
maximum representing the minimum dwelling unit space necessary to adequately
shelter the applicant household. Applicants requesting assistance for housing that
contains more bedrooms than are necessary for the number of household members
will be provided assistance according to the maximum level for the number of rooms
actually needed.
Rental Payments to Relatives. The municipality may elect to not issue any rental
payment to an applicant’s relatives unless the rental relationship has existed for at
least three months and the applicant’s relative(s) rely on the rental payment for their
basic needs. For the purpose of this section, a “relative” is defined as the applicant’s
66
parents, grandparents, children, grandchildren, siblings, parent’s siblings, or any of
those relative’s children (22 M.R.S.A. § 4319(2)).
Rental Payments to Non-Relatives. When applicants are living in private homes
with the owner or sharing dwelling units with people who are not pooling income or
who are not legally liable relatives, the amount allowed as the applicant’s shelter
expense will be the applicant’s pro rata share of the actual, total shelter cost, up to
the ordinance maximum (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(6)).
Any housing assistance issued to a recipient in such a circumstance will be issued,
whenever reasonably possible, to the landlord or property owner with the most
superior interest in the property; i.e., to a landlord before a tenant, or to a mortgagee
before a mortgagor.
When the municipality issues in aggregate more than $600 in rental payments to any
landlord in any calendar year, a 1099 form declaring the total amount of rental
payments issued during the calendar year will be forwarded to the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) pursuant to IRS regulation (see section 6041(a) of Internal Revenue
Code).
Any landlord wishing to regularly receive rental payments from the municipality on
behalf of applicants renting rooms from the landlord’s own residence must, at a
minimum, make a good faith effort to obtain a lodging license from the Department
of Health and Human Services, Division of Health Engineering, pursuant to 10-144A
Code of Maine Regulations, Chapter 201, as a condition of that landlord receiving
future general assistance payments on behalf of his or her tenants.
Mortgage Payments. In the case of a request for assistance with a mortgage
payment, the general assistance administrator will make an individual factual
determination of whether the applicant has an immediate need for such aid. In
67
making this determination, the administrator will consider the extent and liquidity of
the applicant’s proprietary interest in the housing. Factors to consider in making this
determination include:
(1) the marketability of the shelter’s equity;
(2) the amount of equity;
(3) the availability of the equity interest in the shelter to provide the applicant
an opportunity to secure a short-term loan in order to meet immediate
needs;
(4) the extent to which liquidation may aid the applicant’s financial
rehabilitation;
(5) a comparison between the amount of mortgage obligations and the
anticipated rental charges the applicant would be responsible for if he/she
were to be dislocated to rental housing;
(6) the imminence of the applicant’s dislocation from owned housing because
of his or her inability to meet the mortgage payments;
(7) the likelihood that the provision of housing assistance will prevent such
dislocation; and
(8) the applicant’s age, health, and social situation.
These factors shall be considered when determining whether the equity in the
shelter is an available asset which may be substituted for the assistance the
municipality would otherwise be required to provide.
The administrator shall consider issuing a benefit in response to the applicant’s
request for mortgage assistance to the extent the applicant is otherwise eligible for
general assistance if after reviewing the above criteria the administrator determines
that:
68
(1) the monthly mortgage obligation is in accordance with the maximum levels
of assistance available for housing appropriate to the applicant’s
household size;
(2) there is no capacity in the accumulated equity in the property, when
considered in the context of the applicant’s borrowing capacity with the
mortgagee or the general lending community, to suspend the mortgage
obligation temporarily or reamortize the mortgage in such a way as to
suspend or reduce the mortgage obligation; and
(3) the failure to provide a mortgage payment in a timely manner could
jeopardize the applicant’s continued right of possession of the property.
If a mortgage payment is necessary, the administrator will pay the actual amount
due, up to the amount allowed according to the maximum levels listed below. After
an initial application, assistance with such payments will be given only after the
applicant has made all reasonable efforts to borrow against the equity of his or her
home. If there is not sufficient equity in the home with which to secure a loan, and if
the monthly mortgage payments are not realistically in line with the rental rates for
similar housing in the area that could meet the applicant’s needs, the administrator
will inform the applicant that he/she is responsible for finding alternative housing
within his or her ability to pay and will be obligated to make all reasonable efforts to
secure such housing.
Liens. The municipality may place a lien on the property in order to recover its costs
of granting assistance with mortgage payments. In addition, a municipality may claim
a lien against the owner of real estate for the amount of money spent by it to make
capital improvements to the real estate (22 M.R.S.A. § 4320). No lien may be
enforced against a recipient except upon his or her death or the transfer of the
property. Further, no lien may be enforced against a person who is currently
receiving any form of public assistance, or who would again become eligible for
general assistance if the lien were enforced.
69
If the municipality determines that it is appropriate to place a lien on a person’s
property to recover its costs of providing general assistance for a mortgage payment
or capital improvement it must file a notice of the lien with the county registry of
deeds where the property is located within 30 days of making the mortgage
payment. That filing shall secure the municipality’s or the state’s interest in an
amount equal to the sum of that mortgage or capital improvement payment and all
subsequent mortgage or capital improvement payments made on behalf of the same
eligible person, plus interest and costs.
Not less than 10 days prior to filing the lien in the registry, the municipal officers
must send notice to the owner of the real estate, the general assistance recipient,
and any record holder of the mortgage by certified mail, return receipt requested,
that a lien on the property is going to be filed with the registry. This notice must
clearly inform the recipient of the limitations upon enforcement plus the name, title,
address and telephone number of the person who granted the assistance. The
municipal officers must also give written notice to the recipient each time the amount
secured by the lien is increased because of an additional mortgage payment. This
notice must include the same information that appeared on the original intent-to-file
notice sent to the recipient.
The municipality may charge interest on the amount of money secured by the lien.
The municipal officers will establish the interest rate not to exceed the maximum rate
of interest allowed by the State Treasurer to be charged against delinquent taxes.
The interest will accrue from the date the lien is filed.
Property Taxes. In the event an applicant requests assistance with his or her
property taxes, the administrator will inform the applicant that there are two
procedures on the local level to request that relief: the poverty abatement process
(36 M.S.R.A. § 841(2)) and General Assistance. If the applicant chooses to seek
70
property tax assistance through General Assistance, or if the applicant is denied a
poverty tax abatement, the administrator may consider using general assistance to
meet this need only if:
a) the property tax in question is for the applicant’s place of residence;
b) there is a tax lien on the property which is due to mature within 60 days of the
date of application;
c) as a matter of municipal policy or practice, or on the basis of information
obtained from the applicant’s mortgagee, if any, it is reasonably certain that a
tax lien foreclosure will result in subsequent eviction from the residential
property; and
d) the applicant, with sufficient notice, applies for property tax relief through the
Maine Property Tax Fairness Credit program, when available.
Housing Maximums. The maximum levels of housing assistance contained in this
ordinance have been derived either from a locally accomplished fair market rental
survey or the fair market rental values developed by the United States Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). If the maximum levels of housing are
derived from the HUD values made effective as of every October 1, and adjusted to
disregard the current and averaged utility allowances as developed by the Maine
State Housing Authority, those levels are hereby incorporated by reference. See
Appendix C of this ordinance for the current year’s housing maximums.
If and when the maximum levels of housing contained in this ordinance are derived
from a locally developed fair market rental survey, a record of that survey will be
submitted to the DHHS, General Assistance Unit, and the maximum levels of
housing assistance will be incorporated into this ordinance pursuant to the ordinance
adoption and amendment procedures found at 22 M.R.S.A. § 4305.
71
C) Utilities. Expenses for lights, cooking, and hot water will be budgeted separately if
they are not included in the rent. Applicants are responsible for making
arrangements with the utility company regarding service, including entering into a
special payment arrangement if necessary.
Assistance will be granted to eligible applicants on the basis of their most recent bill.
The municipality is not obligated to pay back bills or utility security deposits.
Exceptions may be made in emergency situations pursuant to section 4.9.
Disconnection of utility service will not be considered an emergency in all cases.
The administrator will make an individual, factual analysis to determine if the
termination of utility service constitutes an emergency. The administrator will
consider the household composition, the time of year, the age and health of the
household members, and other appropriate factors in reaching a decision.
Applicants who had sufficient income, money, assets or other resources to pay their
utility bill when it was received, but who spent all or part of their income on items
which were not basic necessities, will not be eligible to receive general assistance to
replace those funds.
Applicants have the burden of providing evidence of their income and use of income
for the applicable time period (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(2)) (see section 4.9 and 6.3).
The administrator will notify applicants in writing that they must give the
administrator prompt notice if their utility service is to be terminated or if their fuel
supply is low. It is the applicant’s responsibility to attempt to make arrangements
with the utility company to maintain their service and to notify the administrator if
assistance is needed with a utility bill prior to service being terminated.
Electricity Maximums for Households Without Electric Hot Water. See Appendix D of
this ordinance for the current year’s electricity maximums.
72
Electricity Maximums for Households that Use Electrically Heated Hot Water. See
Appendix D of this ordinance for the current year’s electricity maximums.
Non-Electric Utilities. The allowed amount for water and sewer utility service will be
budgeted at a 30-day reasonable usage rate.
D) Fuel. Expenses for home heating will be budgeted according to the actual need for
fuel during the heating season (September through May) provided such expenses
are reasonable, and at other times during the year when the administrator
determines the request for fuel assistance is reasonable and appropriate.
Assistance will be granted to eligible applicants on the basis of their most recent bill.
The municipality is not responsible for back bills except in an emergency as provided
in section 4.9. Applicants are responsible for monitoring their fuel supply and
requesting assistance prior to depleting their fuel supply. When applicants who have
been informed of this responsibility run out of fuel nonetheless, and can show no just
cause for failing to give the administrator timely notice of their need for fuel, the
administrator shall find that the emergency was not beyond the applicants’ control,
and process the emergency request accordingly, pursuant to section 4.9 of this
ordinance.
See Appendix E of this ordinance for the current year’s fuel maximums.
E) Personal Care and Household Supplies. Expenses for ordinary personal and
household supplies will be budgeted and allowed according to the applicant’s actual
need for these items. Personal and household supplies include: hand soap,
toothpaste, shampoo, shaving cream, deodorant, dish detergent, laundry supplies
and costs, household cleaning supplies, razors, paper products such as toilet paper,
tissues, paper towels, garbage/trash bags light bulbs and supplies for children under
73
5 years of age. See Appendix F of this ordinance for the current year’s personal
care and household supplies maximums.
F) Other Basic Necessities. Expenses falling under this section will be granted when
they are deemed essential to an applicant’s or recipient’s health and safety by the
general assistance administrator and, in some cases, upon verification by a
physician. Assistance will be granted only when these necessities cannot be
obtained through the utilization of available resources.
1) Clothing. The municipality may assist a household with the purchase of
adequate clothing. Before assistance will be granted for clothing, the general
assistance administrator must be satisfied that the applicant has utilized all
available resources to secure the necessary clothing. In some circumstances,
clothing will be a postponable item. Exceptions to this would be, for example, if
fire, flood or unusually cold weather makes extra clothing an immediate
necessity, special clothing is necessary for the applicant’s employment, or a
household member is without adequate clothing.
2) Medical. The municipality will pay for essential medical expenses, other than
hospital bills (see below), provided that the municipality is notified and approves
the expenses and services prior to their being made or delivered. Medical
expenses include prescriptions, devices, treatments, or services that are
determined to be ‘medically necessary’ by a licensed physician. The
municipality will grant assistance for medical services only when assistance
cannot be obtained from any other source and the applicant would not be able
to receive necessary medical care without the municipality’s assistance. The
applicant is required to utilize any resource, including any federal or state
program, that will diminish his or her need to seek general assistance for
medical expenses. The municipality will grant assistance for non-emergency
medical services only if a physician verifies that the services are essential.
74
Provided there is no cost to the applicant, the administrator may require a
second medical opinion from a physician designated by the municipality to
verify the necessity of the services.
Generally, the municipality will issue general assistance at the established
Medicaid rates for all medical services, prescriptions, or other medical
commodities. Before authorizing general assistance for any medical expenses,
the administrator will inform the pharmacy or medical service provider of the
municipality’s intention to pay for the medical service at the Medicaid rate, and
ask to be billed accordingly.
Ordinary medical supplies/non-prescription drugs will be budgeted at the actual
amount when the applicant can demonstrate a need for such items. Allowable
supplies include bandages, aspirin, cough syrup, and other generic brand, nonprescription
medicines. In addition, the basic monthly rate for telephone
service will be budgeted when a telephone is essential to the health and safety
of the household. In order for telephone service to be considered an allowable
expense the applicant must provide a written statement from a physician
certifying that the telephone is essential.
3) Hospital Bills. In the event of an emergency admission to the hospital, the
hospital must notify the administrator within 5 business days of the admission.
Notification must be by telephone, confirmed by certified mail, or by certified
mail only. If a hospital fails to give timely notice to the administrator, the
municipality will have no obligation to pay the bill.
Any person who cannot pay his or her hospital bill must apply to the hospital for
consideration under the Hospital’s Free Care Program as provided in Title 22
M.R.S.A. § 1716. Anyone who is not eligible for the hospital’s free care
program may apply for general assistance. Applicants must apply for
75
assistance within 30 days of being discharged from the hospital and provide a
notice from the hospital certifying that they re not eligible for the hospital’s free
care program.
Before the administrator will consider whether to allow a hospital bill as a
necessary expense, the applicant must enter into a reasonable payment
arrangement with the hospital. The payment arrangement will be based upon
the Medicaid rate. In determining an applicant’s eligibility, the municipality will
budget the monthly payment to the hospital the applicant has agreed to pay.
The applicant’s need for assistance with a hospital bill will be considered each
time he/she applies by including the amount of the bill in the applicant’s monthly
budget, but the recipient will be responsible for making any necessary
payments to the hospital pursuant to the use-of-income requirements found at
section 6.6 of this ordinance.
4) Dental. The municipality will pay for medically necessary dental services only.
As is the case with medical services generally, the municipality will issue
general assistance for dental services at the established Medicaid rates for
those services, and before authorizing the general assistance benefit for dental
services, the administrator will inform the dentist or dental surgeon of the
municipality’s intention to pay at the Medicaid rate. If full mouth extractions are
necessary, the municipality will pay for dentures provided the applicant has no
other resources to pay for the dentures. The applicant will be referred to a
dental clinic in the area whenever possible. The administrator will expect the
applicant to bear a reasonable part of the cost for dental services, including
extractions and dentures, taking into account the applicant’s ability to pay.
5) Eye Care. In order to be eligible to receive general assistance for eyeglasses,
an applicant must have his or her medical need certified by a person licensed
to practice optometry. The general assistance administrator will provide
76
assistance for eyeglasses to eligible persons only after the applicant has
exhausted all other available resources and generally only at the Medicaid rate.
6) Telephone Charge. A payment for basic telephone will only be allowed if a
telephone is necessary for medical reasons as verified by a physician. At the
discretion of the GA administrator, minimum/basic telephone services may be
allowed for households with children, for households where job search or job
related reasons exist and/or for any other reasons the administrator deems
necessary.
7) Work-Related Expenses. In determining need, reasonable and actual workrelated
expenses will be deducted from earned income. These expenses
include childcare costs, work clothes, supplies and transportation at the actual
costs not to exceed the ordinance maximum (see Appendix G for this year’s
maximum mileage allotment). The applicant is required to provide
documentation substantiating the costs and that the expenses were necessary.
8) Travel Expenses. In determining need, necessary travel which is not workrelated
will be budgeted if the applicant can satisfy the administrator that the
prospective need for travel is necessary. For applicants in rural areas, weekly
transportation to a supermarket will be considered, as will any medically
necessary travel. See Appendix G for the current rate at which such necessary
travel will be budgeted. This rate shall be construed to subsidize all costs
associated with automobile ownership and operation, including gas/oil, tires,
maintenance, insurance, financing, licensing/registration, excise tax, etc.
9) Burials, Cremations. Under the circumstances and in accordance with the
procedures and limitations described below (see section 6.9), the municipality
recognizes its responsibility to pay for the burial or cremation of eligible
persons. See Appendix H for the current maximums.
77
10) Capital Improvements. The costs associated with capital improvements/repairs
(e.g., heating/water/septic system repair) will generally not be budgeted as a
basic necessity. Exceptions can be made only when the capital
improvement/repair has been pre-approved by the administrator as a
necessary expense and the monthly cost of the capital improvement/repair has
been reduced as far as reasonably possible; for example, by means of the
applicant entering into an installment payment arrangement with the
contractor. The administrator may grant general assistance for capital
improvements when:
1) the failure to do so would place the applicant(s) in emergency
circumstances;
2) there are no other resources available to effect the capital repair; and
3) there is no more cost-effective alternative available to the applicant or
municipality to alleviate an emergency situation.
In some cases, the entire immediate cost of the capital improvement can be
mitigated by the applicant entering into an installment payment arrangement
with a contractor. The municipality reserves the right to place a lien on any
property pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4320 when general assistance has been
used to effect a capital improvement. The lien process shall be accomplished
in the same manner as for mortgage payments, as described in subsection
(B) “Liens”, above.
Section 6.9—Burials; Cremations
Funeral Director Must Give Timely Notice. In order for the municipality to be liable for a
burial or cremation expense, the funeral director must notify the administrator prior to
the burial or cremation or by the end of three business days following the funeral
director’ receipt of the body, whichever is earlier (22 M.R.S.A. §4313(2)). This contact
by the funeral director shall begin the process of developing an application for
78
burial/cremation assistance on behalf of the deceased. It is the funeral director’s
responsibility to make a good-faith effort to determine if the family or any other persons
are going to pay all or part of the burial expenses. If family members or others are
unable to pay the expenses, and the funeral director wants the municipality to pay all or
part of the expenses, the funeral director must make timely contact to the municipal
administrator. In addition, the funeral director may refer legally liable relatives to the
administrator so that a timely determination of financial capacity may be accomplished.
Application for Assistance Shall be Calculated on Behalf of the Deceased. For the
purposes of determining residency, calculating eligibility and issuing general assistance
for burial or cremation purposes, an application for assistance shall be completed by the
administrator on behalf of the deceased.
With regard to residency, the municipality of responsibility for burial expenses shall be
the municipality in which the eligible deceased person was a resident at the time of
death as residency is determined under section 4.10 of this ordinance.
Although legally liable relatives may be asked to provide information regarding their
income, assets, and basic living expenses, that information will not be construed as an
application for general assistance inasmuch as living persons are not eligible for burial
assistance. To clarify this point of law, although legally liable relatives have a financial
responsibility to pay for the burial or cremation of their relatives, that financial
responsibility only exists to the extent the legally liable relatives have a financial
capacity to do so. Therefore, legally liable relatives who are eligible for general
assistance, by virtue of their eligibility, have no legal obligation to pay for the burial or
cremation of their relatives. For these reasons, all general assistance issued for burial
or cremation purposes shall be issued on behalf of, and in the name of, the deceased.
The Financial Responsibility of Certain Family Members. Grandparents, parents,
children and grandchildren of the deceased, who live in Maine or own property in Maine,
79
are financially responsible for the burial or cremation of the deceased to the extent
those relatives, individually or as a group, have a financial capacity to pay for the burial
or cremation either in lump sum or by means of a budgeted payment arrangement with
the funeral home. Accordingly, at the request of the administrator, all legally liable
relatives must provide the municipal administrator with any reasonably requested
information regarding their income, assets, and basic living expenses.
Consideration of the Financial Responsibility of Family Members. Generally, when the
administrator can make a finding that one or more of the deceased’s legally liable
relatives have an obvious and demonstrable financial capacity to pay for the burial or
cremation, by lump sum payment or by means of a reasonable payment arrangement,
the municipality will not grant the requested burial or cremation assistance. When the
administrator is unable to make such a finding, the following proration of familial
responsibility will be implemented.
Proration of Familial Responsibility. A proration of familial financial responsibility will be
used when no legally liable relative possesses an obvious and demonstrable capacity to
pay for the burial or cremation, but one or more of the financially liable relatives is found
to have a financial capacity to make a partial financial contribution, or the administrator
is unable to determine the financial capacity of one or more of said relatives.
Under these circumstances, each legally liable relative is considered to be responsible
for his or her pro rata share of the total municipal contribution that would exist if no
legally liable relatives had a financial capacity to contribute. Furthermore, and as long
as all other eligibility factors have been satisfied, the municipality will provide as a burial
or cremation benefit the aggregate of all pro rata shares less the share of any legally
liable relative who refuses to cooperate with the administrator by providing information
or documentation reasonably necessary to determine that relative’s financial capacity,
and less any share or part of a share attributable to a legally liable relative who can
80
financially contribute or partially contribute toward the burial or cremation to the extent
of that relative’s share.
Eight Days to Determine Eligibility. The administrator may take up to 8 days from the
date of contact by the funeral director to issue a written decision regarding the amount
of the municipal contribution toward the burial or cremation. The 8-day eligibility
determination period from the date of contact by the funeral director shall be used as
necessary to make third-party collateral contacts, verify the listing of legally liable family
members and determine their respective financial capacities to contribute to the burial
or cremation, contact the personal representative of the deceased’s estate, if any, and
other related administrative tasks. The administrator shall not use this 8-day period
allowed by law to unreasonably delay the municipality’s decision.
The Municipal Obligation to Pay When Legally Liable Relatives or Others Can
Contribute. The figures provided in this section are the maximum benefits provided by
the municipality when no contributions toward the burial or cremation are available from
any other source. To the extent any legally liable relatives of the deceased have a
financial capacity to pay for the burial or cremation, that financial capacity shall be
deducted from the maximum burial costs allowed by this section. In addition, any other
benefits or resources that are available, such as Social Security burial benefits,
veterans’ burial benefits, or contributions from other persons, will be deducted from the
maximum amount the municipality will pay, except there will be no deduction from the
municipal benefit level with respect to any contribution provided for the purpose of
publishing an obituary notice up to an aggregate contribution limit for this purpose of
$75 when a paid receipt demonstrating the purchase of an obituary notice is provided to
the administrator.
Burial Expenses. The administrator will respect the wishes of family members with
regard to whether the deceased is interred by means of burial or cremated. See
Appendix H for the maximum levels of assistance granted for the purpose of burials.
81
Cremation Expenses. In the absence of any objection by any family members of the
deceased, or when neither the administrator nor the funeral director can locate any
family members, the administrator may issue general assistance for cremation
services. See Appendix H for the maximum levels of assistance granted for the
purpose of cremations.
Section 6.10—Notice of Decision
Written Decision. The administrator will give a written decision to each applicant after
making a determination of eligibility each time a person applies. The decision will be
given to the applicant within 24 hours of receiving a completed and signed application
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4305(3)) (see Article IV, section 4.6).
When an applicant submits an incomplete or unsigned application, due to the 24-hour
decision requirement placed on the GA administrator, the GA administrator may decide
to render a notice of “ineligibility” and provide the applicant with another application to
submit as soon as is practicable for the applicant.
In order to ensure that applicants understand their rights, it is the responsibility of the
general assistance administrator to explain the applicants’ right to a fair hearing in the
written notice of decision.
Contents. After an application has been completed, applicants will be given written
notice of any decision concerning their eligibility for assistance. In addition to the
contents of a written decision listed in section 4.6 of this ordinance, the notice will state
that applicants:
a) have the right to a fair hearing and the method by which they may obtain a fair
hearing and;
82
b) have the right to contact the DHHS if they believe the municipality has violated
the law. The decision will state the method for notifying the department.
Disbursement of General Assistance. Except when determined impractical by the
administrator, all general assistance will be provided in the form of a voucher or
purchase order payable to a vendor or through direct municipal payment to a provider of
goods or services. General assistance will not be issued in the form of a cash payment
to an applicant unless there is no alternative to making such a cash payment, in which
case the administrator shall document the circumstances for issuing general assistance
in the form of cash (22 M.R.S.A. § 4305(6)).
83
ARTICLE VII
The Fair Hearing
Section 7.1—Right to a Fair Hearing
Within 5 working days of receiving a written notice of denial, reduction or termination of
assistance, or within 10 working days after any other act or failure to act, the applicant
or his or her authorized representative has the right to request a fair hearing (22
M.R.S.A. § 4322). The right to review a decision of the general assistance administrator
is a basic right of the applicant to a full evidentiary hearing and is not limited solely to a
review of the decision.
Section 7.2—Method of Obtaining a Fair Hearing
Upon receiving notification of the decision of the general assistance administrator, all
claimants will be informed of the method of obtaining a fair hearing. All complaints that
are not clear requests for a fair hearing will be answered by a personal interview or in
writing by the general assistance administrator. If the client is satisfied with the
adjustment or explanation, the administrator will make an entry in the case record and
file any correspondence involved.
Written Request. To obtain a fair hearing, the claimant, or his or her authorized
representative, must make a written request within 5 working days of receiving the
administrator’s decision to grant, deny, reduce or terminate assistance, or within 10
working days after any other act or failure to act. The administrator will make available
a printed form for requesting a fair hearing and will assist the claimant in completing it if
necessary. On the printed form, the claimant will give the following information:
a) the decision on which review is sought;
b) the reason(s) for the claimant’s dissatisfaction and why the claimant believes
he/she is eligible to receive assistance; and
84
c) the relief sought by the claimant.
The administrator cannot deny or dismiss a request for a hearing unless it has been
withdrawn (in writing) by the claimant.
Scheduling the Fair Hearing. Upon receipt of the completed written request the fair
hearing authority must meet and hold the hearing within 5 working days. The
administrator will notify the claimant in writing when and where the hearing will be held
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4322). In addition to the date, time and place of the hearing, the notice
of fair hearing sent to the claimant shall include, at a minimum, the claimant’s rights to:
a) be his or her own spokesperson at the fair hearing, or be represented by legal
counsel or other spokesperson at the hearing, at the claimant’s own expense;
b) confront and cross-examine any witnesses presented at the hearing against the
claimant; and
c) present witnesses on his or her own behalf.
Arrangements for the date, time, and place of the hearing will take into consideration the
convenience of the claimant and hearing authority. The claimant will be given timely
notice to allow for preparation and will also be given adequate preliminary information
about the hearing procedure to allow for effective preparation of his or her case.
Section 7.3—The Fair Hearing Authority
The municipal officers will appoint a fair hearing authority (FHA) that will determine,
based on all the evidence presented at the fair hearing, whether the claimant(s) were
eligible to receive assistance at the time they applied for GA. The FHA is charged with
the responsibility of ensuring that general assistance is administered in accordance with
the state law and local ordinance.
85
The fair hearing authority may consist of the municipal officers, one or more persons
appointed by the municipal officers to act as the FHA , or, if designated, the board of
appeals created under 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691 (22 M.R.S.A. § 4322). In determining the
organization of the fair hearing authority, the municipal officers will use the following
criteria. The person(s) serving as FHA must:
a) not have participated in the decision which is the subject of the appeal;
b) be impartial;
c) be sufficiently skilled in interviewing techniques to be able to obtain evidence and
the facts necessary to make a fair determination; and
d) be capable of evaluating all evidence fairly and realistically, explaining to the
claimant the laws and regulations under which the administrator operated, and
interpreting to the administrator any evidence of unsound, unclear, or inadequate
policies, practices or actions.
Section 7.4—Fair Hearing Procedure
When a claimant requesting a fair hearing is notified of the date, time, and place of the
hearing in writing, he/she will also be given adequate preliminary information about the
hearing procedure to allow for effective preparation of his or her case. The claimant
shall be permitted to review his or her file prior to the hearing. At a minimum, the
claimant will be told the following information, which will govern all fair hearings. All fair
hearings will:
a) be conducted privately, and will be open only to the claimant, witnesses, legal
counsel, or others whom the claimant wants present, and the general assistance
administrator, his or her agents, counsel and witnesses;
b) be opened with a presentation of the issue by the fair hearing authority;
c) be conducted informally, without technical rules of evidence, but subject to the
requirements of due process;
86
d) allow the claimant and the administrator the option to present their positions for
themselves or with the aid of others, including legal counsel;
e) give all participants an opportunity to present oral or written testimony or
documentary evidence, offer rebuttal; question witnesses presented at the
hearing; and examine all evidence presented at the hearing;
f) result in a decision, based exclusively on evidence or testimony presented at the
hearing; and
g) be tape recorded, and result in a written decision that is given to the claimant and
filed with evidence introduced at the hearing. The fair hearing authority will allow
the claimant to establish all pertinent facts and circumstances, and to advance any
arguments without undue interference. Information that the claimant does not
have an opportunity to hear or see will not be used in the fair hearing decision or
made part of the hearing record. Any material reviewed by the fair hearing
authority must be made available to the claimant or his or her representative. The
claimant will be responsible for preparing a written transcript if he/she wishes to
pursue court action.
The fair hearing authority shall admit all evidence if it is the kind of evidence upon which
reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs (22
M.R.S.A. § 4322).
Claimant’s Failure to Appear. In the event the claimant fails to appear, the FHA will
send a written notice to the claimant that the GA administrator’s decision was not
altered due to the claimant’s failure to appear. Furthermore, the notice shall indicate
that the claimant has 5 working days from receipt of the notice to submit to the GA
administrator information demonstrating “just cause,” for failing to appear.
For the purposes of a claimant’s failure to appear at a fair hearing, examples of “just
cause” include:
a) a death or serious illness in the family;
87
b) a personal illness which reasonably prevents the party from attending the
hearing;
c) an emergency or unforeseen event which reasonably prevents the party from
attending the hearing;
d) an obligation or responsibility which a reasonable person in the conduct of his or
her affairs could reasonably conclude takes precedence over the attendance at
the hearing; or
e) lack of receipt of adequate or timely notice; excusable neglect, excusable
inadvertence, or excusable mistake.
If the claimant (or their attorney) establishes just cause, the request for the hearing will
be reinstated and a hearing rescheduled.
In the event a claimant who is represented by legal counsel fails to appear at a fair
hearing, legal counsel shall not testify in place of the claimant on matters of ‘fact’ but
may cross examine witnesses and make ‘legal’ arguments on behalf of the claimant.
Section 7.5—The Fair Hearing Decision
The decision of the fair hearing authority will be binding on the general assistance
administrator, and will be communicated in writing to the claimant within 5 working days
after completion of the hearing. Written notice of the decision will contain the following:
a) a statement of the issue;
b) relevant facts brought out at the hearing;
c) pertinent provisions in the law or general assistance ordinance related to the
decision; and
d) the decision and the reasons for it.
A copy of the notice of the decision will be given to the claimant. The hearing record and
the case record will be maintained by the general assistance administrator.
88
The written notice of the decision will state that if the claimant is dissatisfied with the fair
hearing decision, he/she has a further legal right to appeal the decision pursuant to the
Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 80B. To take advantage of this right, the claimant
must file a petition for review with the Superior Court within 30 days of receipt of the fair
hearing decision.
When the decision by the fair hearing authority or court authorizes assistance to the
claimant, the assistance will be provided within 24 hours.
89
ARTICLE VIII
Recovery of Expenses
Recipients. The municipality may recover the full amount of assistance granted to a
person from either the recipient or from any person liable for the recipient, or his or her
executors or administrators in a civil action. However, prior to recovering assistance
granted, the municipality shall “offset” the value of any workfare performed by a GA
recipient, at a rate not less than minimum wage.
Prior to taking a recipient to court to recover the amount of assistance, the municipality
will seek voluntary repayment from the recipient by notifying him/her in writing and
discussing it with the recipient. The municipality shall not attempt to recover such costs
if, as a result of the repayment, the person would again become eligible for general
assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4318).
Recipients Anticipating Workers’ Compensation Benefits. The municipality shall claim a
lien for the value of all general assistance payments made to a recipient on any lump
sum payment made to that recipient under the Workers’ Compensation Act or similar
law of any other state (22 M.R.S.A. § 4318, 39-A M.R.S.A. § 106). After issuing any
general assistance on behalf of a recipient who has applied for or is receiving Workers’
Compensation, the municipality shall file a notice of the municipal lien with the general
assistance recipient and the Office of Secretary of State, Uniform Commercial Code
division.
The notice of lien shall be filed on a UCC-1 form which must be signed by the recipient
of general assistance who has applied for or is receiving Workers’ Compensation. Any
general assistance applicant who has applied for or who is receiving Workers’
Compensation benefits and who refuses to sign a properly prepared UCC-1 form will be
found ineligible to receive general assistance until he or she provides the required
90
signature. The municipality shall also send a photocopy of that filing to the recipient’s
Worker’s Compensation attorney, if known, the applicant’s employer or the employer’s
insurance company, and, at the administrator’s discretion, to the Workers’
Compensation Board. The lien shall be enforced at the time any lump sum Workers’
Compensation benefit is issued.
Recipients of SSI. All applicants who receive general assistance while receipt of their
Supplemental Security Income (SSI) assistance is pending or suspended, and which
therefore may be retroactively issued to the applicant at a later date, will be required to
sign a statement on an Interim Assistance Agreement form distributed by the DHHS that
authorizes the Social Security Administration to direct a portion of any retroactive SSI
payment to the municipality and/or the state in repayment for the general assistance
granted. Any general assistance applicant who has applied for or who may be applying
for SSI, or who may be required to apply for SSI pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4317, and
who refuses to sign the Interim Agreement SSI authorization form will be found ineligible
to receive general assistance until he or she provides the required signature (22
M.R.S.A. § 4318).
Relatives. The spouse of an applicant, and the parents of any applicant under the age
of 25, are liable for the support of the applicant (22 M.R.S.A. § 4319). In addition,
grandchildren, children, parents and grandparents are liable for the burial costs of each
other. The municipality considers these relatives to be available resources and liable for
the support of their relatives in proportion to their respective ability. The municipality
may complain to any court of competent jurisdiction to recover any expenses made on
the behalf of a recipient if the relatives fail to fulfill their responsibility (22 M.R.S.A. §
4319).
91
ARTICLE IX
Severability
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid,
such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of the ordinance.
92


Appendix A
Effective: 10/01/17-09/30/18
Prepared by MMA
8/2017
1
GA Overall Maximums
Metropolitan Areas
Persons in Household
COUNTY 1 2 3 4 5*
Bangor HMFA:
Bangor, Brewer, Eddington, Glenburn, Hampden,
Hermon, Holden, Kenduskeag, Milford, Old Town,
Orono, Orrington, Penobscot Indian Island
Reservation, Veazie
714 788 994 1,242 1,506
Penobscot County HMFA:
Alton, Argyle UT, Bradford, Bradley, Burlington,
Carmel, Carroll plantation, Charleston, Chester,
Clifton, Corinna, Corinth, Dexter, Dixmont, Drew
plantation, East Central Penobscot UT, East
Millinocket, Edinburg, Enfield, Etna, Exeter,
Garland, Greenbush, Howland, Hudson, Kingman
UT, Lagrange, Lakeville, Lee, Levant, Lincoln,
Lowell town, Mattawamkeag, Maxfield, Medway,
Millinocket, Mount Chase, Newburgh Newport,
North Penobscot UT, Passadumkeag, Patten,
Plymouth, Prentiss UT, Seboeis plantation,
Springfield, Stacyville, Stetson, Twombly UT,
Webster plantation, Whitney UT, Winn, Woodville
605 682 847 1,095 1,269
Lewiston/Auburn MSA:
Auburn, Durham, Greene, Leeds, Lewiston, Lisbon,
Livermore, Livermore Falls, Mechanic Falls, Minot,
Poland, Sabattus, Turner, Wales
641 726 915 1,169 1,397
Portland HMFA:
Cape Elizabeth, Casco, Chebeague Island,
Cumberland, Falmouth, Freeport, Frye Island,
Gorham, Gray, Long Island, North Yarmouth,
Portland, Raymond, Scarborough, South Portland,
Standish, Westbrook, Windham, Yarmouth; Buxton,
Hollis, Limington, Old Orchard Beach
1,002 1,131 1,431 1,931 2,097
York/Kittery/S.Berwick HMFA:
Berwick, Eliot, Kittery, South Berwick, York
982 1,025 1,333 1,714 2,173
Cumberland County HMFA: Baldwin,
Bridgton, Brunswick, Harpswell, Harrison, Naples,
New Gloucester, Pownal, Sebago
761 807 1,072 1,561 1,780
Appendix A
Effective: 10/01/17-09/30/18
Prepared by MMA
8/2017
2
COUNTY 1 2 3 4 5*
Sagadahoc HMFA:
Arrowsic, Bath, Bowdoin, Bowdoinham,
Georgetown, Perkins UT, Phippsburg, Richmond,
Topsham, West Bath, Woolwich
781 863 999 1,318 1,600
York County HMFA:
Acton, Alfred, Arundel, Biddeford, Cornish, Dayton,
Kennebunk, Kennebunkport, Lebanon, Limerick,
Lyman, Newfield, North Berwick, Ogunquit,
Parsonsfield, Saco, Sanford, Shapleigh, Waterboro,
Wells
745 872 1,079 1,457 1,477
*Note: Add $75 for each additional person.
Non-Metropolitan Areas
Persons in Household
COUNTY 1 2 3 4 5*
Aroostook County 618 642 760 965 1,049
Franklin County 646 671 793 985 1,400
Hancock County 693 787 992 1,249 1,367
Kennebec County 722 746 928 1,216 1,297
Knox County 754 755 928 1,186 1,315
Lincoln County 783 834 987 1,234 1,470
Oxford County 630 646 771 1,110 1,343
Piscataquis County 595 672 828 1,090 1,125
Somerset County 675 704 835 1,133 1,146
Waldo County 680 751 887 1,206 1,281
Washington County 630 645 763 985 1,173
* Please Note: Add $75 for each additional person.
Appendix B
Effective: 10/01/17 to 09/30/18
B-1 Prepared by MMA - 8/2017
Food Maximums
Please Note: The maximum amounts allowed for food are established in accordance with the
U.S.D.A. Thrifty Food Plan. As of October 1, 2017, those amounts are:
Number in Household Weekly Maximum Monthly Maximum
1 44.65 192
2 81.86 352
3 117.21 504
4 148.84 640
5 176.74 760
6 212.33 913
7 234.65 1,009
8 268.14 1,153
Note: For each additional person add $144 per month.
Appendix C
Effective: 10/01/17-09/30/18
C-1 Prepared by MMA – 8/2017
GA Housing Maximums
(Heated & Unheated Rents)
NOTE: NOT ALL MUNICIPALITIES SHOULD ADOPT THESE SUGGESTED
HOUSING MAXIMUMS! Municipalities should ONLY consider adopting the following
numbers, if these figures are consistent with local rent values. If not, a market survey should be
conducted and the figures should be altered accordingly. The results of any such survey must be
presented to DHHS prior to adoption. Or, no housing maximums should be adopted and
eligibility should be analyzed in terms of the Overall Maximum—Appendix A. (See Instruction
Memo for further guidance.)
Non-Metropolitan FMR Areas
Aroostook County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 111 476 130 559
1 111 476 134 578
2 130 558 159 684
3 167 718 204 878
4 177 762 221 949
Franklin County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 117 503 137 587
1 117 503 141 607
2 137 591 167 717
3 173 743 209 898
4 258 1,108 302 1,300
Hancock County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 124 535 147 633
1 139 599 167 720
2 183 788 213 915
3 227 976 270 1,159
4 242 1,041 294 1,264
Kennebec County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 131 564 154 662
1 131 564 158 679
2 168 724 198 851
3 219 943 262 1,126
4 226 971 278 1,194
Appendix C
Effective: 10/01/17-09/30/18
C-2 Prepared by MMA – 8/2017
Non-Metropolitan FMR Areas
Knox County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 139 596 161 694
1 139 596 161 694
2 168 724 198 851
3 212 913 255 1,096
4 230 989 282 1,212
Lincoln County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 145 625 168 723
1 150 646 178 767
2 182 783 212 910
3 223 961 266 1,144
4 266 1,144 318 1,367
Oxford County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 110 472 133 570
1 110 472 135 579
2 132 567 161 694
3 195 837 237 1,020
4 237 1,017 288 1,240
Piscataquis County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 106 457 126 540
1 118 508 143 613
2 147 630 177 759
3 198 853 235 1,011
4 198 853 240 1,034
Somerset County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 120 517 143 615
1 121 519 148 637
2 147 631 176 758
3 202 869 243 1,043
4 202 869 243 1,043
Appendix C
Effective: 10/01/17-09/30/18
C-3 Prepared by MMA – 8/2017
Non-Metropolitan FMR Areas
Waldo County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 121 522 144 620
1 131 563 159 684
2 159 683 188 810
3 217 933 260 1,116
4 222 955 274 1,178
Washington County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 110 472 133 570
1 110 472 134 578
2 130 559 160 686
3 166 712 208 895
4 208 847 249 1,070
Metropolitan FMR Areas
Bangor HMFA Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 129 556 152 654
1 140 600 168 721
2 184 790 213 917
3 225 969 268 1,152
4 275 1,180 326 1,403
Penobscot Cty. HMFA Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 104 447 127 545
1 115 494 143 615
2 149 643 179 770
3 191 822 234 1,005
4 219 943 271 1,166
Lewiston/Auburn MSA Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 112 483 135 581
1 125 538 153 659
2 165 711 195 838
3 208 896 251 1,079
4 249 1,071 301 1,294
Appendix C
Effective: 10/01/17-09/30/18
C-4 Prepared by MMA – 8/2017
Metropolitan FMR Areas
Portland HMFA Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 196 844 219 942
1 219 943 247 1,064
2 285 1,227 315 1,354
3 386 1,658 428 1,841
4 412 1,771 464 1,994
York/Kittery/S. Berwick
HMFA
Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 192 824 214 922
1 195 837 223 958
2 263 1,129 292 1,256
3 335 1,441 378 1,624
4 430 1,847 481 2,070
Cumberland Cty. HMFA Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 140 603 163 701
1 144 619 172 740
2 202 868 231 995
3 299 1,288 342 1,471
4 338 1,454 390 1,677
Sagadahoc Cty. HMFA Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 145 623 168 721
1 157 675 185 796
2 185 795 214 922
3 243 1,045 286 1,228
4 296 1,274 348 1,497
York Cty. HMFA Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 136 587 159 685
1 159 684 187 805
2 203 875 233 1,002
3 275 1,184 318 1,367
4 275 1,184 320 1,374
FOR MUNICIPAL USE ONLY
MMA
08/17
1
GA MAXIMUMS SUMMARY SHEET
Note: The overall maximums found in Appendices A, B, C, D, E, and F are effective from
October 1, 2017 to September 30, 2018.
APPENDIX A - OVERALL MAXIMUMS
County Persons in Household
1 2 3 4 5 6
NOTE: For each additional person add $75 per month.
(The applicable figures from Appendix A, once adopted, should be inserted here.)
APPENDIX B - FOOD MAXIMUMS
Number in Household Weekly Maximum Monthly Maximum
1 44.65 192
2 81.86 352
3 117.21 504
4 148.84 640
5 176.74 760
6 212.33 913
7 234.65 1009
8 268.14 1,153
NOTE: For each additional person add $144 per month.
APPENDIX C - HOUSING MAXIMUMS
Unheated Heated
Number of
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
01234
(The applicable figures from Appendix C, once adopted, should be inserted here.)
FOR MUNICIPAL USE ONLY
MMA
08/17
2
APPENDIX D - UTILITIES
ELECTRIC
NOTE: For an electrically heated dwelling also see “Heating Fuel” maximums below. But remember, an
applicant is not automatically entitled to the “maximums” established?applicants must demonstrate
need.
1) Electricity Maximums for Households Without Electric Hot Water: The maximum amounts
allowed for utilities, for lights, cooking and other electric uses excluding electric hot water and heat:
Number in Household Weekly Monthly
1 $14.00 $60.00
2 $15.70 $67.50
3 $17.45 $75.00
4 $19.70 $86.00
5 $23.10 $99.00
6 $25.00 $107.00
NOTE: For each additional person add $7.50 per month.
2) Electricity Maximums for Households With Electrically Heated Hot Water: The maximum
amounts allowed for utilities, hot water, for lights, cooking and other electric uses excluding heat:
Number in Household Weekly Monthly
1 $20.65 $89.00
2 $23.75 $102.00
3 $27.70 $119.00
4 $32.25 $139.00
5 $38.75 $167.00
6 $41.00 $176.00
NOTE: For each additional person add $10.00 per month.
NOTE: For electrically heated households, the maximum amount allowed for electrical utilities per
month shall be the sum of the appropriate maximum amount under this subsection and the appropriate
maximum for heating fuel as provided below.
APPENDIX E - HEATING FUEL
Month Gallons Month Gallons
September 50 January 225
October 100 February 225
November 200 March 125
December 200 April 125
May 50
FOR MUNICIPAL USE ONLY
MMA
08/17
3
NOTE: When the dwelling unit is heated electrically, the maximum amount allowed for heating
purposes will be calculated by multiplying the number of gallons of fuel allowed for that month
by the current price per gallon. When fuels such as wood, coal and/or natural gas are used for
heating purposes, they will be budgeted at actual rates, if they are reasonable. No eligible
applicant shall be considered to need more than 7 tons of coal per year, 8 cords of wood per year,
126,000 cubic feet of natural gas per year, or 1000 gallons of propane.
APPENDIX F - PERSONAL CARE & HOUSEHOLD SUPPLIES
Number in Household Weekly Amount Monthly Amount
1-2 $10.50 $45.00
3-4 $11.60 $50.00
5-6 $12.80 $55.00
7-8 $14.00 $60.00
NOTE: For each additional person add $1.25 per week or $5.00 per month.
SUPPLEMENT FOR HOUSEHOLDS WITH CHILDREN UNDER 5
When an applicant can verify expenditures for the following items, a special supplement will be budgeted
as necessary for households with children under 5 years of age for items such as cloth or disposable
diapers, laundry powder, oil, shampoo, and ointment up to the following amounts:
Number of Children Weekly Amount Monthly Amount
1 $12.80 $55.00
2 $17.40 $75.00
3 $23.30 $100.00
4 $27.90 $120.00
Appendix G
Mileage Rate
This municipality adopts the State of Maine travel expense reimbursement rate as set by the
Office of the State Controller. The current rate for approved employment and necessary medical
travel etc. is 44 cents (44¢) per mile.
Please refer to the Office of State Controller for changes to this rate: Telephone: 626-8420 or
visit: http://www.state.me.us/osc/
Appendix H
Funeral Maximums
Burial Maximums
The maximum amount of general assistance granted for the purpose of burial is $1,125.
Additional costs may be allowed by the GA administrator, where there is an actual cost,
for:
• The wholesale cost of a cement liner if the cemetery by-laws require one;
• The opening and closing of the grave site; and
• A lot in the least expensive section of the cemetery. If the municipality is able to
provide a cemetery lot in a municipally owned cemetery or in a cemetery under
municipal control, the cost of the cemetery lot in any other cemetery will not be
paid by the municipality.
The municipality’s obligation to provide funds for burial purposes is limited to a
reasonable calculation of the funeral director’s direct costs, not to exceed the maximum
amounts of assistance described in this section. Allowable burial expenses are limited to:
• Removal of the body from a local residence or institution
• A secured death certificate or obituary
• Embalming
• A minimum casket
• A reasonable cost for necessary transportation
• Other reasonable and necessary specified direct costs, as itemized by the funeral
director and approved by the municipal administrator.
Cremation Maximums
The maximum amount of assistance granted for a cremation shall be $785. Additional
costs may be allowed by the GA administrator where there is an actual cost, for:
• A cremation lot in the least expensive section of the cemetery
• A reasonable cost for a burial urn not to exceed $50
• Transportation costs borne by the funeral director at a reasonable rate per mile for
transporting the remains to and from the cremation facility.
Appendix I
26 MRSA §1043 (23)
Misconduct. “Misconduct” means a culpable breach of the employee’s duties or obligations
to the employer or a pattern of irresponsible behavior, which in either case manifests a disregard
for a material interest of the employer. This definition relates only to an employee’s entitlement
to benefits and does not preclude an employer from discharging an employee for actions that are
not included in this definition of misconduct. A finding that an employee has not engaged in
misconduct for purposes of this chapter may not be used as evidence that the employer lacked
justification for discharge. [1999, c. 464, §2 (rpr).]
A. The following acts or omissions are presumed to manifest a disregard for a material
interest of the employer. If a culpable breach or a pattern of irresponsible behavior is shown,
these actions or omissions constitute “misconduct” as defined in this subsection. This does
not preclude other acts or omissions from being considered to manifest a disregard for a
material interest of the employer. The acts or omissions included in the presumption are the
following:
(1) Refusal, knowing failure or recurring neglect to perform reasonable and proper
duties assigned by the employer;
(2) Unreasonable violation of rules that are reasonably imposed and communicated and
equitably enforced;
(3) Unreasonable violation of rules that should be inferred to exist from common
knowledge or from the nature of the employment;
(4) Failure to exercise due care for punctuality or attendance after warnings;
(5) Providing false information on material issues relating to the employee’s eligibility
to do the work or false information or dishonesty that may substantially jeopardize a
material interest of the employer;
(6) Intoxication while on duty or when reporting to work or unauthorized use of alcohol
while on duty;
(7) Using illegal drugs or being under the influence of such drugs while on duty or when
reporting to work;
(8) Unauthorized sleeping while on duty;
(9) Insubordination or refusal without good cause to follow reasonable and proper
instructions from the employer;
(10) Abusive or assaultive behavior while on duty, except as necessary for self-defense;
(11) Destruction or theft of things valuable to the employer or another employee;
(12) Substantially endangering the safety of the employee, coworkers, customers or
members of the public while on duty;
(13) Conviction of a crime in connection with the employment or a crime that reflects
adversely on the employee’s qualifications to perform the work; or
(14) Absence for more than 2 work days due to incarceration for conviction of a crime.
Appendix I
[1999, c. 464, §2 (new).]
B. “Misconduct” may not be found solely on:
(1) An isolated error in judgment or a failure to perform satisfactorily when the
employee has made a good faith effort to perform the duties assigned;
(2) Absenteeism caused by illness of the employee or an immediate family member if
the employee made reasonable efforts to give notice of the absence and to comply with
the employer’s notification rules and policies; or
(3) Actions taken by the employee that were necessary to protect the employee or an
immediate family member from domestic violence if the employee made all reasonable
efforts to preserve the employment.
[1999, c. 464, §2 (new).]

Town of York Harbor Ordinance Revised through November 7, 2017
2
HARBOR ORDINANCE
Rules and Regulations Pertaining to the Harbors, Ports, Tidal Waters, and Channels
within the Town of York, Maine
SECTION 1. DEFINITIONS
ANCHORAGE: An area where vessels may be anchored, moored or otherwise berthed at
a wharf, dock, slip or pier.
BATHING AREA: The area of water within 200 feet of the shoreline of a defined beach
in the Town.
BEACHES, DEFINED: Primarily includes, but not limited to Long Sands Beach, Short
Sands Beach, Harbor Beach and Cape Neddick Beach.
BERTH: The place where a vessel lies when at anchor or when made fast at a dock, float,
moored float, mooring, pier, slip, wharf, or any other facility used for securing a vessel.
CHANNELS:
a. Defined: Areas of Harbors or Tidal Rivers kept open for navigation or other
purpose by this ordinance.
b. Natural: That part of a tidal river below the low water mark, providing the
natural course of flow of water; the thread of a body of running water.
THE FOLLOWING CHANNELS ARE DEFINED:
1. York Harbor Entrance Channel: An area enclosed in the following boundaries,
to wit: A line beginning on the eastern shore of Harris Island at the spindle #9
to the most western point on the shore of Stage Neck; then encompassing all
the waters from that line to a starting point at the point on the most south
eastern shore of Eastern Point, then on a line to a point on the northeastern
shore of Western Point.
2. York Harbor Navigation Channel: An area approximately 30 yards wide from
the north westerly end of the York Harbor Entrance Channel to the Route 103
Bridge, following the natural channel of the York River and marked Spindle
“9”, Can “11” and the channel lights and sign on the Route 103 Bridge.
3. York River Channel: The natural channel of the York River from the Route
103 Bridge to the source of the York River and all its tidal tributaries.
4. Cape Neddick Outer Harbor Channel: An area enclosed by the following
boundaries, to wit: A line extending from Bell Buoy “2” southwesterly to Can
“1”, then northerly to the channel marker spindle east of Shore Road then
southeasterly to Bell Buoy “2”.
Town of York Harbor Ordinance Revised through November 7, 2017
3
5. Cape Neddick Inner Harbor Channel: The natural channel of the Cape
Neddick River from the channel marker spindle east of Shore Road to the
source of the Cape Neddick River.
COMMERCIAL FISHERMAN: A fisherman who is licensed by the State of Maine
and/or other applicable entities to engage in commercial fishing. Because of York’s
proud history of fishing, the Harbor Board gives preferences to commercial fisherman in
the administration of this Ordinance.
DOCK: A slip extending beside one or more piers or wharves or a waterway cut into the
land for the reception of vessels.
FLOAT: A platform that floats and is attached to or associated with a single pier or wharf
in such a way that pedestrian movement is afforded between the pier and the float.
HARBORS: Used herein to indicate all the Harbor areas defined below collectively.
Defined Harbors of the Town are:
Brave Boat Harbor: That portion of Brave Boat Harbor, as charted on N.O.S.
Chart 13283, corrected December 1, 1984, which lies within the geographical
limits of the Town.
Cape Neddick Harbor: Cape Neddick Harbor, as charted on N.O.S. chart 13283,
corrected to December 1, 1984 including that portion of the Cape Neddick River
westerly of the Charted Harbor to the Clark Road Bridge.
a) Outer Harbor: A portion of the Cape Neddick Harbor lying upstream
from the mouth of the Cape Neddick River and extending to the Shore
Road Bridge.
b) Inner Harbor: A portion of the Cape Neddick River lying upstream
from the Shore Road Bridge to Clark Road Bridge.
York Harbor: An area, as charted on N.O.S. Chart 13283, corrected to December
1, 1984, from the mouth of the York River to the Route 103 Bridge.
HARBOR USE: Holding a mooring permit, traversing tidal water areas or rental or
occupation of private berths in the Town.
HIGH WATER MARK: The highest elevation of the water during the highest annual tide
as published on the tide tables for York Harbor from the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), which is also interpreted by the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection for the current year.
HOUSEBOAT: A vessel designed for use primarily as a dwelling or domicile for human
occupancy in protected waters, whether self-propelled or not. Offshore safety and
navigational related features such as, but not limited to hydrodynamics, freeboard, and
Town of York Harbor Ordinance Revised through November 7, 2017
4
seaworthiness would be secondary or even non-existent. Final determination to be made
by the Harbor Master and the Harbor Board.
JURISDICTION: This ordinance shall apply to all tidal waters and to all land areas at an
elevation below the High Water Mark as defined above in the Town.
LANDING: A place for receiving or discharging persons or things from a vessel.
LOW WATER MARK: The lowest elevation of the water during the low tide
immediately following the highest annual tide.
MARINA: An establishment providing berths, supplies or services for vessels for a fee.
MARSH: A periodically wet or continually flooded land area with the surface not deeply
submerged, covered dominantly with sedges, cattails, rushes, and other hydrophytic
plants.
MARSH BANK: That portion of the coastal wetlands which is covered with marsh
grasses. The line, delineated by the change from marsh vegetation to mud, shall be the
"marsh bank line."
MOORED FLOAT: A platform not attached to or associated with a pier, wharf, or the
shore in any way, that floats and is anchored, moored or otherwise secured and is used as
a berth or other purpose.
MOORING: A semi-permanent, adequate means of securing a vessel to the bottom in an
anchorage.
MOORING FIELD: One of the eight regions into which the York Harbor and York River
are separated, as more particularly depicted in the document entitled York Harbor
Mooring Field Chart, which is incorporated into this definition by reference.
MOORING PERMIT: A permit issued annually by the Harbor Master to an applicant,
authorizing the applicant to utilize a specific mooring space for a specific size and type of
vessel, for a period of one (1) year.
MOORING SPACE: A space assigned by the Harbor Master for securing a vessel to a
mooring or moored float.
MOORING SPACE ASSIGNEES: Vessel owner(s) who have been granted a mooring
space permit and whose name(s) has been on the mooring space permit or on the
application for the mooring space permit, since a point in time that is the later of five
years prior to the current date, or the original date of the application for the mooring
space permit, or the effective date of this ordinance.
MOUTH OF THE CAPE NEDDICK RIVER: A line in the Cape Neddick River between
the easternmost low water out-crops of Weare’s Point and Barn Point, passing through #2
Bell Buoy.
Town of York Harbor Ordinance Revised through November 7, 2017
5
MOUTH OF THE YORK RIVER: A line projecting due south in the York River
projecting due south from Eastern Point to Western Point.
OIL: Any and all petroleum products and their by-products of any kind and in any form,
including, but not limited to, petroleum, fuel oil, sludge, oil refuse, oil mixed with other
wastes, and crude oil.
PERSONAL WATERCRAFT: Any motorized vessel utilized primarily for recreational
purposes that is capable of exceeding 20 miles per hour. This term applies only to a
vessel that uses an inboard motor powering a jet pump as the vessel’s primary source of
propulsion and is designed to be operated by a person sitting, standing or kneeling on the
vessel rather than the conventional manner of sitting, standing or kneeling inside the
vessel. The term includes, but is not limited to, a Jet Ski, Wave Rider, wet bike, surf jet,
miniature speedboat, and hovercraft. Personal watercraft also includes any motorized
watercraft whose operation is controlled by a water skier. This term does not include
dinghies, skiffs, tenders, canoes, kayaks and other like vessels, used primarily for
transporting persons and goods at speeds of less than five miles per hour.
PIER: A structure extending into a harbor for use as a landing place.
PORT: Includes the harbor area, town wharves and public landings and any other public
landings or wharves that might be acquired by the Town in any defined Harbor in York.
RESIDENT: Any person occupying a dwelling in the town of York for more than 180
days in a calendar year.
SEASON, BOATING: Beginning of Memorial Day weekend to end of Columbus Day
weekend.
TENDER: A vessel 13’ 6” or less in length and 6’ 0” or less in beam and not more than
15 horse power, associated with a specific larger vessel and principally used for
transportation from the larger vessel to a landing or other vessel. Also referred to as a
“dinghy”, or “skiff”. Each mooring permit shall entitle the holder to one tender.
TOWN: The Town of York, Maine.
TRANSIENT VESSEL: A vessel, the operator or owner of which seeks a temporary
place to berth within a defined Harbor, River, or Channel.
VESSEL: A watercraft of any kind including but not limited to boats, scows, dredges,
and shellfish cars.
VESSEL, ABANDONED: A vessel shall be considered “abandoned” if for a period of at
least six (6) continuous months, and of the following circumstances exist:
1. The owner of the vessel fails or refuses to pay any applicable license fee,
excise tax, harbor usage fee, or any other fee or charge imposed by the Town of
York.
Town of York Harbor Ordinance Revised through November 7, 2017
6
2. The owner of the vessel fails or refuses to comply with any lawfully issued
order of the Harbor Master.
3. The owner of the vessel fails or refuses to respond to any lawful request for
information submitted to him or her by the Harbor Master.
VESSEL, DERELICT: A vessel shall be considered “derelict” if any or all of the
following circumstances exist:
1. The vessel is fastened to neither a mooring nor an anchor.
2. The vessel lacks any license or registration, from any authority, the
possession of which is a pre-requisite to the operation of such a vessel.
3. The vessel is submerged to a level substantially above its normal water line,
and remains so for a period of at least fourteen (14) consecutive days without
reasonable explanation.
4. The vessel is damaged to such an extent that it cannot be moved under its
own power.
VESSEL OWNER: An individual having at least a 25% interest in and demonstrable
right of exclusive use of a vessel, whether or not registered or documented. Proof of
ownership interest and demonstrable right of exclusive use shall be a document, currently
dated, showing the names of all owners of interest the percentage of their interest in the
vessel, and the date they obtained that interest, signed and sworn to by all named owners
and filed with the Harbor Master.
WHARF: A structure built on the shore of a harbor, river, channel or the like, including
but not limited to, one extending parallel to the shore line, so that vessels may lie close
alongside to receive and discharge passengers and cargo.
SECTION 2. POWERS OF APPOINTMENT AND RESPONSIBILITIES
A. Harbor Master:
1. The Town Manager shall appoint a Harbor Master.
2. The Harbor Master, with oversight by the Town Manager, shall appoint such
Deputy Harbor Masters as may be necessary to assist the Harbor Master with all
the powers and obligations as granted by Statute.
3. The Harbor Master and Deputies may be removed from office for cause by the
Town Manager in a manner prescribed by applicable law.
4. Upon qualification, the Harbor Master and Deputies may be appointed as Reserve
Police Officers in the York Police Department having all the powers of arrest as
granted thereto by the Statutes of the State of Maine.
5. The Harbor Master shall enforce the Rules and Regulations of the Town and the
applicable Statutes of the State of Maine pertaining to any area under the
Town of York Harbor Ordinance Revised through November 7, 2017
7
jurisdiction of this ordinance and shall cooperate with other government agencies
in enforcing their regulations; preserve and regulate navigation within said areas;
assign, relocate, and/or revoke annual and transient mooring permits; require
berths and their associated hardware to be kept in safe condition; direct the
relocation or removal of vessels if necessity or emergency requires or for reasons
of safety, navigation, improved space utilization, or offense against this
ordinance; collect transient mooring fees as required; advise the Harbor Board
regarding applications for new construction and for alterations to existing
structures; and inquire into and prosecute all offenses occurring within said areas.
6. The Harbor Master shall keep such records as the Town Manager and the Harbor
Board may require and shall perform such other duties as the Town Manager and
the procedures of the Harbor Board may require in the administration of this
ordinance.
7. Qualifications, salary and expenses of the Harbor Master are recommended by the
Harbor Board for approval by the Town Manager.
8. The Harbor Master shall attend all Harbor Board Meetings unless excused, and
shall act in an advisory capacity to the Board.
B. Harbor Board:
1. The Board of Selectmen shall appoint a Harbor Board, being a board of Town
residents, to serve without compensation and to include five regular members who
serve staggered terms of three years and two alternate members who each serve a
term of three years. The duties and responsibilities of the Harbors Board shall be:
2. To oversee and plan the general operation of the Harbors and Tidal Waters of the
Town.
3. To hear appeals from decisions of the Harbor Master in accordance with the
procedure established in Section III, Paragraph 8 of this ordinance.
4. To consider applications for both new and existing structures within the
jurisdictional limits of this ordinance and to determine whether such applications
should be granted, in accordance with the procedure established in Section 3 of
this ordinance.
5. To advise as to the Board of Selectmen regarding applications for wharves and
weir fish licenses pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A. § 1022.
6. To advise the Harbor Master in the implementation of the provisions of this
ordinance, including mooring space assignments.
7. To annually submit a budget request to the Selectmen through the Town Manager,
and to administer the budget as approved.
8. To adopt written policies, procedures, and application forms to facilitate the
administration of the Ordinance.
Town of York Harbor Ordinance Revised through November 7, 2017
8
9. To make recommendations to the Board of Selectmen through the Town Manager
for the enhancement of harbor facilities for the long range benefit of users and the
Town.
10. To make recommendations as needed to the Board of Selectmen through the
Town Manager for the revision and updating of this Ordinance.
11. To hold public informational meetings as necessary to assure adequate public
participation in deliberations and recommendations of the Board.
12. To report periodically to the Town Manager on the activities of the Board.
SECTION 3. HARBOR USE REGULATIONS
A. Vessel Owner Responsibility
The owner(s) of a vessel shall be co-equally and severally responsible with an operator of
said vessel for any infraction of this ordinance by said operator if:
1. Said owner of a vessel permits another person to operate said vessel and said
operation is in violation of any section of this ordinance.
2. Boat owners are responsible for adequate maintenance, care, and upkeep of their
boats, skiffs and dinghies. Failure to do so will result in forfeiture of the mooring.
3. Said owner is the parent guardian responsible for the care of a minor under 18
years of age and the minor operates said vessel in violation of any section of this
ordinance.
B. Speed of Vessels
1. Upon all tidal waters within the Town it shall be unlawful to operate a vessel at a
speed that is not safe and prudent including, but not limited to damaging any
wharf, float, or anchored or moored vessel, or endangering any person or
property, or impairing another vessel’s ability to maneuver or proceed safely.
Operating a vessel at more than headway speed within 10 feet of a person in the
water or within a defined bathing area when persons are in the water shall be
considered endangering a person, and is unlawful.
2. Upon the York River and all its tributaries within the Town, from Can #7 in the
York River Channel and Sewall’s Bridge and between the Brickyard Marker
Buoy and the U.S. Route 1 Bridge, and between Scotland Bridge and the source
of the York River, it shall be unlawful to operate a vessel at a speed exceeding
five miles per hour over the bottom or in such a manner that causes a wash, wake,
or waves that visibly and unnecessarily disturbs an anchored or moored vessel or
float, or endangers a person or the banks of a harbor or river.
Town of York Harbor Ordinance Revised through November 7, 2017
9
3. Upon the Cape Neddick River and all its tributaries within the Town, within an
area between a speed marker 200 yards east of the Shore Road Bridge and the
source of the Cape Neddick River, it shall be unlawful to operate a vessel at a
speed exceeding five miles per hour over the bottom or in such a manner that
causes a wash, wake or waves that visibly and unnecessarily disturbs an anchored
or moored vessel or float, or endangers a person or the banks of a harbor or river.
C. Personal Watercraft and Houseboats
It shall be unlawful to operate a personal watercraft, as well as anchor or moor a
houseboat upon the tidal waters within the Town within an area encompassed by the
mouth and the source of the York River; and upon the Cape Neddick River and all
its tributaries within the Town within an area encompassed by a speed marker buoy
200 yards east of the Shore Road Bridge and the source of the Cape Neddick River;
within Brave Boat Harbor; and within any bathing area at a defined beach.
D. Towing
Upon the York River and all its tributaries in the Town, York Harbor, Cape
Neddick Harbor, Cape Neddick River and Brave Boat Harbor, it shall be unlawful
for any operator of a vessel to have in tow any device, such as skis, sleds, boards,
etc., intended primarily for recreational purposes.
E. Channels
It shall be unlawful to place any materials in defined channels in the jurisdictional
limits of the Town in such a manner as to obstruct the channel. Such materials shall
include, but are not limited to, buoys and floating line.
F. Fishing Equipment
Except for eel pots and hand held gear such as fishing rods or lines, it shall be
unlawful to set fishing equipment in the York River Channel.
G. Anchorage
The defined Harbors and the Tidal Rivers of the Town are hereby assigned as
anchorage areas, provided, however, that no anchor, mooring, or other device for
securing a vessel shall be set, established, or maintained without permission of the
Harbor Master, who shall grant such permission with due regard to maintaining
channels for passage of vessels and in a manner as described herein. The Harbor
Master may order any vessel in this area to change position when, in the Harbor
Master’s opinion, said vessel may impede navigation or endanger other vessels.
H. Mooring Spaces
These regulations are promulgated to meet the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
requirements for Federal Anchorages and its permit number ME-YORK-85-1361,
as amended; the requirements of the Town of York Interim Harbor Management
Town of York Harbor Ordinance Revised through November 7, 2017
10
Plan dated May 28, 1985; and the Statutes of the State of Maine, as such regulations
and statutes may from time to time be modified.
1. Current Permit Holder: Mooring space applications prepared by the Harbor Board,
shall be mailed annually to the current mooring permit holder. The application
shall include the length, draft, and type of vessel approved for the mooring space,
the application fee, and other pertinent information requested on the application
form. It is the responsibility of the applicant to fill out the application and submit
it to the Town Clerk together with all fees, taxes and accrued interest, fines and
penalties due. An application shall not be considered received until the application
and fees, taxes and accrued interest and penalties are received. The Town Clerk
receipts the mooring application, fees, and taxes and accrued interest, fines and
penalties and forwards the application to the Harbor Master, who after reviewing
the application, approves it and issues the mooring permit or denies the
application. In so far as it shall be consistent with Statute, the Harbor Master shall
give preference in approving mooring permits to persons holding permits during
the past calendar year and to Shorefront Property Owners.
I. Construction and Alteration of Structures
1. It shall be unlawful to either construct a new structure or to make any addition,
alteration, or change to an existing structure without prior application to the
Harbor Board. For the purposes of this provision, the term “structure” shall
include, but shall not be limited to, any dock, float, moored float, pier, wharf, or
landing located or to be located within the jurisdictional limits of this ordinance.
2. This provision shall not apply to routine repairs and maintenance to existing
structures. The requirements of this provision shall be in addition to any other
applicable local, state, or federal requirements.
3. The following procedure shall be applied by the Harbor Board when reviewing
applications for new structures and for additions, alterations, or changes to
existing structures:
a. Any person wishing to construct a new structure and/or make additions,
alterations, or changes to an existing structure:
1. File an application on the form provided by the Harbor Board;
2. Provide a plan that shows the proposal in plan view which meets the
following requirements:
a. is prepared and certified by a Maine-licensed Professional
Engineer;
b. has a signature block with a title, “Approval of the Town of York,
Maine”, has signature and date lines for the Chair of the Harbor
Board, the Code Enforcement Officer and the Chair of the Board
of Selectmen, and concludes with the sentence, “All 3 signatures
Town of York Harbor Ordinance Revised through November 7, 2017
11
shall be required before the plan is considered approved and
construction may commence.”
c. shows all information necessary to demonstrate compliance with
all applicable codes; and
3. Pay a non-refundable application fee of $50.
b. The Harbor Board shall hold a public hearing on the application within thirty
days (30) of the filing date.
c. Notice of the public hearing shall be posted at the Town Hall and shall also be
published in a newspaper of general circulation at least seven (7) business
days prior to the public hearing.
d. The Harbor Master shall attend the hearing and shall present all information
deemed appropriate for the Harbor Board’s understanding of the application.
e. The Harbor Board shall not approve the application unless a majority of
members present and voting finds that the new structure, or the addition,
alteration, or change to the existing structure will neither impede navigation
nor endanger vessels. In addition to this general standard, the following shall
also apply:
1. New wharves, piers and floats shall not extend closer than 100 feet
from the opposite marsh bank. All measurements shall be made
perpendicular to the high water mark of the natural shoreline. No
measurements shall be made from any man-made structure.
2. To avoid interference with navigation, no pier or float combination shall
extend into the channel a distance greater than 10% of the width of the
channel at low tide.
3. Wharves, piers, and docks will be permitted on the York River, west
(upstream) of Sewall’s Bridge, only in areas where the low water channel
is 50 feet or less from the high water mark. Wharves, piers, and docks
will be permitted on the York River, east (downstream) of Sewall’s
Bridge, only in areas where the low water channel is 84 feet or less from
the high water mark. No wharves, piers or docks will be permitted in
Barrells Mill Pond. All measurements shall be made perpendicular to the
high water mark of the natural shoreline at the location of the proposed
structure. No measurements may be made from any man-made structure.
4. To be repaired in kind, the structure (in this context to include wharf, pier,
dock and/or float) must have been in place and functioning as intended, in
the opinion of the Harbor Master, within 24 months of the Town’s receipt
of an application. When repaired, all reasonable measures shall be taken
to bring the structure into conformance with current standards to the
greatest extent possible and only upon issuance of a permit by the Harbor
Town of York Harbor Ordinance Revised through November 7, 2017
12
Board. A structure that has not been functioning as intended for longer
than 24 months, in the opinion of the Harbor Master, may be repaired or
replaced only in full compliance with all current local and State permitting
requirements. Shoreland and Building permits from the Code
Enforcement Officer may also be required. See also – Zoning Ordinance
§8.3.6.10.
f. The Harbor Board shall advise the Board of Selectmen regarding applications
for wharves and weir fish licenses pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A. §1022.
g. Notice of the Harbor Board’s decision shall be sent to the applicant within
thirty (30) days of the date of the public hearing and within seven (7) business
days of the decision. Decisions shall be in writing, shall contain a statement of
findings and conclusions, and shall state the reasons for the decision.
h. Appeals from the Harbor Board’s decision shall be made in accordance with
Maine law.
4. Immediately following completion of any construction work approved under
Section 3, above, and before lawful use commences, a Maine-licensed
Professional Engineer shall provide certified written documentation that all work
was completed in full compliance with the approved plan. Failure to provide such
certification of full compliance shall be treated as a violation of this Ordinance as
of the date of completion of construction. See Section 10 for penalties.
Additionally, the Harbor Board may ask the Code Enforcement Officer to check
for zoning violations.
SECTION 4. MOORING SPACE ASSIGNMENTS
A. All mooring spaces are under the exclusive control of the Harbor Master and must be
assigned annually from established lists maintained by the Harbor Master, of persons
either holding or desiring a mooring permit, except for designated mooring spaces
which the Harbor Master may assign to transient vessels.
B. No vessel of greater than 50 feet in length overall shall be assigned a free-swinging or
Bow & Stern mooring space in York Harbor. Vessels over 50 feet in length overall
which have been assigned mooring space prior to adoption of this amendment are
excepted, so long as their application for annual permit renewal is otherwise in good
standing. Bow sprits, Pulpits, Booms, Outboard swim platforms, all shall be
considered in the assignment of a mooring.
C. Mooring Space Application: Any person seeking a mooring space shall file an
application with the Office of the Harbor Board . Upon payment of an application fee,
the applicant’s name shall be added to the waiting list maintained by the Harbor Master
in the order the application fee was received. All applicants are responsible for giving
notice of any change of address. An annual fee for each mooring application will be
billed on December 1st and be due by January 2nd of the following year. Failure to pay
the annual fee will result in applicant’s name being purged from their respective lists.
Town of York Harbor Ordinance Revised through November 7, 2017
13
1. Applicants will indicate a range of vessel size, provided that when they receive a
space assignment they must utilize it for a vessel of the size and type indicated on
the mooring permit by the end of the first full boating season after receipt of the
space assignment, and in no case shall ever utilize it for a vessel of different size
class than approved for the space assignment without written approval of the
Harbor Master. If the applicant cannot utilize the assigned mooring space within
the first full boating season, the applicant may offer the space to the Harbor
Master for the Temporary (One Season) Waiting List before May 31st to retain the
space assignment for one season.
2. The Town shall develop a procedure to purge the waiting list of applicants that no
longer desire a mooring or who cannot be contacted by Registered mail. Said
procedure shall be approved by the Harbor Board and the Board of Selectmen.
D. Waiting List: All new mooring space assignments shall be made on a “first come, first
served” basis from established waiting lists maintained by the Harbor Master, except
as provided by statute, following the procedure provided in Section III. Applicants
will be listed chronologically according to the size range of their sail or powerboat
and declare their choice(s) of mooring location within the Mooring Field Plan shown
on the last page of this document. Applicants may change to a different size range list
and/or location field as long as they maintain position on the list chronologically from
the time of application. The Harbor Master shall review mooring space applications
with regard to space available for the length, draft and type of vessel indicated and as
evaluated by the Harbor Master. Upon approval by the Harbor Master, it is the
responsibility of the applicant to submit the approved mooring space application to
the Town Clerk, together with all fees, fines and penalties due. The applicant will
then present the mooring space application to the Harbor Master, who will issue a
permit and location for such mooring space and advise the applicant concerning the
requirements of these rules and regulations. Priority will be given to commercial
fishermen (lobster, dragger, gillnet, & charter, etc.). Upstream of the Route 103
bridge on the York River, which is above the Federal Navigation Project (federally
funded dredging), priority will be given to commercial fishermen who are York
residents.
1. Applicants on a Waiting List may refuse an offered mooring space and retain their
relative position on the List only twice before being moved to the end of their
respective list. Applicants will have 14 days to respond to mooring assignment
offers by mail. The Waiting Lists shall be available for inspection by the public
during regular business hours at the office of the Harbor Board and online at
http://www.yorkmaine.org/Committees/HarborBoard/tabid/65/Default.aspx.
E. New Assignments Procedures: The Harbor Master shall create a list of available
mooring spaces, specifying the length, type, and location of vessel to be accommodated
at each mooring space. The Harbor Master shall send the list by mail to all persons on the
waiting list whose applications are for the location(s) and space for a vessel of
approximately the same length, draft, and type as those previously assigned to one or
more of the available mooring spaces. Applicants shall then make known to the Harbor
Master their interest in specific available mooring spaces. The Harbor Master shall assign
each of the available spaces to the highest ranked qualified applicant asking for that
specific space. Failure to respond to two notifications of an available mooring, or
Town of York Harbor Ordinance Revised through November 7, 2017
14
notice returned two times “unable to deliver” will result in name being removed from
the Mooring Waiting list.
1. Mooring space assignees may change vessels on their assigned mooring only with
the permission of the Harbor Master. In general they will be limited to the same
approximate size and type of vessel unless, in the judgment of the Harbor Master,
a change can be made without adversely affecting the Harbor mooring plan or
adjoining mooring space assignees.
2. An approved mooring space assignee has the responsibility of providing and
maintaining his own mooring hardware or moored float and its associated
hardware.
3. Mooring assignments may not be transferred, except that a mooring assignment
used for commercial fishing purposes may be transferred only at the request or
death of the assignee, only to a member of the assignee’s family and only if the
mooring assignment will continue to be used for commercial fishing purposes..
For the purpose of this subsection, “member of the assignee’s family” means an
assignee’s spouse, parent, child, or sibling, by birth or by adoption, including a
relation of the half blood. Mooring assignments may not be rented.
4. Marinas and individuals shall not control or assign any berth space except at their
own privately owned piers, docks, and floats attached to private property. A
vessel without a mooring permit shall not be permitted to remain on a mooring
unless assigned by the Harbor Master in accordance with the provisions of this
Ordinance. Vessels occupying a mooring without a valid permit may be removed
by the Harbor Master following a hearing conducted by the Harbor Board. Notice
and procedures for any such hearing shall be as set forth in Section III of this
Ordinance, except that the Harbor Master need only demonstrate by a
preponderance of the evidence that the vessel does not possess a valid permit for
the mooring in question. Should the Harbor Board affirm the Harbor Master’s
determination that a vessel does not possess a valid permit, the owner of the
vessel shall have ten (10) days in which to remove such vessel, or it may be
removed thereafter by the Harbor Master at the owner’s expense. Mooring permit
holders may, upon receipt of written approval of the Harbor Master, permit guest
usage of their mooring space for not more than 14 days per season.
5. The Harbor Master shall, whenever practicable, assign mooring space where
owners of a shorefront parcel of land as defined in 38 MRSA Section 11, with one
hundred feet or more of shore rights are applicants, and shall locate one suitable
mooring space fronting their lands for them, but not encroaching upon the natural
channel or channels established by law, and not interfering with the mooring,
passage, and navigation of other vessels. The Harbor Master shall, insofar as the
same may be done consistently with these rules and regulations and with due
regard for the safety of other vessels and of navigation, give consideration to the
choice of mooring space of an assignee. However, where berth privileges of other
assignees are claimed to be invaded or where protection is sought of the Harbor
Master, the Harbor Master shall assign and indicate to assignees the locations
Town of York Harbor Ordinance Revised through November 7, 2017
15
which they may occupy for the assigned berth. Outhauls shall conform to the same
provisions as a shorefront mooring.
F. Winter Moorings: All vessels assigned a permanent mooring space and left over the
winter must be moored on a float or a bow and stern mooring. Vessels not assigned a
permanent mooring space in the Harbors of the Town may receive a permit to use the
moorings of assignees, with the written permission of the assignee and the Harbor
Master upon presentation of proof of payment of Harbor Usage Fee during the period
of November 15 to April 30. Failure to remove a vessel with a winter permit by April
30 will be considered a refusal of an order of the Harbor Master.
G. Temporary (One Season) Mooring List: Mooring holders (except for holders of
shorefront property owners’ moorings granted in accordance with this ordinance) who
know that they will not be occupying their mooring for a season are urged to place
their mooring on the Temporary Mooring List so that it can be used. The Application
for Harbor Permit Renewal has provisions to list moorings on the Temporary List. A
Mooring Holder who is not using their mooring and pays their Harbor Usage Fees
annually may retain rights to a mooring for up to 3 years while listing it on the
Temporary Mooring List even if no one from the List uses it. Mooring riggings will
be inspected and maintained by the temporary assignees during their occupancy.
Applicants already on the Mooring Waiting List and wishing to be included on the
Temporary Mooring List shall be listed in the same chronological order as described
in Paragraph D. of this section.
H. Final Notification Procedure: Mooring permit holders failing to reapply for their
permit by the last business day in April shall be notified by the Harbor Master by a
single final notice by Certified Mail with a return receipt requested that they shall
reapply for a mooring permit within fifteen days of the date of the final notice or risk
forfeiture of their mooring space. Assignees so notified will be assessed an additional
Administrative Late Fee.
1. Upon termination of the assignment of any mooring space to an assignee, the
associated hardware must be removed unless a new assignee has assumed the
responsibility for the hardware from the former assignee. Any cost for removal of
hardware is the responsibility of the terminating assignee. When the mooring
space is on a moored float, the new assignee has the responsibility to negotiate a
purchase price for his share of the float with the previous assignee.
I. Mooring Space Abandonment: Failure by mooring permit holders to comply with the
Annual Renewal Procedure for any reason, including but not limited to nondeliverability
for the final notice, will constitute an abandonment of the assignment.
Accordingly, the Harbor Master may reassign the mooring space in a manner as
provided for herein, except, however that this reassignment provision shall not apply
to a mooring space mandated by State Statute.
1. Abandoned Mooring Space Removal Costs: Mooring space assignees
abandoning their assignments are liable for all costs for the removal, if
necessary, or any associated hardware.
Town of York Harbor Ordinance Revised through November 7, 2017
16
J. Unused Mooring Space Assignments: Mooring space assignments unused for one
calendar year shall be reviewed by the Harbor Board and may be revoked and
reassigned by the Harbor Master. A vessel owned by the Permit Holder and assigned
to the mooring space by the Harbor Master, except for holders of shorefront property
owners’ moorings granted in accordance with this ordinance, must be on the mooring
for at least fourteen (14) days during the season and the Permit Holder shall be
responsible for ensuring that the Harbor Master is aware that the vessel is on the
mooring during the fourteen days. Failure to use the mooring as specified in this
subsection except under the provisions of the Temporary One Season Mooring List
for at least fourteen (14) days shall constitute non-use of the mooring.
K. Mooring Specifications: Moorings shall be maintained in a safe condition by the
owner. Any Mooring existing, or hereinafter to be set shall be of sufficient size to
hold the vessel for which it is used and shall conform to or exceed the Mooring and
Float Rig Specifications sheet available at the office of the Harbor Board.
1. All moorings shall have the mooring number assigned by the Harbor Master
permanently affixed on the mooring buoy. Said mooring number shall be at least
three inches high and shall be clearly visible at all times. The Harbor Master may,
after due notice of deficiency to a mooring permit holder, place the mooring
number on a buoy and charge the holder for the cost of so doing, plus an
Administrative Fee.
2. The Harbor Master or other agent of the town may at any time examine any
mooring to determine compliance with this ordinance. Except in cases of
emergency, the Harbor Master shall notify the owner of intention to examine the
mooring and request the presence of the owner during such examination. After
examination, the Harbor Master shall provide a written report of the mooring’s
condition to the owner, along with a statement of corrective action required if any.
Moorings determined by the Harbor Master to be inadequate shall be corrected by
the assignee within two weeks or be removed. Any cost of examination or
removal resulting there from shall be borne by the assignee of the mooring. By
assigning a mooring space, the Town is not accepting responsibility for the
condition of the mooring hardware.
SECTION 5: HARBOR MANAGEMENT
A. Berthed Vessels that Impede Navigation or Endanger Other Vessels: All berths now
existing or herein after approved shall be located so that the vessels secured therein
will not impede navigation or endanger other vessels. If the Harbor Master shall find
that any vessel is so located, it may be required that the owner or assignee of the
berth, or of the vessel secured therein, take such steps as will prevent such impeding
of navigation or endangering to other vessels, or the Harbor Master may order that the
berth hardware or the vessel attached thereto be removed or relocated in a manner as
described herein. In requiring said removal or relocation under this provision, the
berth last assigned shall be the first ordered to be removed or relocated. Any persons
so ordered by the Harbor Master acting under this provision shall remove or relocate
Town of York Harbor Ordinance Revised through November 7, 2017
17
the same within 48 hours after being so ordered, provided however, that if the Harbor
Master shall find an emergency requiring immediate action to prevent injury to life or
damage to property, the Harbor Master may cause said action. Any expense incurred
shall be borne by the berth owner, assignee and/or the owner of the vessel being
removed or relocated.
B. Moving Berths: Except by direction of the Harbor Master or with permission of the
assignee/owner and approval by the Harbor Master, no person shall move or interfere
with any berth or vessel in any defined Harbor or Tidal River.
C. Transient Berths: The Town owns and maintains moorings for the use of transient
vessels in York Harbor. In addition, mooring permit holders may, from time to time,
authorize the Harbor Master to assign their berths to transient vessels.
1. The Harbor Master is empowered to assign available berths for use by transient or
other vessels on a “first come, first served” basis.
2. Except as permitted by the Harbor Master, transient vessels may use an assigned
berth for no longer than 24 hours.
3. The Town will assess a fee for transient vessel use of berths as indicated in Section
IV. Said fee will be collected in advance by the Harbor Master, Harbor Master’s
Deputies or agents of the Town.
D. Public Floats, Piers, Wharves and Landings Limitations: No vessel other than a
tender shall be made fast to a Town float, pier, wharf, or landing except for a
reasonable time required for loading or unloading. Exceptions may be made in
emergencies only by written permission of the Harbor Master.
1. Storage: Personal property, including but not limited to lobster traps, motor
vehicles, cradles, boats and floats shall not be stored on a Town float, pier, wharf,
or landing. Any designated loading zone shall be used only for lobster traps,
fishing gear and other items in transit.
2. Usage: No person shall loiter, create a public nuisance, or partake of alcoholic
beverages on a Town float, pier, wharf, or landing.
3. Swimming: No person shall dive, swim, skin dive, or SCUBA dive within 30
feet of a Town owned structure without permission of the Harbor Master, except
in cases of emergencies.
4. Tenders: No skiffs, dinghies, tenders, or similar vessels shall be allowed on top
of a Town float, pier, wharf or landing. Such vessels shall be maintained by their
owners and the owners shall be liable for any damage occurring to Town property
or other vessels. Any such vessels maintained in the harbors of the Town and
using Town facilities for a total of more than 14 days per annum shall be
registered with the Harbor Master by notation on the application for a mooring
permit and have the mooring space number or the owner’s name visibly displayed
on the inside transom of said vessel. The Harbor Master may, after due notice of
Town of York Harbor Ordinance Revised through November 7, 2017
18
deficiency to the owner, place the mooring number on a tender and charge the
owner for the cost thereof plus an administrative fee.
5. Obstruction: It shall be unlawful to obstruct by any means whatsoever the free
use of a Town float, pier, wharf or landing, or any other common landing place.
Said areas shall be used only for loading and unloading. Vessels shall not remain
tied up at said structures for a period longer than is reasonably necessary for this
purpose, except by permission of the Harbor Master in case of emergency. The
Harbor Master shall remove or cause to be removed, any unattended vessel
obstructing free use of said areas after due effort has been made to notify the
Master or owner of said vessel of the above violation. The vessel owner shall be
responsible for all costs associated with said action.
E. Waste and Refuse: No person or vessel shall deposit, throw, sweep or cause to be
deposited or swept into the tidal waters of the Town, or into waters adjacent thereto,
any human waste, gas or oil or bilge water containing same, ashes, dirt, stones,
gravel, mud, logs, planks, brush or any other substance tending to obstruct the
navigation of said waters, or to shoal the depth of said waters, or to pollute said
waters. No trash or refuse shall be placed on any Town float or pier except in
designated containers. No person shall deposit, on or in proximity to any town dock
or harbor parking area either waste oil or oil containers or oil-contaminated materials.
F. Regulations: Nothing herein shall be considered as conflicting with Federal or State
laws applicable to the tidal waters of the state.
SECTION 6: DERELICT AND ABANDONED VESSELS
Authority of the Harbor Master : The Harbor Master shall be responsible for
ensuring that all vessels utilizing the Harbor are properly maintained and registered
with all applicable local, state, and federal authorities. Toward that end, the Harbor
Master shall have authority to remove from the harbor any and all derelict and/or
abandoned vessels. In enforcing this section, it shall be unnecessary for the Harbor
Master to establish any subjective intent by the vessel owner actually to abandon the
vessel.
SECTION 7: PROCEDURES FOR IMPOUNDING VESSELS
A. Post-Seizure Hearings In Emergencies: If the Harbor Master concludes that an
abandoned or derelict vessel poses an immediate threat to the health, safety, or
welfare of persons using either the Harbor or lands adjoining the Harbor, the Harbor
Master shall be authorized to seize control of such vessel, to remove such vessel to
another location, and/or to secure such vessel in whatever manner the Harbor Master
shall determine is reasonable and appropriate.
1. Within twenty-four hours of such action, the Harbor Master shall notify the Harbor
Board of such action and request the Board to conduct a hearing to review the
Harbor Master’s action. At such hearing it shall be the burden of the Harbor
Master to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the vessel was in fact
abandoned or derelict. No later than seven (7) days prior to the hearing, the
Town of York Harbor Ordinance Revised through November 7, 2017
19
Harbor Master shall provide the owner of such vessel with notice of the hearing
by the manner best calculated to provide him or her with actual knowledge of the
hearing.
B. Pre-Seizure Hearings In All Other Cases: In all other cases, should the Harbor
Master conclude that a vessel is abandoned or derelict, the Harbor Master shall in
writing: simultaneously notify the Harbor Board and the owner of the vessel of such
conclusion and; request the Board to conduct a hearing to review the Harbor Master’s
action. Such hearing shall be held no later than thirty (30) days after the Harbor
Master so notifies the Board. At such hearing, it shall be the burden of the Harbor
Master to prove by a preponderance of the evidence, that the vessel was in fact
abandoned or derelict. The Harbor Master shall provide the owner of such vessel with
at least seven (7) days’ notice of the hearing by the manner best calculated to provide
him or her with actual knowledge of the hearing.
C. Harbor Master Actions Following Harbor Board Hearing: Should the Harbor Board
affirm the Harbor Master’s determination that a vessel is abandoned or derelict, the
owner of such vessel shall have thirty (30) days in which to claim said vessel. The
Harbor Master shall not release any such vessel unless and until the owner of said
vessel shall have paid all expenses incurred by the Town of York in connection with
the matter; including, but not limited to, and all expenses of securing the vessels in
emergency situations. If the owner of the vessel does not so claim the vessel, the
vessel shall be forfeited to the Town and may be disposed of by the Town in any
commercially reasonable manner. Should the Harbor Board find that the Harbor
Master erred in finding that the vessel was abandoned and/or derelict, then: in the
case of an emergency seizure; the Harbor Master shall return the vessel to its original
location; and in all other cases, take such other action as may be lawful.
SECTION 8: HARBOR USAGE FEES & SCHEDULES
A. Vessel owners with an annually assigned mooring space in the waters of the Town or
vessel owners whose vessels are berthed or operated in said waters for a total of more
than 14 days per annum shall pay an annual Harbor Usage Fee to the Town either at
the time of their annual mooring space assignment renewal or when indicated below,
whichever is sooner. Vessel owners with Town owned float system assignments shall
pay their float fees in addition to the Harbor Usage Fee. Commercial fishermen shall pay
winch fees, both current and/or past due in addition to Harbor Usage Fee.
1. Any person receiving a new mooring space assignment must pay the Harbor
Usage Fee within 30 days of notification of the assignment or risk forfeiture of the
assignment.
2. Vessel owners who are not annual mooring space assignees and whose vessels are
berthed or operated in the waters of the Town for a total of more than 14 days per
annum shall pay Harbor Usage fee at the same time as they pay excise tax and
registration fees or within 30 days of notification by the Harbor Master and upon
presentation to the Harbor Master of proof of payment will receive a Harbor
Usage Decal to be affixed on a port side of the transom.
Town of York Harbor Ordinance Revised through November 7, 2017
20
3. Marina operators shall inform all berth renters whose vessels are not included in
(2) above and who are berthed at their facility for more than 14 days of the need
to remit said fees to the Town. Marina owners shall upon request of the Harbor
Master provide a list of persons occupying berths at their facility and a description
of their vessels.
4. Mooring assignees that do not own a vessel or do not use their mooring at any
time during the year will be required to pay the minimum Harbor Usage Fee in
order to maintain their assignments.
5. Failure to remit the Harbor Usage Fee to the Town within prescribed time limits
may result in forfeiture of a mooring assignment.
6. Use of said waters solely for effecting transient vessel repairs shall not subject the
owner or vessel to the aforesaid fees.
7. The Harbor Board, with the approval of the Board of Selectmen, shall have the
authority to assess user fees necessary to manage, maintain and operate the
Harbors, Ports, Tidal Waters and Channels within the Town of York, including
but not limited to harbor usage fees, transient boat fees, winch fees and
administrative and legal fees. Annual fees are due no later than the earlier of the
last business day in April or within 30 days of assessment. All fees collected
under this section shall be placed in a reserve account and may only be used for
improvements to the harbors, ports, tidal waters and channels within the Town of
York, including capital improvements, wharf construction and repair, dredging
equipment and land acquisitions.
B. Liability for Costs Vessel owners are liable for all legal and administrative costs
incurred in any attempt to collect fees due or to enforce the provisions of this
ordinance.
SECTION 9: EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall take effect upon adoption by the Legislative Body, and shall remain
in effect until amended by the Legislative Body.
SECTION 10: PENALTIES
Any person who violates this ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty of $100.00 for
the first offense, $150.00 for the second offense, and $200.00 for the third and subsequent
offenses, except when said violation shall be a violation of a State or Federal statute
providing for additional penalties which will be applicable. Each day that any person
shall be found in violation of any of said provisions shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
SECTION 11: WAIVER/PAYMENT OF FINES
Town of York Harbor Ordinance Revised through November 7, 2017
21
Any person charged with a violation of this section, shall be allowed to waive such
violation and tender to the Town of York the fine amount if paid within 20 days of
issuance of the summons. If the waiver fine is paid, no appearance before a District
Court Judge or other judicial officer shall be required. If the offender pays the waiver
fine, the matter will be closed in the York Police Records system and listed as a
subsequent offense for future violations.
If the offender chooses not to pay the waiver fine, he/she shall appear in court on the
specified date to answer for the ordinance violation. If the offender is found to have
committed the offense in court, fines, applicable court fees, attorney’s fees, and
prosecution costs may apply.
SECTION 12: SEPARABILITY
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this ordinance or
application thereof to any person(s) or circumstance(s) is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion or application shall
be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision or application and such holding
shall not effect the validity of the remaining portions or applications thereof.
SECTION 13: APPEAL PROCESS
A. Right of Appeal The Harbor Board shall hear the appeal of any person aggrieved by
any decision, act, or failure to act of the Harbor Master as it relates to the
implementation of this Ordinance.
B. Power and Duties Appeals shall go forward from the decision of the Harbor Master
to the Harbor Board, from the Harbor Board to the Superior Court in accordance with
Maine Law. The Harbor Board shall have the following powers and duties: To hear
and decide where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made, or not made, by the Harbor Master in the enforcement of this
Ordinance. The Board may affirm, modify or deny the action of the Harbor Master, or
may remand the matter to the Harbor Master for further proceedings in accordance
with the terms of these Rules and Regulations, by majority vote of those present and
voting. In case of a clear conflict of interest a voting member shall withdraw from the
case and the Chairman shall designate an alternate member to be a voting member for
the hearing.
C. Appeal Procedure In all cases, a person aggrieved by a decision of the Harbor Master
shall file his appeal within thirty (30) days after receipt of a written decision from the
Harbor Master. The appeal shall be filed with the Harbor Board on forms to be
approved by the Harbor Board, and the aggrieved person shall specifically set forth
on said form the grounds for said appeal. Following the filing of an appeal, the
Harbor Board shall notify forthwith the Harbor Master and the Town Manager. The
appeal shall then be in order for a public hearing within thirty (30) days of the filing
date.
D. The Harbor Board shall hold a public hearing prior to making a decision on an appeal,
notice of which shall be made by the Harbor Board, by certified mail to the appellant.
Town of York Harbor Ordinance Revised through November 7, 2017
22
Notification shall include the nature of the appeal, and the time and place of the
public hearing. Notice of all appeals shall also be published in a newspaper of general
circulation and posted in at least three (3) public places within the Town. All
notifications must precede the public hearing by at least seven (7) business days.
E. The Harbor Master, or his designated deputy, shall attend all hearings, and shall
present to the Harbor Board all plans, photographs or other material deemed
appropriate for an understanding of the appeal. The appellant’s case shall be heard
first. The aggrieved party may appear by agent or attorney. To maintain orderly
procedure, each side shall proceed without interruption. Questions may be asked
through the Chair. All persons at the hearing shall abide by the order of the Chairman.
Hearings may be continued to other times.
F. Written notices of the decision of the Harbor Board shall be sent to the appellant, the
Harbor Master, the Town Manager and the Municipal Officers within thirty (30) days
of the date of the hearing of the appeal, and within seven (7) business days of the
decision. Decisions shall be in writing, and shall contain a statement of findings and
conclusions, as well as the reasons or basis therefore. Decisions shall be sent to the
appellant via Certified Mail.
G. Appeals granted under the provision of this Section by the Harbor Board shall expire
if the work or change involved is not affected within one year of the date on which
such appeal is granted, unless as otherwise provided for in the appeal.
H. If the Harbor Board shall deny an appeal, another appeal of a similar nature shall not
be brought before the Board within one year from the date of the denial, unless in the
opinion of a majority of the Board, substantial new evidence shall be brought forward
or unless the Board finds, in its sole and exclusive judgment, that an error or mistake
of law or misunderstanding of facts shall have been made.
I. The appellant shall pay a fee to the Town of York to cover the costs of notification
and advertisements concerning an appeal.
Town of York Harbor Ordinance Revised through November 7, 2017
23
Design Guidelines
for
Historic Districts and Sites
York Historic District Commission
York, Maine
July 2005
Local Historic District Guidelines • Town of York • 2005 1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction
York’s Local Historic Districts
Lindsay Road Local Historic District
Village Center Local Historic District
York Harbor Local Historic District
Design Review Principles
Local District and Landmark Application Process
General Guidelines
Specific Guidelines
Wood Walls and Trim
Doors and Steps; Porches and Decks
Roofs, Chimneys and Gutters
Masonry and Stucco
Windows
Storefronts
Fences and Walls
Outbuildings
Public Improvements and Landscaping
Demolition and New Construction
Appendix
Property Tax Refund Policy
Local Historic District Guidelines• Town of York • 2005
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This publication has been financed in part with Federal funds from the National Park Service, Department of
the Interior. However, the contents and opinions do not necessarily reflect the views and policies of the
Department of the Interior, nor does the mention of trade names or commercial products constitute endorsement
or recommendation by the Department of the Interior. The Maine Historic Preservation Commission
receives Federal financial assistance for identification and protection of historic properties. Under Title VI of
the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the U. S. Department of the
Interior prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, or handicap in its federally assisted
program. If you believe you have been discriminated against in any program, activity, or facility as
described above, or if you desire further information, please write to:
Office for Equal Opportunity
U. S. Department of the Interior
Washington, D. C. 20240
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
17
18
20
These guidelines were funded with the assistance of a grant from the Maine Historic Preservation
Commission. The guidelines were prepared for the York Historic District Commission Reed &
Reed, consultants, Brookline, Massachusetts.
2 Local Historic District Guidelines• Town of York • 2005 Local Historic District Guidelines • Town of York • 2005 3
LINDSAY ROAD LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT
The specific design guidelines in this booklet are, as their name implies, guidelines intended to encourage appropriate
design by applicants and foster predictability in Commission actions. While the Commission has the authority,
in its exercise of discretion, to permit applicants to depart from the Guidelines, applicants are encouraged to follow
them to the greatest extent possible and should not expect that the Commission will permit applicants to depart
from them in most circumstances. The Commission does not anticipate departing from certain of the Guidelines,
such as that regarding artificial siding. Further, it should be understood that certain properties, and the specific features
of certain properties, may have greater than usual architectural or historic significance.
Purposes of Local Historic Districts
Local historic districts have three purposes:
1. To preserve and protect the distinctive characteristics of buildings and places significant to the history
of the Town of York;
2. To maintain and improve the settings of those buildings and places; and
3. To assure that new construction is compatible with existing buildings and their historic relationship to
other buildings in their vicinity.
INTRODUCTION
Shingle Style cottage in York Harbor Historic
District, circa 1900 view (Courtesy Old York
Historical Society)
4 Local Historic District Guidelines• Town of York • 2005 Local Historic District Guidelines • Town of York • 2005 5
VILLAGE CENTER LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT YORK HARBOR LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT
Local Historic District Guidelines • Town of York • 2005 7
THE LOCAL DISTRICT AND LANDMARK APPLICATION PROCESS
Local Historic District Guidelines• Town of York • 2005
DESIGN REVIEW PRINCIPLES
6
When reviewing individuals applications, the Commission will be guided by the following design
principles, which have been adapted from the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of
Historic Properties (1995):
• The historic character of a property should be retained and preserved. The removal of
distinctive materials or alteration of features, spaces and spatial relationships that characterize
a property should be avoided.
• Each property should be recognized as a physical record of its time, place and use. Changes
that create a false sense of historical development, such as adding conjectural features or
elements from other historic properties, should be avoided.
• Changes to a property that have acquired historic significance in their own right should be
retained and preserved.
• New additions, exterior alterations or related new construction that destroy historic materials,
features and spatial relationships that characterize the property should be avoided. New work
should be differentiated from the old and should be compatible with the historic materials,
features, size, scale, proportion and massing to protect the integrity of the property and its
environment.
• New additions and adjacent or related new construction which, if removed in the future, would
impair the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment should be
avoided.
Design Review Process
A completed application for work subject to review by the Historic District Commission must be obtained
from the Code Enforcement Officer. Applications for either of Certificate of Appropriateness or Demolition
shall be forward by the Code Enforcement Officer to the Chairman of the Historic District Commission. A
completed application must be received at least seven days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting to be
placed on the agenda. York’s historic districts are outlined in Article 12 of the Town of York Zoning
Ordinance. The ordinance is available on line at: www.yorkmaine.org under Land Use Codes.
What Changes Are Reviewed
All changes to the exterior of a building that are visible from a public way, park or body of water must be
reviewed and approved by the Commission. Such changes include, but are not limited to, replacements and
alterations to windows, doors, roofs, building materials, new construction, additions, fences, walls and landscaping.
For the purposes of determining visibility, existing and proposed wooden fences and landscaping
are considered impermanent and are deemed not to block sight lines from a public way. If there is a question
regarding visibility, the final determination will be made by the chair of the Commission or the chair’s
designee.
What Changes Are Not Reviewed
The Commission does not review paint colors and ordinary like-kind (exact duplicate) repairs and replacements
of existing historic fabric. Shutters are exempt from review. However, shutters (and blinds, to use the
correct term when they have louvers) are important historical features on a house. They also became important
decorative features with the advent of the Colonial Revival style in the late nineteenth century. Property
owners are strongly urged to retain wood shutters and blinds, and to have them mounted with hardware as
they would if operable. Storm doors and storm windows are also exempt as easily reversible. Care should
be taken not to damage or remove historic trim in their installation.
York Town Hall
8 Local Historic District Guidelines• Town of York • 2005 Local Historic District Guidelines • Town of York • 2005 9
GENERAL GUIDELINES
General Guidelines
Although the points listed in these General Guidelines are covered in detail in the Specific Design Guidelines
that begin on the following page, nine general guidelines are listed here to highlight their importance:
Ornamental and decorative detailing should not be removed.
Deteriorated ornamental, decorative and characteristic architectural features should be repaired,
rather than replaced.
No artificial siding should be installed.
Wood windows should be retained.
There should be no new openings on primary façades, except to restore original or pre-existing
openings.
Missing architectural features should be documented as authentic by photographic, physical
historical evidence before they are reproduced.
Historic outbuildings, such as barns and automobile garages, should be preserved on their original
sites.
New fences should not act as visual barriers from public ways.
Traditional building materials should be used when available.
York Village, circa 1900 (Courtesy Old York
Historical Society)
York Harbor, circa 1900 (Courtesy Old York
Historical Society)
Local Historic District Guidelines • Town of York • 2005 11
DOORS AND STEPS; PORCHES AND DECKS
Existing doors and door openings, including transoms
and sidelights, should be repaired, not replaced.
Steps and railings should be compatible in materials and
design with the porch.
If an applicant concludes that an existing door cannot be
repaired or is an inappropriate door, the proposed
replacement door should be made of wood and, if
glazed with muntin bars, have true divided lights.
Porches and entrance porticos, including ornamental
details, should be retained.
Open porches and porticos should not be permanently
enclosed or glazed.
Porch and roof railings should be maintained in their
historic design, including height.
Sleeping porches should be retained if original or
historic additions.
Decks should be located on less visible elevations andshould
be constructed of wood with painted railings,
posts and balusters consistent with the style of the
structure. Elevated decks should be furnished with
an authentically fabricated lattice or vertical board
skirting below the floor.
10 Local Historic District Guidelines• Town of York • 2005
WOOD WALLS AND TRIM
Historic trim and detailing should not be removed.
Replacement wood clapboards or siding should replicate original dimensions and exposure.
Wood shingles should replicate original shingles in exposure and patterns. Wood shingle "shakes", which
convey a rough corrugated appearance, are not historically appropriate for York architecture.
Artificial siding, including, but not limited to, vinyl, aluminum, asphalt, and artificial brick and stone, should
not be used.
Awnings should be fabricated of canvas or like-kind material and mounted to be retractable.
Queen Anne style house in Lindsay Road Historic District
with shingles, siding and ornamental trim intact.
Queen Anne style house in Kittery with synthetic
siding added and trim removed.
Greek Revival style house with circa 1900s
porch showing simple railing characteristic of
York cottages.
Modern deck on rear wing of early nineteenth
century house.
Historic view of simple porch design. Note close spacing
of balusters. (Courtesy Old York Historical Society)
12 Local Historic District Guidelines• Town of York • 2005 Local Historic District Guidelines • Town of York • 2005 13
MASONRY AND STUCCO
Unpainted masonry should not be painted.
Sealants should not be applied to masonry as a "maintenance" measure, unless a sealant is necessary to prevent
further deterioration of damaged brick and stone.
Repointing masonry (sometimes referred to as tuck pointing) should be appropriate in terms of the type,
color and aggregate of the mortar to be used and the width and profile of the joint. Joints should not be
widened when cutting out old mortar. New mortar should be kept off the face of masonry.
Sandblasting should not be used to clean brick.
Stucco should be repaired with a mixture that matches the original as closely as possible. Non-traditional
resin based stuccos do not replicate historic stucco.
ROOFS, DORMERS, CHIMNEYS AND GUTTERS ROOFS, DORMERS, CHIMNEYS AND GUTTERS
Wood shingle roofs are encouraged as historically appropriate. Wooden "shakes" that attempt to replicate
hand hewn shingles with their rough corrugated appearance are not historically authentic and should not be
used.
Slate and terra cotta tile roofing should be repaired or replicated in kind, including color, decorative patterns
and style. Synthetic slate or tile should not be used.
Rubber membrane roofing should not be used except in minimally visible locations.
Roof trim, such as cornices, fascias and rakeboards, should be maintained.
Historic dormers should not be removed or enlarged. New dormers should be added to unobtrusive
locations, such as rear elevations, and should be designed in a scale to match the period of the house.
Skylights should be installed only where minimally visible and a flat low profile in a dark color to blend with
the roof.
The height and dimensions of chimneys should be maintained, along with any decorative brickwork patterns.
All decorative metal, such as iron cresting, finials and weathervanes should be retained.
Wood gutters, when an integral part of an ornamental cornice or roof edge design, should be repaired and
maintained. Copper gutters, which duplicate the original molding profile of wood gutters, may be
considered as a replacement for wood gutters. Aluminum gutters should not be used.
Roof top HVAC and other mechanical elements, including soundproofing elements, should be placed out of
view from a public way.
Roof ventilation with a continuous low profile ridge vent extended fully to the ends of the roof is
recommended over box ventilators.
Roof decks and enclosures should not be added, unless historically documented.
Wood gutter forming a crown molding for a cornice.
The original wood gutter was roofed over and a aluminum
gutter and downspout tacked on.
York cottages have a tradition of multiple dormers to provide
light and air to upper stories, as in these York Harbor examples.
The original architectural character can be dramatically
altered with enlarged modern windows, as in this Kittery
example.
Chimneys are important architectural
features.
Local Historic District Guidelines • Town of York • 2005 15
STOREFRONTS
Storefronts (i.e., the ground story) have typically been remodeled many times over the years. Historic
storefronts should retained, including later remodeling that have acquired architectural significance as part of
the history of the building.
New storefronts should be compatible with the style of the building in design and materials. Unless documented
through historic photographs, avoid non-historic "Colonial" features such as small paned windows,
pediments and shutters. Similarly, wood shingles, "shakes", wood, vinyl or aluminum siding and brick or
stone veneer treatments should be avoided. Simplicity is usually the best approach in order to avoid having
the storefront compete with the design of the upper floors of the façade.
If converting from a commercial to residential use, retain character-defining features such as storefront
display windows.
This historic view of a York storefront illustrates the simple treatment
for display windows. (Courtesy the Old York Historical Society)
14 Local Historic District Guidelines• Town of York • 2005
Existing windows should be repaired, not replaced.
If an applicant believes that an existing window cannot be repaired, the applicant’s proposal for replacing
window[s] will be reviewed on a window-by-window basis.
If a replacement window is proposed, the material and design of the existing window, including the casing,
size, number of panes and type of window, should not be changed, unless a more historically accurate
design can be documented. If the window is not a character-defining feature of a primary façade, the
Commission may approve minor changes in the proposed replacement window.
If a replacement window is proposed, it should not have muntin bars no greater than 7/8" wide unless otherwise
historically documented.
If a window in new construction has insulating glass, it should have (i) permanently applied muntins no wider
than 7/8" and (ii) dark colored internal spacer bars, but it should have neither flat muntin grids applied to
the inside or outside panes, nor removable muntin grids.
New and replacement windows should not be clad in non-historic materials. Vinyl-clad and metal-framed
sash should not be used.
Wood frames should not be metal panned and the dimensions of window openings, jambs and sashes should
not be changed.
Stained glass or decorative windows should be retained.
WINDOWS
This historic sash cannot be replicated by modern
vinyl clad windows with removal muntins that are
not true divided lights separating each pane of glass.
Historic wood windows are much more durable than
most modern sash due to the quality of wood and
method of fabrication. They will last indefinitely
when properly maintained.
16 Local Historic District Guidelines• Town of York • 2005 Local Historic District Guidelines • Town of York • 2005 17
OUTBUILDINGS
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND LANDSCAPING
Outbuildings are integral to the historic character of many York buildings and should be maintained in
their original physical relationship to the main building. As important and often rare historic structures,
outbuildings are governed by the same guidelines used for principal structures.
Conversions for other uses should respect character-defining features, such as irregular fenestration patterns
and large barn or garage door openings.
Street furniture, including benches, lighting, paving, trash receptacles, and planters, should respect the
historic character of the urban or rural surroundings of buildings. Generally, historic materials are the most
compatible.
While lighting is a modern reality and a necessity for traffic safety and security reasons, its use in historic
districts should be limited. Lighting should be kept at low levels, discretely designed to harmonize with the
structure or landscaping and shielded to prevent glare or overspill of the light off the property.
The style and materials of light fixtures when visible from the public way should be appropriate to the
historic character of the district.
Large expanses of paving are inconsistent with the character of York’s historic districts. Landscaping, such
as plantings and/or fencing, should be employed for screening the cars and pavement from public view.
The existing, natural contours and topography of the landscape should be preserved to the fullest extent
possible. The preservation of mature trees is strongly encouraged. Native trees, plants and flowers should
be given preference over other (exotic) varieties.
Shingled barn with characteristic fenestration.
Barn with windows and doors altered with modern domestic
fenestration that is not compatible with the historic character
of the building.
FENCES AND WALLS
If a new fence or wall is on or within two feet of the front of a retaining wall, then the height of the new fence
or wall should be measured from the grade on the lower side of the retaining wall. If a new fence or wall
is on or near a retaining wall, then the visual impact of the combined height from the lower side should
be taken into account.
When possible, ground units should be located unobtrusively and screened with vegetation and/or fencing
(including lattice fences.)
Fences running from the side of a building to a side yard fence should not be more than 42 inches high if a
higher fence would obscure significant features on the side of the building or site.
Brick walls should use historically appropriate brick. Bricks and mortar joints should be compatible in color,
aggregate and joint profile with the building.
Stone walls may be dry laid or set in a mortar that is historically appropriate in color, aggregate and joint profile.
The following should not be used for residential properties: (i) plastic fences, (ii) chain link fences, unless minimally
visible, (iii) stockade fences, unless minimally visible and (v) lattice fences, except as a side or rear
yard garden element.
Emerson-Wilcox House with Colonial Revival style fence.
House in York Harbor Historic District with
traditional picket fence.
18 Local Historic District Guidelines• Town of York • 2005 Local Historic District Guidelines • Town of York • 2005 19
DEMOLITION AND NEW CONSTRUCTION NOTES
Structures, including historically significant additions and outbuildings, should not be demolished.
The Commission will review all proposed alterations of, and additions to, existing structures and
all new construction.
Alterations and additions should be compatible with the character of the building and earlier
additions in terms of size, scale, massing, material, location and detail. The original portion of the building
and earlier additions should continue to be recognizable apart from the addition by means of massing,
articulation of setbacks, trim and ornamental detail. Additions should be designed so that the primary
elevations of the original building remain clearly delineated.
New construction should respect the existing historic streetscape. The historic relationship of
buildings to the street, including setbacks and open spaces, should be maintained.
The Commission will consider the appropriateness of the size and shape of the building or
structure both in relation to the land area upon which the building or structure is situated and to buildings
and structures in the vicinity. The Commission may impose dimensional and setback requirements in
addition to those required by the Zoning By-law.
20 Local Historic District Guidelines• Town of York • 2005 Local Historic District Guidelines • Town of York • 2005 21
E. Application Review and Ranking
1. Ranking. The Commission shall review all applications received to verify,refund amount and
conformance with application requirements. The Commission shall rank all suitable applications.
Rank shall determine the order in which funds will be allocated to projects in the event the
program is not fully funded. Rank shall be based on the following criteria:
a. The first ranking shall be based on the location (creating three priority classes), as
follows:
1. Buildings on property listed in Article 12.6 shall receive the highest ranks.
2. Buildings on property in the National Register Historic District, or individually
listed in the National Register of Historic Places, but not listed in Article 12.16
shall receive the next highest ranks. Other buildings shall receive the lowest
ranks.
b. Within each of these priority classes, rank shall be further refined based on two
criteria. These shall be evaluated sequentially, as follows:
1. First, buildings that have never received a refund under this program shall be
ranked ahead of those that have (creating six priority classes).
2. The final ranking within each of the priority classes shall be a first-come, firstserved
rank based on the date of receipt of the complete application.
APPENDIX: PROPERTY TAX REFUND POLICY
Section 12.6, Town of York Zoning Ordinance
A. Purpose. Historic resources are an integral component of the character of the Town, and the
continued presence of the extensive, well maintained concentration of historic buildings in York is vital. Few
of these properties are regulated under this Article, but this does not indicate a diminished value to the community.
The purpose of offering a property tax refund for appropriate maintenance work is to
provide an incentive for the owners of historic buildings to invest in upkeep and rehabilitation, thereby
discouraging the loss of significant resources.
B. Eligibility.
1. Property. The building is a contributing structure within a National Register Historic District,
individually listed in the National Register of Historic Places, a contributing structure within a local
historic district, or is determined by the Maine Historic Preservation Commission to be eligible for
listing in the National Register of Historic Places.
2. Owner. There shall be no delinquent property taxes on any property in York owned by the
applicant at the time of application.
3. Activity. Eligible work includes maintenance of the historic fabric by rehabilitation, restoration or
preservation of the building. All work shall meet or exceed the standards adopted by reference in
Article 12.14.1.
C. Refund Amount. The amount of refund shall be equal to the lesser of the following:;
1. 10% of the actual cost of eligible work completed; or
2. the value of the total property tax paid on the property for the fiscal year in which the
application is made.
D. Application Requirements.
1. Meeting with the Commission. Prior to submittal of an application, the applicant shall be
required to attend a Commission meeting and present the project at a conceptional level. This
shall be an opportunity for the Commission to offer non-binding guidance, advice and assistance
to the applicant.
2. Application Form. The applicant shall complete an application form available from the
Commission.
3. Supplemental Application Materials. The applicant shall prepare materials as necessary to
supplement the application form. These materials shall include:
a. Work Plan. This shall document the scope, method and extent of work to be performed,
in sufficient detail to demonstrate compliance with requirements of this program.
b. Maintenance Plan. This shall document activities to be performed and a schedule for
performance of maintenance of the building for at least five years following the
completion of the project.
4. General Timeline. The general timeline for this process is outlined herein to enhance
understanding of the program. The Commission may very the schedule by voting to adopt a
different timeline.
a. Advance meeting with the applicant per Article 12.16.D1: any time.
b. Submittal of application materials: July 1 through September 15.
c. Application review and ranking: September 16 through November 30.
d. Budget process: December through to the May budge Referendum.
e. Time period for work, and fund availability: after July 1 through June 30 (the next
fiscal year), subject to possible carry-forward to later fiscal years.
APPENDIX: PROPERTY TAX REFUND POLICY





Littering Ordinance (Revised: May 16, 2015)
LITTERING ORDINANCE
Section 1 Title
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Litter Ordinance.
Section 2 Purpose
The purpose of this ordinance is to prohibit waste and litter from being discarded improperly within the
limits of the Town of York. This behavior endangers the public health and negatively impacts the free
utilization and enjoyment of the Community.
Section 3 Definition
LITTER: For purposes of this Ordinance the term “Litter” means all waste materials including, but not
limited to, bottles, glass, tobacco products, crockery, cans, scrap metal, junk, paper, garbage, rubbish,
offal, except waste parts or remains resulting from the normal field dressing of lawfully harvested wild
game or the lawful use of waste parts or remains of wild game as bait, feathers, except feathers from live
birds which being transported, abandoned ice-fishing shacks, old automobiles or parts of automobiles or
similar refuse, or disposable packages or containers thrown or deposited, but not including the wastes of
the primary processes of mining, logging, saw milling, farming or manufacturing.
Section 4 Littering Prohibited
No person shall throw, drop, deposit, discard, dump or otherwise dispose of litter in any manner or
amount:
A. In or on any public highway, road, street, alley, public right of way or other public lands or upon
any privately owned property except when placed in designated containers in accordance with the
standards established by the Town of York Solid Waste Collection, Recycling and Disposal
Ordinance as amended.
B. In any fresh water lake, river, stream, tidal or coastal water or on ice over these waters. When litter
is thrown or discarded from a water craft, both the operator of the water craft and the person
actually disposing of the litter are in violation of this Ordinance.
C. From a trailer or vehicle that is constructed, loaded or uncovered in such a way that the load may
drop, sift, leak or otherwise escape. This provision applies to vehicles or trailers carrying trash,
rubbish or other materials that may be considered as litter.
2
Littering Ordinance (Revised: May 16, 2015)
When any litter is thrown or discarded from a vehicle, both the operator of the vehicle and the person
actually disposing of the litter are in violation of this Ordinance. If a person dumps litter from a
commercial vehicle, that person is presumed to have dumped the litter for a commercial purpose.
Section 5 Penalties
Persons violating this Ordinance are subject to the following penalties:
A. A person who disposes of less than 15 pounds or less than 27 cubic feet of litter shall be subject to a
civil penalty of $200.00 for the first offense, $500.00 for the second offense, and $750.00 for the
third and subsequent offenses.
B. A person who disposes of more than 15 pounds up to 499 pounds, or between 27 cubic feet and 99
cubic feet of litter shall be subject to a civil penalty of $500.00 for the first offense, $1,000.00 for
the second offense, and $1,500.00 for the third and subsequent offenses.
C. A person who disposes of more than 500 pounds or more than 100 cubic feet of litter for
commercial purposes is subject to the penalties under Title 38, Section 349.
Section 6 – Waiver/Payment of Fines
Any person charged with a violation of this section, shall be allowed to waive such violation and tender to
the Town of York the fine amount if paid within 20 days of issuance of the summons. If the waiver fine
is paid, no appearance before a District Court Judge or other judicial officer shall be required. If the
offender pays the waiver fine, the matter will be closed in the York Police Records system and listed as a
subsequent offense for future violations.
If the offender chooses not to pay the waiver fine, he/she shall appear in court on the specified date to
answer for the ordinance violation. If the offender is found to have committed the offense in court, fines,
applicable court fees, attorney’s fees, and prosecution costs may apply.
Section 7 Penalty Options
In addition to the penalties imposed in Section 5 of this Ordinance the Court may order a person to
perform one or more of the following:
A. Remove all litter dumped in violation of this ordinance;
B. Pay the owner of the property or in the case of public property the Town, triple the cost of clean up
and removal;
C. Pay the person, or in the case of Public Property the Town, sustaining damages arising out of a
violation of this ordinance triple the actual damages of $200 whichever is greater, plus the injured
party’s court costs and attorney’s fees if action results in a civil proceeding;
D. Perform public service relating to the removal of litter or to the restoration of an area polluted by
litter.
3
Littering Ordinance (Revised: May 16, 2015)
Section 8 Repeal of Existing Ordinances
This Ordinance is intended to replace and repeal Chapter XIV, Ordinance Relating to Public Health and
Safety, Section 1, Removal of Waste from the Ordinance of the former York Beach Village Corporation
and Chapter 5, Ordinance Relating to Public Health and Safety, Section 1, Removal of Waste from the
Ordinances of the former York Harbor Village Corporation.
4

Amended 05/11/2015
Mandatory Recycling For Residences & Special Residences
Rules And Regulations
(SOLID WASTE COLLECTION, RECYCLING AND DISPOSAL ORDINANCE)
In accordance with Section 5.1 of the Solid Waste Collection, Recycling and
Disposal Ordinance, the Town of York, Board of Selectmen, hereby resolve to
initiate a mandatory residential recycling program and to adopt the following rules
and regulations to govern mandatory recycling for residences and special
residences. These rules and regulations shall be entitled: "Rules and Regulations to
Govern the Mandatory Curbside Collection Recycling Program for Residences and
Special Residences".
Adopted 4/22/91
Amended 5/ 26/ 92
Amended 11/14/95
Amended 05/11/2015
RECY2.DOC (ORDINANCES W) 11/14/ 95 djb
1
Amended 05/11/2015
YORK SOLIDWASTE COLLECTION, RECYCLING AND DISPOSAL
ORDINANCE
RULES AND REGULATIONS TO GOVERN MANDATORY CURBSIDE
COLLECTION RECYCLING PROGRAM FOR THE RESIDENCES AND
SPECIALRESIDENCES
SECTION 1. INTERACTIONWITHRECYCLINGCOMMITTEE. The
Board of Selectmen shall consultwith and request recommendations fromthe
York Recycling Committee to establish initial or amended rules and regulations
to implementMandatory Recycling forResidences and SpecialResidences. The
Committee shall provide recommendations regarding program operations,
including by example and not by limitation: materials subject to Mandatory
Recycling;frequencyof collection ofMandatoryRecyclables; selectionof aTown
Hauler to collect andmarketMandatory Recyclables; establishments subject to
these rules and regulations; and fees for services provided.
SECTION 2. MANDATORY SEPARATION: EachResidence and Special
Residence is required to separate specific materials from the solid waste stream
for recycling purposes.
2.1 MATERIALS TO SEPARATE: The following materials are subject to
Mandatory Recycling requirements.
2.1.1 GLASS, including clear, brown, and green bottles and jars. All caps B
and metal parts shall be removed and containers shall be cleaned. Glass shall
not be broken.
2.1.2 ALUMINUM, including cleaned aluminum cans and other allaluminum
materials. Aluminum foil shall not be collected for recycling
purposes. Cans shall be cleaned.
2.1.3 STEEL CANS, including all cans containing ferrous metals and the tops
of these cans. All cans shall be cleaned.
2.1.4 NEWSPAPERS, including color printed and black and white newsprint.
It is unnecessary to remove slick inserts. Newspapers shall be securely
bundled or placed in paper bags for easy handling. No bundle shall exceed 40
pounds in weight.
2.1.5 PLASTICS, including #1 PET and #2 HDPE plastic containers. All
materials must be cleaned and the tops removed. Containers should be
crushed to decrease the volume of the containers in the collection container.
2
Amended 05/11/2015
2.1.6 MAGAZINES, CATALOGS, PHONE BOOKS and MIXED PAPER
including "junk mail" shall be recycled. This material must be bundled or
placed in paper bags and may be co-mingled with newspaper. No bundle shall
exceed 40 pounds.
2.1.7 CARDBOARD, MILK CARTONS and ASEPTIC CONTAINERS (juice
boxes) shall be recycled. All containers must be clean with straws removed.
2.1.8 CORRUGATED CARDBOARD s ha l l be recycled. All boxes must
be broken down flat and bundled. Bundles may not exceed 40 pounds in
weight or be larger than 2' x 2'.
Section 3.0 RECYCLING CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS: Each Residence
and Special Residence is required to prepare the recycling materials as stipulated
in Section 2, above, and to place all Mandatory Recyclable materials in a
recycling container approved by the Town.
3.1 RESIDENCE: Each Residence shall purchase a Town approved recycling
container, a blue bin, from the Town at a cost established by the
Selectmen. A replacement bin(s) may be purchased for a fee established
by the Selectmen.
3.2 SPECIAL RESIDENCES: The TownHauler who collects recyclable
materials shall stipulate the type of container which each Special
Residence shall use. The Special Residences which are required to use a
Town approved recycling container, a blue bin, shall purchase such
recycling containers from the Town at a cost established by the Selectmen.
A replacement bin(s) may be purchased for a fee established by the
Selectmen.
The Special Residences which are required to use taters shall be provided
an appropriate number of taters by the Town recycling program Town
Hauler. Separate taters shall be used to collect newspapers and to collect
co-mingled recyclable materials; glass, aluminum cans, steel/ tin cans and
plastics.
SECTION 4.0 METHOD OF COLLECTION: The collection of Mandatory
Recyclables from Residences and Special Residences shall be subject to the
following requirements.
4.1 The Town shall contract with a Town Hauler to provide curbside
collection of Mandatory Recyclables from Residences once every other
week, 26 times per year. This collection service shall occur on the same
day as the services provided by the Town Hauler that collects Refuse from
3
Amended 05/11/2015
Residences. Collection from Residences is subject to the limitations
described in Section 5.2.3 of the "Solid Waste Collection, Recycling and
Disposal Ordinance". The Town shall provide Residences notice of the
collection schedule.
4.2 PLACEMENTFORCOLLECTIONFORRESIDENCES: EachResidence
shall place all Mandatory Recyclable materials in a Town Approved
Container, a blue bin. The Container(s) shall be placed at the back edge of
the property side of the sidewalk (blocking of a sidewalk is prohibited), or
where there is no sidewalk, three (3) to ten (10) feet from the edge of
pavement or unpaved road, before 7:00 A.M. on the day of collection.
Each Residence shall ensure that the recyclable materials and refuse which
are both placed at curbside for collection are physically separated by
about three feet.
4.3 COLLECTIONSCHEDULEFOR SPECIALRESIDENCES: TheTown shall
contract with a Town Hauler to provide curbside collection of Mandatory
Recyclables from Special Residences. The Town and the Town Hauler
shall determine the frequency of collection for each Special Residence, and
shall provide each SpecialResidence a collection schedule. Most Special
Residenceswill receive recycling collection services once every two
weeks,however, someSpecialResidences, particularly seasonal
establishments, may receive more frequent pick-up services during their
months of operation.
4.4 PLACEMENTFORCOLLECTIONFORSPECIALRESIDENCES: Each
Special Residence shall place all Mandatory Recyclable materials in the
appropriate recycling container specified by the Town and Town Hauler.
All Special Residences which are required to use the Town approved
recycling container, a blue bin, shall place the container bin at the back
edge of the property side of the sidewalk (blocking of sidewalk is
prohibited), or where there is no sidewalk, three (3) to ten (10) feet from
the edge of the pavement or unpaved road, before 7:00 A.M. on the day of
collection.
All Special Residences which are required to use toters, shall regularly
place the toters in a location which is both accessible to the Town Hauler's
collection vehicle and made known to the Town Hauler. These Special
Residences shall be required o enter a Hold Harmless Agreement with the
Town Hauler which permits the Town Hauler collection vehicle to access
the premises of the Special Residence. The Special Residence shall take
appropriate measures to lessen the likelihood that the toters for recyclable
materials are not contaminated with non-recyclable materials.
4
Amended 05/11/2015
SECTION 5.0 FEE FOR COLLECTION SERVICE: The Town shall pay
all costs incurred by the Town Hauler to collect, transport and market
Mandatory Recyclable materials. The only fee the Residence, or the Special
Residences which must use recycling container bins, shall pay is the cost to
purchase a Town approved recycling container.
SECTION 6.0 DESIGNATED TOWN OFFICIAL: The Town Public Works
Director is the Town designated official for the management of the Town
Mandatory Residential Curbside Collection Recycling Program for Residences
and Special Residences. The Public Works Director may delegate responsibilities
involved with the operation and management of this program.
SECTION 7.0 DISTURBANCE OFRECYCLABLE CONTAINERS AND
MATERIALS. No person shall disturb Recyclable materials that have been
placed at curbside in a recycling container or toter for collection by a Residence
or Special Residence.
SECTION 8.0 PENALTIES: The TownHauler, members of the York
Recycling Committee and the designated Town solidwaste official(s) may
examine anyMandatory Recyclable materials to ensure that the separation and
collection of thesematerials complieswith the "SolidWasteCollection,Recycling
and Disposal Ordinance" and these rules and regulations. The designated Town
solid waste official(s) shall institute action for violations.
Any person, firm or corporation who violate any provision of the Ordinance shall be
subject to a fine of $100.00 for each violation. Each day such a violation is continued is
a separate offense.
SECTION 9.0 WAIVER/PAYMENT OF FINES: Any person charged with a
violation of this section, shall be allowed to waive such violation and tender to the Town
of York the fine amount if paid within 20 days of issuance of the summons. If the
waiver fine is paid, no appearance before a District Court Judge or other judicial officer
shall be required. If the offender pays the waiver fine, the matter will be closed in the
York Police Records system and listed as a subsequent offense for future violations.
If the offender chooses not to pay the waiver fine, he/she shall appear in court on the
specified date to answer for the ordinance violation. If the offender is found to have
committed the offense in court, fines, applicable court fees, attorney’s fees, and
prosecution costs may apply.
SECTION 10.0 DEFINITIONS: The following definitions apply for the
purpose of distinguishing a Residence froma SpecialResidence and to identify
all establishments included in the above terms which are subject to the
requirements of these rules and regulations.
5
Amended 05/11/2015
10.1 RESIDENCE: Any home, apartment or condominium complex with no
more than four dwelling units.
10.2 SPECIAL RESIDENCE: Any apartment, condominium complex, cottage
colony, trailer park or campground with five or more dwelling units or spaces;
including spaces which are rented for short-term occupancy. Special Residences
shall not include motels or hotels, nor shall it include solid waste accounts other
than those identified above which are presently considered commercial
establishments by Town solid waste regulations.
SECTION 11.0 EFFECTIVE DATE:
11.1 The initial rules and regulations shall become effective as of 12:00 A.M., May
6, 1991.
11.2 The amended rules and regulations which incorporate provisions to
stipulate recycling requirements for SpecialResidences, shall become effective as of
12:00 A.M., on June 1,1992.
6
Amended 05/11/2015
7

TOWN OF YORK
NOISE ORDINANCE
SECTION 1: PURPOSE
The Town of York has a compelling interest in ensuring for its residents and visitors an
environment free from excessive noise that may jeopardize their health or welfare, or degrade their
quality of life. This Ordinance is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety,
welfare and quality of life for the citizens of York through the reduction, control and prevention of
loud and unreasonable noise.
SECTION 2: STANDARDS
Standards. Noise shall be controlled by relative and absolute standards, in accordance with the
following:
2.1 Relative Limits. In order to prevent a single sound source from radically changing the
noise levels in a neighborhood, the amount of additional sound that may be generated
shall be limited.
A. In the Route One-3, Route One-4, and BUS-3 zoning districts, the following
relative increases shall be permitted:
1) between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.: an increase not to exceed 10
decibels; and
2) at all other times: an increase not to exceed 5 decibels.
B. In all other zones, relative increases shall not exceed 5 decibels.
C. In any zone, a short-duration activity that occurs for not more than 15 minutes
per day, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., shall be permitted to
increased the relative sound level by an additional 10 decibels above that
otherwise permitted in this Section.
2.2 Absolute Limits. The maximum permissible sound pressure level of any continuous,
regular, or frequent source of sound shall be limited as follows:
A. Between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.:
1) 70 decibels in the Route One-3, Route One-4, and BUS-3 zoning
districts; and
2) 60 decibels in all other zones.
B. At all other hours: 50 decibels.
SECTION 3: EXCEPTIONS
Activities listed in this Section are declared to be exempt from the limitations of this Ordinance, as
follows:
3.1 Natural phenomena.
3.2 Church bells rung as part of any official church ceremony or service, and tower clock bells
ringing the hour during daytime hours.
3.3 Any siren, whistle or bell lawfully used by emergency vehicles or any other alarm systems
used in any emergency situation, provided, however, that burglar alarms not terminated
within thirty (30) minutes after being activated shall be unlawful.
3.4 Safety signals or warning devices required by OSHA or other State or Federal regulations.
Noise Ordinance, Town of York, Maine. Amended: May 16, 2015. Page 1 of 4
3.5 Lawful emergency maintenance or construction such as, but not limited to, repair of a
broken water main or replacement of overhead power lines.
3.6 Special events approved by the Board of Selectmen, including but not limited to parades,
special sporting events, public concerts and fire works displays.
3.7 Noises created by on-site construction and maintenance activities between 7 a.m. and 8
p.m.
3.8 Traffic noise.
3.9 Municipal Activities. Any legitimate activity of the Town, or a water or sewer district, may
be exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance at the discretion of the Superintendent of
Public Works.
3.10 Emergencies or Extraordinary Situations. In an emergency or an extraordinary situation,
the Police Chief may vary these standards if, in the Chief’s sole judgment, it is in the best
interests of the Town.
SECTION 4: SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS
Activities defined in this Section are declared to be loud, disturbing and/or unnecessary noises
regardless of the specific decibels generated.
4.1 All domestic animal noise issues shall be controlled exclusively through the Animal
Control Ordinance.
4.2 Using, operating or playing any type of audio device in a loud and unreasonable manner
that casts sound upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or
attracting the attention of the public shall be prohibited.
4.3 The loud and unreasonable shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers, and vendors that
disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood shall be prohibited.
4.4 Any vending machine located outdoors and within 200’ of a residence shall not be filled
with products nor emptied of money during the time from 10:00 PM to 6:00 AM.
SECTION 5: MEASUREMENT
5.1 Sound Pressure Level. This Ordinance regulates sound pressure levels. It shall be
measured in terms of overall readings that provide a single decibel value taking into
account all frequencies or pitches.
5.2 Equipment. A sound level meter used in the administration of this Ordinance shall be a
Type 2 (or better) meter that complies with the ANSI standard S1.4, 1983, or the latest
version thereof.
5.2 Location. Measurements shall be taken in accordance with the following:
A. In all cases, noise measurements shall be taken with the meter at least four feet
above the ground.
B. To measure relative limits, noise shall be measured at the point of concern, not on
the property on which the noise is generated. In the case of a compliant,
measurement shall be taken at the property of the person complaining.
C. To measure maximum limits, noise shall be measured at points around the
perimeter of the lot on which the sound is being generated.
Noise Ordinance, Town of York, Maine. Amended: May 16, 2015. Page 2 of 4
SECTION 6: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
6.1 This Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the York Police Department.
6.2 No person shall interfere with, oppose or resist an authorized person charged with the
enforcement of this Ordinance while such person is engaged in the performance of his duty.
6.3 For the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, the Police
Officers are authorized to make inspections of all noise sources, and to take measurements
and make tests whenever necessary to determine the quantity and character of noise. They
may enter any property with the consent of the owner or owner’s agent. If consent is not
granted, the Officer may seek an administrative warrant from District Court.
6.4 Violations of this Ordinance shall be prosecuted in the same manner as other civil
violations, provided, however, that in the event of an initial violation of the provisions of
this Ordinance, a written notice shall be given the alleged violator which specifies the time
by which the condition shall be corrected. No complaint or further action shall be taken in
the event the cause of the violation has been removed, the condition abated or fully
corrected within the same period specified in the written notice. The notice shall state that
unless corrections are made within the allotted time, the violator is subject to prosecution
pursuant to provisions of this Ordinance.
6.5 In the event the alleged violator cannot be located in order to serve the notice of the intent
to prosecute, the notice as required herein shall be deemed to be given upon mailing of
notice by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the alleged violator at this
last known address or at the place where the violation occurred, in which event the specified
time period for abating the violation or applying for a variance shall commence at the date
of the day following the mailing of such notice. Subsequent violations of the same offense
shall result in the immediate filing of a criminal complaint.
SECTION 7: PENALTIES
Any person who violates this ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty of $100.00 for
the first offense, $150.00 for the second offense, and $250.00 for the third and subsequent
offenses.
SECTION 8: WAIVER/PAYMENT OF FINES
Any person charged with a violation of this section, shall be allowed to waive such violation
and tender to the Town of York the fine amount if paid within 20 days of issuance of the
summons. If the waiver fine is paid, no appearance before a District Court Judge or other
judicial officer shall be required. If the offender pays the waiver fine, the matter will be closed in
the York Police Records system and listed as a subsequent offense for future violations.
If the offender chooses not to pay the waiver fine, he/she shall appear in court on the
specified date to answer for the ordinance violation. If the offender is found to have
committed the offense in court, fines, applicable court fees, attorney’s fees, and prosecution
costs may apply.
SECTION 9: GENERAL PROVISIONS
9.1 Saving Clause. If any portion of this Ordinance is found to be invalid by the courts, it
shall not affect the validity of any other portion of this Ordinance.
Noise Ordinance, Town of York, Maine. Amended: May 16, 2015. Page 3 of 4
9.2 Conflict with Other Codes. Where provisions of this Ordinance are in conflict with or
different than provisions of other codes, the more restrictive shall apply.
9.3 Internal Conflicts. Where provisions of this Ordinance are in conflict with one another,
the more restrictive shall apply.
9.4 References to Zoning Districts. References to districts in the Zoning Ordinance shall
refer to the geography delineated as of November 1, 2001.
9.5 Effective Date. This Ordinance shall become effective upon adoption by Town Meeting.
9.6 Amendment. This Ordinance may be amended by majority vote of any Town Meeting.
Ordinance Amended: May 16, 2015
May 19, 2012
November 2, 2004
Ordinance Adopted: November 6, 2001
Noise Ordinance, Town of York, Maine. Amended: May 16, 2015. Page 4 of 4

Town of York, Maine
Non-Stormwater Discharge Ordinance
1. Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the Town of York through regulation of non-stormwater
Discharges to the Town’s storm sewer system as required by Federal and State law.
This Ordinance establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into
the Town’s storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the Federal
Clean Water Act and State law. Objectives are to prohibit unpermitted non-stormwater
discharges to the storm sewer system and to set forth the legal authority and procedures
to carry out all inspection, monitoring and enforcement activities necessary to ensure
compliance with this Ordinance.
2. Authority. The Town of York enacts this Ordinance pursuant to 30-A M.S.R.A. §3001
(municipal home rule ordinance authority), 38 M.S.R.A §413 (the “Wastewater Discharge
Law”), 33 U.S.C. §1251 et seq. (the “Clean Water Act”), and 40 CFR Part 122 (U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency’s regulations governing the National Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (“NPDES”)). The Maine Department of Environmental
Protection, through its promulgation of the “General Permit for the Discharge of
Stormwater from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (“Small MS4”); under
this General Permit, listing as a Regulated Small MS4 necessitates enactment of this
Ordinance as part of the Town’s Stormwater Management Program in order to satisfy the
minimum control measures.
3. Definitions. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the terms listed below are defined as
follows:
CLEAN WATER ACT: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §1251 et
seq., also known as the “Clean Water Act”), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (CEO): Any of the individuals appointed by the York
Board of Selectmen to fulfill duties of code enforcement for shoreland zoning and/or land
use within the Town.
DISCHARGE: Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emptying, dumping, disposing or
other addition of pollutants to “waters of the State”. “Direct discharge” or “point source”
means any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including, but not limited to,
any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock,
concentrated animal feeding operation or vessel or other floating craft, from which
pollutants are or may be discharged.
EXEMPT PERSON OR DISCHARGE: Any person who is subject to a multi-sector
general permit for industrial activities, a general permit for construction activity, a general
permit for discharge of stormwater from the Maine Department of Transportation or the
Maine Turnpike Authority storm sewer systems, or a general permit for the discharge of
Non-Stormwater Discharge Ordinance (as enacted November 4, 2014)
Page 1 of 6
Town of York, Maine
stormwater from state-owned or federally-owned storm sewer system facilities; and any
non-stormwater discharge permitted under a NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge
license or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the U. S.
Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) or the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection (“DEP”).
MUNICIPALITY: The Town of York.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): Conveyances for storm
water, including, but not limited to, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made channels or storm drains (other than publicly
owned treatment works and combined sewers) owned or operated by the Town of York,
Maine.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE: A permit issued by the EPA or by the DEP that authorizes
the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable to
an individual, group, or general area.
NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any Discharge to an MS4 that is not composed
entirely of stormwater.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, corporation, municipality, quasi-municipal corporation,
state agency, federal agency or other legal entity which creates, initiates, originates or
maintains a discharge of stormwater or non-stormwater.
POLLUTANT: Dredged spoil, solid waste, junk, incinerator residue, sewage, refuse,
effluent, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemicals, biological or radiological
materials, oil, petroleum products or by-products, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment,
rock, sand, dirt and industrial, municipal, domestic, commercial or agriculture wastes of
any kind.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether improved or
unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips, located within the Town of
York from which a discharge into the storm sewer system has or may be created, initiated,
originated or maintained.
REGULATED SMALL MS4: Any Small MS4 regulated by the State of Maine “General
Permit for the Discharge of Stormwater from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
Systems” dated July 1, 2013 (“General Permit”), including all those located partially or
entirely within an Urbanized Area (UA) and those additional Small MS4’s located outside
a UA that, as of the issuance of the General Permit, have been designated by the DEP as
Regulated Small MS4’s.
Non-Stormwater Discharge Ordinance (as enacted November 4, 2014)
Page 2 of 6
Town of York, Maine
SMALL MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM, OR SMALL MS4: Any
MS4 that is not already covered by the Phase I MS4 stormwater program, including
municipally owned or operated storm sewer systems.
STORM SEWER SYSTEM: The entire storm sewer system owned and/or operated by the
Town of York.
STORMWATER: Any stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, or surface runoff and
drainage. “Stormwater” has the same meaning as “Storm Water.”
STORMWATER MANAGER: The CEO designated by the Town Manager to be
responsible for oversight of the Town’s MS4 program and compliance with the State
General Permit.
URBANIZED AREA (UA): Areas of the State of Maine so defined by the latest decennial
(2010, as amended) census by the U.S. Bureau of Census.
4. Applicability. This Ordinance shall apply to all stormwater and/or non-stormwater
discharges from any premises into the storm sewer system.
5. Administration and Enforcement. The Stormwater Manager shall administer the
provisions of this Ordinance. CEO’s shall enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.
6. Prohibition of Non-Stormwater Discharges
A. General Prohibition - Except as allowed or exempted herein, no person shall create,
initiate, originate or maintain a non-stormwater discharge to the Town’s storm sewer
system. Such non-stormwater discharges are prohibited notwithstanding the fact that
the Town may have approved the connections, drains or conveyances through which
the non-stormwater discharges flow.
B. Allowed Non-Stormwater Discharge - The creation, initiation, origination and
maintenance of the following non-stormwater discharges to the storm sewer system
are allowed provided the discharge does not contribute to a violation of water quality
standards defined by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection:
1. Landscape irrigation;
2. Diverted stream flows;
3. Rising ground waters;
4. Uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR 35.2005(20);
5. Uncontaminated pumped ground water;
6. Uncontaminated flows from foundation drains;
7. Air conditioning and compressor condensate;
8. Irrigation water;
9. Flows from uncontaminated springs;
10. Uncontaminated water from basement or crawl space pumps;
11. Uncontaminated flows from footing drains;
12. Lawn watering runoff;
Non-Stormwater Discharge Ordinance (as enacted November 4, 2014)
Page 3 of 6
Town of York, Maine
13. Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
14. Residual street wash water (where spills/leaks of toxic or hazardous materials
have not occurred, unless all spilled material has been removed and detergents
are not used);
15. Hydrant flushing and firefighting activity runoff;
16. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources; and
17. Individual residential car washing.
C. Exempt Person or Discharge - The Ordinance shall not apply to an exempt person or
discharge, except that the CEO may request from the exempt person, or from persons
with exempt discharges, copies of permits, notices of intent, licenses and orders from
the EPA or DEP that authorize the discharge(s).
7. Suspension of Access to the Town’s Storm Sewer System – The CEO may, without prior
notice, order or initiate action to physically suspend discharge access to the storm sewer
system when such suspension of access is necessary to stop an actual or threatened nonstormwater
discharge to the storm sewer system which presents or may present imminent
and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health, safety or welfare of persons, or
to the storm sewer system, or which may cause the municipality to violate the terms of its
environmental permits.
Such suspension may include, but is not limited to, blocking pipes, constructing dams or
taking other measures, on public ways or public property, to physically block the discharge
to prevent or minimize a non-stormwater discharge into the storm sewer system. If the
person responsible for the discharge fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an
emergency, the CEO may take steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage
to the storm sewer system, or to minimize danger to persons, provided, however, that in
taking such steps the CEO may enter upon the premises that are the source of the actual or
threatened non-stormwater discharge to the storm sewer system only with the consent of
the premises’ owner, occupant or agent.
8. Monitoring of Discharges. In order to determine compliance with this Ordinance, the
CEO may enter upon and inspect premises subject to this Ordinance at reasonable hours
with the consent of the premises’ owner, occupant or agent; to inspect the premises and
connection thereon to the storm drainage system; and to conduct monitoring, sampling and
testing of the discharge to the storm sewer system.
9. Enforcement.
A. Notice of Violation and Order for Corrective Action: Whenever the CEO believes
that a person has violated this Ordinance, the CEO may order compliance with this
Ordinance by written Notice of Violation and Order for Corrective Action. This shall
indicate the nature of the violation and order actions necessary to correct the
violation, including, without limitation:
1. The elimination of non-stormwater discharges to the storm sewer system,
including, but not limited to, disconnection of the premises from the MS4;
Non-Stormwater Discharge Ordinance (as enacted November 4, 2014)
Page 4 of 6
Town of York, Maine
2. The cessation of discharges, practices, or operations in violation of this
Ordinance;
3. At the person’s expense, the abatement or remediation (in accordance with best
management practices in DEP rules and regulations) of non-stormwater
discharges to the storm sewer system and the restoration of any affected
property; and/or
4. The payment of fines, of the Town’s remediation costs and of the Town’s
reasonable administrative costs and attorneys’ fees and costs.
Any Notice of Violation and Order for Corrective Action must be consistent with the
legal requirements of the Freeport v. Greenlaw (1992) case. Such Notices/Orders
must: be appropriately titled; be official in tenor but written in plain English as to be
understandable to the average citizen; cite the specific code section allegedly violated;
specify actions required to fix the violation, with specific and reasonable deadlines;
explain the consequences of failure to comply (next steps, loss of rights to other
permitting, monetary penalties, etc.); and provide notice of the recipient’s appeal
rights (right to appeal, deadlines, process, and consequences of failure to appeal).
B. Penalties/Fines/Injunctive Relief: Any person who violates this Ordinance shall be
subject to fines, penalties and orders for injunctive relief and shall be responsible for
the Town’s attorney’s fees and costs all in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. §4452.
Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. Moreover,
any person who violates this Ordinance also shall be responsible for any and all fines,
penalties, damages and costs, including, but not limited to attorneys’ fees and costs,
incurred by the Town for violation of Federal and State environmental laws and
regulations caused by or related to that person’s violation of this Ordinance; this
responsibility shall be in addition to any penalties, fines or injunctive relief imposed
under this Section.
C. Consent Agreement: With the approval of the Board of Selectmen, the CEO may
enter into a written consent agreement with the violator to address timely abatement
of the violation(s) of this Ordinance for the purposes of eliminating violations of this
Ordinance and of recovering fines, costs and fees without court action.
D. Appeal: Any action or inaction of the CEO relative to this Ordinance may be
appealed to the York Board of Appeals. This shall be treated as an administrative
appeal and shall be processed pursuant to the provisions of York Zoning Ordinance
§18.8. The appeal must be received by the Town within 30 days of the action being
appealed. The Board of Appeals shall hold a de novo hearing on the appeal within 30
days from the date of receipt. The Board of Appeals may affirm, reverse, modify or
remand the decision of the CEO. A suspension under Section 7 of this Ordinance
remains in place unless or until lifted by the Board of Appeals or by a reviewing
court. A party aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Appeals may appeal that
decision to the Maine Superior Court within 45 days of the date of the Board of
Appeals decision pursuant to Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
Non-Stormwater Discharge Ordinance (as enacted November 4, 2014)
Page 5 of 6
Town of York, Maine
E. Enforcement Measures: If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the
requirements set forth in the Notice of Violation and Order for Corrective Action, or
in the event of an appeal to the Board of Appeals within 45 days of a decision of the
Board of Appeals affirming the CEO’s decision, then the CEO may recommend that
the Board of Selectmen (BOS) pursue legal action. The BOS may direct the Town’s
attorney to file an enforcement action in a Maine court of competent jurisdiction
under Rule 80K of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedures. The BOS may initiate this
action without a recommendation from the CEO, and may act sooner, provided the
BOS finds that the polluting activity poses an immediate and unacceptable threat to
the public health, safety and welfare.
F. Ultimate Responsibility of Discharger: The standards set forth herein are minimum
standards; therefore the Ordinance does not intend nor imply that compliance by any
person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized
discharge of pollutants into waters of the U.S. caused by said person. This Ordinance
shall not create liability on the part of the Municipality, or any officer, agent or
employee thereof, for any damages that result from any person’s reliance on this
Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
10. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall take effect on the date of passage by the voters.
Future amendments shall take effect on the date of passage by the voters unless otherwise
specified in the amendment.
11. Saving Clause. In the event any provision of this Ordinance is found by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, this finding shall not affect the remainder of this
Ordinance.
Non-Stormwater Discharge Ordinance (as enacted November 4, 2014)
Page 6 of 6

Enacted May 20, 2017
Ordinance Prohibiting Retail Marijuana Establishments and Retail Marijuana
Social Clubs
Section 1. Authority.
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the Marijuana Legalization Act, 7 M.R.S.A. c. 417;
and Municipal Home Rule Authority, Me. Const., art. VIII, pt. 2; and 30-A M.R.S.A. §
3001.
Section 2. Definitions.
For purposes of this ordinance, retail marijuana establishments, including retail marijuana
stores, retail marijuana cultivation facilities, retail marijuana products manufacturing
facilities and retail marijuana testing facilities; and retail marijuana social clubs are defined
as set forth in 7 M.R.S.A. § 2442.
Section 3. Prohibition on Retail Marijuana Establishments and Retail Marijuana Social
Clubs.
Retail marijuana establishments, including retail marijuana stores, retail marijuana
cultivation facilities, retail marijuana products manufacturing facilities, and retail
marijuana testing facilities, are expressly prohibited in the Town of York.
Retail marijuana social clubs are expressly prohibited in the Town of York.
No person or organization shall develop or operate a business in the Town of York that
engages in retail or wholesale sales of a retail marijuana product, as defined by 7 M.R.S.A.
§ 2442.
Nothing in this ordinance is intended to prohibit any lawful use, possession or conduct
pursuant to the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act, 22 M.R.S.A. c. 558-C.
Section 4. Effective date; duration.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon enactment by the municipal legislative
body unless otherwise provided and shall remain in effect until it is amended or repealed.
Section 5. Penalties.
This ordinance shall be enforced by the municipal officers or their designee. Violations of
this ordinance shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 4452.

Town of York, Maine
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance
1. Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the Town of York through monitoring and enforcement of
compliance with post-construction stormwater management plans in order to comply with
requirements of the federal Clean Water Act, of federal regulations, and of the General
Permit. Monitoring and enforcement of post-construction stormwater management plans
will ensure to the maximum extent practicable that stormwater management facilities,
including but not limited to parking areas, catch basins, drainage swales, detention basins
and ponds, pipes and related structures that are part of a storm drainage system, are
properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety.
2. Authority. The Town of York enacts this Ordinance pursuant to 30-A M.S.R.A. §3001
(municipal home rule ordinance authority), 38 M.S.R.A §413 (the “Wastewater Discharge
Law”), 33 U.S.C. §1251 et seq. (the “Clean Water Act”), and 40 CFR Part 122 (U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency’s regulations governing the National Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (“NPDES”)). The Maine Department of Environmental
Protection, through its promulgation of the “General Permit for the Discharge of
Stormwater from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (“Small MS4”); under
this General Permit, listing as a Regulated Small MS4 necessitates enactment of this
Ordinance as part of the Town’s Stormwater Management Program in order to satisfy the
minimum control measures required by Part IV D 5 (“Post-construction stormwater
management in new development and redevelopment”).
3. Definitions. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the terms listed below are defined as follows:
APPLICANT: A Person with requisite right, title or interest, or an agent for such Person
who has filed an application for new development, or redevelopment that requires a postconstruction
stormwater management plan under this Ordinance.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce
the pollution of waters of the State. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating
procedures and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste
disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §1251 et
seq., also known as the “Clean Water Act”), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (CEO): Any of the individuals appointed by the York
Board of Selectmen to fulfill duties of code enforcement for shoreland zoning and/or land
use within the Town.
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance (as enacted November 4, 2014)
Page 1 of 9
Town of York, Maine
DISCHARGE: Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emptying, dumping, disposing or
other addition of Pollutants to “waters of the State.” “Direct discharge” or “point source”
means any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance, including, but not limited to,
any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well discrete fissure, container, rolling stock,
concentrated animal feeding equipment or vessel or other floating craft, from which
pollutants are or may be discharged.
DISTURBED AREA: Any clearing, grading, and/or excavation. Mere cutting of trees,
without grubbing, stump removal, disturbance or exposure of soil is not considered
“disturbed area.” Disturbed area does not include routine maintenance but does include
redevelopment. Routine maintenance is maintenance performed to maintain the original
design, line and grad, hydraulic capacity, and purpose of land or improvements thereon.
MUNICIPALITY: The Town of York.
MUNICIPAL PERMITTING AUTHORITY: The municipal official or body that has
jurisdiction over land use approvals or permit requirements for a new development or
redevelopment.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): Conveyances for storm water,
including, but not limited to, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins,
curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made channels or storm drains (other than publicly owned
treatment works and combined sewers) owned or operated by the Town of York, Maine.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT: A permit issued by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (“EPA”) or by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection
(“DEP”) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether
the permit is applicable to an individual, group, or general area.
NEW DEVELOPMENT: Any construction activity on an unimproved premise.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, corporation, municipality, quasi-municipal corporation,
State agency, Federal agency or other legal entity.
POLLUTANT: Dredged spoil, solid waste, junk, incinerator residue, sewage, refuse,
effluent, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemicals, biological or radiological materials,
oil, petroleum products or by-products, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand,
dirt and industrial, municipal, domestic, commercial or agricultural wastes of any kind.
POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
A. An Inspection and Maintenance Plan as required by rule for projects that require
approval by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection under Chapter 500,
Stormwater Management in Maine; or
B. For projects that do not require approval by the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection under Chapter 500 Stormwater Management in Maine, a plan to inspect and
maintain BMPs and Stormwater Management Facilities employed by a new development
or redevelopment to meet stormwater standards of the Town’s Site Plan and Subdivision
Regulations and Zoning Ordinances.
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance (as enacted November 4, 2014)
Page 2 of 9
Town of York, Maine
PREMISES: Any site, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether improved or
unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips, located within the Town
from which a discharge into the storm drainage system is or may be created, initiated,
originated or maintained.
QUALIFIED THIRD-PARTY INSPECTOR: A person who conducts post-construction
stormwater management facility inspections for compensation and who has received the
appropriate training for the same from the DEP.
REDEVELOPMENT: Any construction activity on premises already improved. Does not
include changes to buildings unless they alter stormwater drainage patterns.
REGULATED SMALL MS4: Any Small MS4 regulated by the State of Maine “General
Permit for the Discharge of Stormwater from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
Systems,” including all those located partially or entirely within an Urbanized Area (UA)
and those additional Small MS4’s located outside a UA that as of the issuance of the
General Permit have been designated by the DEP as Regulated Small MS4’s.
REPORTING YEAR: A 12-month period beginning on July 1st and ending on the
following June 30th.
SMALL MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM, OR SMALL MS4:
Any MS4 that is not already covered by the Phase I MS4 stormwater program including
municipally owned or operated storm sewer systems.
STORM SEWER SYSTEM: The entire storm sewer system owned and/or operated by the
Town of York.
STORMWATER: Any stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, or surface runoff and
drainage. “Stormwater” has the same meaning as “Storm Water.”
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES: Any catch basins, drainage swales,
detention basins and ponds, pipes, or other such structures or features that are intended to
control stormwater runoff quantity and quality.
STORMWATER MANAGER: The CEO designated by the Town Manager to be
responsible for oversight of the Town’s MS4 program and compliance with the State
General Permit.
URBANIZED AREA (UA): Areas of the State of Maine so defined by the latest decennial
(2010, as amended) census by the U.S. Bureau of Census.
4. Applicability. This Ordinance shall apply to all properties on which there will be one or
more acres of disturbed area and which discharge stormwater off the property. The measure
of disturbed area is determined at the buildout of all project phases.
5. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall take effect on the date of passage by the voters.
Future amendments shall take effect on the date of passage by the voters unless otherwise
specified in the amendment.
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance (as enacted November 4, 2014)
Page 3 of 9
Town of York, Maine
6. Approval and Notice.
A. General Requirements. If subject to this Ordinance as identified in Section 4, an
applicant must receive approval pursuant to this Ordinance before any other Town
official or board may grant a permit or approval for any building permit, subdivision,
site plan or other such activity.
B. Stormwater Management Review and Approval. If subject to this Ordinance as
identified in Section 4, where no other stormwater management requirements are
applicable to the proposal, an applicant must demonstrate compliance to the CEO
with the stormwater management, storm drainage construction, and erosion and
sedimentation control standards of the Site Plan & Subdivision Regulations.
C. Notice of BMP Discharge to Municipality’s MS4. At the time of application for a
building permit, subdivision approval, site plan approval or other land use approval
for new development or redevelopment within the scope of this Ordinance, the
applicant shall notify the municipal permitting authority of its Post-Construction
Stormwater Management Plan including any BMP(s) that will discharge to the
Town’s MS4 and shall include in this notification a listing of which BMP(s) will so
discharge.
D. Notice of BMP Discharge to MDOT and MTA. At the time of application for a
building permit, subdivision approval, site plan approval or other land use approval
for new development or redevelopment within the scope of this Ordinance, the
applicant shall notify the MDOT or MTA of its Post-Construction Stormwater
Management Plan including any BMP(s) that will discharge to their jurisdiction.
7. Compliance Requirements. Any person subject to this ordinance who owns, operates
leases or has control over stormwater management facilities shall be required to comply
with the following:
A. Inspection. That person or a qualified third-party inspector hired by that person shall,
at least annually, inspect the stormwater management facilities, including but not
limited to any parking areas, catch basins, drainage swales, detention basins and
ponds, pipes and related structures, in accordance with all municipal and state
inspection and maintenance requirements of the approved Post-Construction
Stormwater Management Plan.
B. Maintenance. If the Stormwater Management Facilities require maintenance to
function as intended by the approved Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan,
that person shall take necessary action(s) to address the deficiency or deficiencies.
C. Annual Reporting and Fee. That person or qualified third-party inspector hired by
that person, shall, on or by July 1 of each year, provide a completed and signed
certification to the Stormwater Manager (identical to that attached as Appendix A),
certifying that the person has inspected the Stormwater Management Facilities. This
certification shall demonstrate that the Stormwater Management Facilities are
adequately maintained and functioning as intended by the approved Post-
Construction Stormwater Management Plan.
The person or qualified third-party inspector shall provide a record of any required
maintenance or deficiency and any corrective action(s) taken for compliance with this
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance (as enacted November 4, 2014)
Page 4 of 9
Town of York, Maine
Ordinance. In addition, any person required to file an annual certification under this
Section shall include a payment with the annual certification in the amount $150.00
to pay the administrative and technical costs of reviewing the annual certification.
This fee shall be placed in the General Fund to help offset program costs.
8. Right of Entry. In order to determine compliance with this ordinance and with the Post-
Construction Stormwater Management Plan, the CEO may enter upon property at a
reasonable hour with the consent of the owner, occupant or agent to inspect the Stormwater
Management Facilities. Refusal to grant reasonable access may require the Town to gain
access by Administrative Warrant.
9. Annual Report. Beginning July 1, 2014 and each year thereafter, the Stormwater
Manager shall include the following in their Annual Report to the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection;
A. The cumulative number of sites that have Stormwater Management Facilities
discharging into their MS4;
B. A summary of the number of sites that have Stormwater Management Facilities
discharging into their MS4 that were reported to the Municipality per §6.C in the
reporting year;
C. The number of sites with documented functioning Stormwater Management Facilities
per §7.C; and
D. The number of sites that required routine maintenance or remedial action to ensure
that Stormwater Management Facilities are functioning as intended.
10. Inspections. The Town shall annually inspect a percentage of Stormwater Management
Facilities located in the direct watershed of a lake most at risk from new development in
the Urbanized Area or in watersheds of an urban impaired stream in the Urbanized Area. If
the owner or operator of a Stormwater Management Facility hires a Qualified Third-Party
Inspector, the permittee will not be subject to Town inspections per this Section. If the
owner or operator of a Stormwater Management Facility does a “self” inspection, the
Municipality is required to conduct the following:
1-10 sites: inspect at least one site, or 40% (whichever is greater)
11-30 sites: inspect at least four sites, or 30% (whichever is greater)
31-60 sites: inspect at least nine sites, or 25% (whichever is greater)
61-100 sites: inspect at least fifteen sites, or 20% (whichever is greater)
101-160 sites: inspect at least twenty sites, or 17% (whichever is greater)
Over 160 sites: inspect at least twenty seven sites, or 11% (whichever is greater)
11. Enforcement. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of, or to fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this Ordinance or the approved Post-Construction
Stormwater Management Plan. Whenever the CEO believes that a person has violated this
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance (as enacted November 4, 2014)
Page 5 of 9
Town of York, Maine
Ordinance or the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan, the CEO may enforce
this Ordinance in accordance with 30-A M.S.R.A §4452.
A. Notice of Violation and Order for Corrective Action: Whenever the CEO believes
that a person has violated this Ordinance or an approved Post-Construction Stormwater
Management Plan, the CEO may order compliance with this Ordinance by written
Notice of Violation and Order for Corrective Action. This shall indicate the nature of
the violation and order actions necessary to correct the violation, including without
limitation:
1. The abatement of violations and the cessation of practices or operations in violation
of this Ordinance or of the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan;
2. At the person’s expense, compliance with BMPs required as a condition of
approval of the New Development and Redevelopment, the repair of Stormwater
Management Facilities and/or the restoration of any affected property; and/or
3. The payment of fines, the Town’s remediation costs, the Town’s reasonable
administrative costs, and attorneys’ fees and costs.
Any Notice of Violation and Order for Corrective Action must be consistent with the
legal requirements of the Freeport v. Greenlaw (1992) case. Such Notice/Order must:
be appropriately titled; be official in tenor but written in plain English as to be
understandable to the average citizen; cite the specific code section allegedly violated;
specify actions required to fix the violation, with specific and reasonable deadlines;
explain the consequences of failure to comply (next steps, loss of rights to other
permitting, monetary penalties, etc.); and provide notice of the recipient’s appeal
rights (right to appeal, deadlines, process, and consequences of failure to appeal).
B. Penalties, Fines, and Injunctive Relief. Any person who violates this Ordinance or
the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan shall be subject to fines, penalties
and orders for injunctive relief and shall be responsible for the Town’s attorney fees
and costs, all in accordance with 30-A M.S.R.A §4452. Each day such violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation.
Moreover, any person who violates this Ordinance or the Post-Construction Stormwater
Management Plan also shall be responsible for any and all fines, penalties, damages
and costs, including, but not limited to attorneys’ fees and costs, incurred by the Town
of York for violation of Federal and State environmental laws and regulations caused
by or related to that person’s violation of this Ordinance or the Post-Construction
Stormwater Management Plan; this responsibility shall be in addition to any penalties,
fines or injunctive relief imposed under this Section.
When a violation of a Town ordinance or regulation is identified and the Code
Enforcement Officer has issued a written notice of violation, the following shall apply:
1. For a lot with a single principle tenant or unit, such as but not limited to a single
house or a single business, no permits or approvals shall be issued for that lot until
the violation is resolved; or
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance (as enacted November 4, 2014)
Page 6 of 9
Town of York, Maine
2. For a lot with multiple tenants or units, such as but not limited to apartment
buildings or malls, one of the following two options shall apply:
a. If the violation relates solely to a single tenant or unit, no permits or approvals
shall be issued for that tenant or unit until the violation is resolved (the tenant
and units which were not cited shall not be adversely affected); or
b. If the violation relates to the site in general, no permits or approvals shall be
issued for any tenant, unit or that lot until the violation is resolved.
C. Consent Agreement. With approval of the Board of Selectmen, the CEO may enter
into a written consent agreement with the violator to address timely abatement of the
violation(s) of this Ordinance or the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan
for purposes of eliminating violations of this Ordinance or the Post-Construction
Stormwater Management Plan and recovering fines, costs and fees without court action.
D. Appeal: Any action or inaction of the CEO relative to this Ordinance or an approved
post-construction stormwater management plan may be appealed to the York Board
of Appeals. This shall be treated as an administrative appeal and shall be processed
pursuant to the provisions of York Zoning Ordinance §18.8. The appeal must be
received by the Town within 30 days of the action being appealed. The Board of
Appeals shall hold a de novo hearing on the appeal within 30 days from the date of
receipt. The Board of Appeals may affirm, reverse, modify or remand the decision of
the CEO. A party aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Appeals may appeal that
decision to the Maine Superior Court within 45 days of the date of the Board of
Appeals decision pursuant to Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
E. Enforcement Measures. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the
requirements set forth in the Notice of Violation and Order for Corrective Action, or
in the event of an appeal to the Board of Appeals within 45 days of a decision of the
Board of Appeals affirming the CEO’s decision, then the CEO may recommend to the
Board of Selectmen (BOS) pursue legal action. The BOS may direct the Town’s
attorney to file an enforcement action in a Maine court of competent jurisdiction
under Rule 80K of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedures. The BOS may initiate this
action without a recommendation from the CEO, and may act sooner, provided the
BOS finds that the circumstances pose an immediate and unacceptable threat to the
public health, safety and welfare.
12. Administration and Enforcement. The Stormwater Manager shall administer the
provisions of this Ordinance. CEOs shall enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.
13. Saving Clause. In the event any provision of this Ordinance is found by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, this finding shall not affect the remainder of this
Ordinance.
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance (as enacted November 4, 2014)
Page 7 of 9
Town of York, Maine
TOWN OF YORK, MAINE
Appendix A
Annual Stormwater Management Facilities Certificate
I, ______________________________________________________, certify the following:
Print or Type
1. This Annual Stormwater Management Facilities Certification is for the following property:
____________________________________________________________________________
Print or Type name of subdivision, condominium or other development
located at ________________________________________________________(“the Property”);
Print or Type Address
2. The owner, operator, tenant, lessee, homeowners association or other party having control of the
Property is:
_____________________________________________________________________________;
Print or Type name(s)
3. I am the owner, operator, tenant, lessee, homeowners’ association president, or a Qualified
Third-Party Inspector hired by the same (circle one);
4. I have knowledge of erosion and stormwater control and have reviewed the approved Post-
Construction Stormwater Management Plan for the Property;
5. On___________________________, 20_____, I inspected or had inspected by
__________________________________________________, a Qualified Third-Party Inspector,
Stormwater Management Facilities, including but not limited to parking areas, catch basins,
drainage swales, detention basins and ponds, pipes and related structures required by the approved
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan for the Property;
6. At the time of inspection of Stormwater Management Facilities on the Property, I or the Qualified
Third-Party Inspector identified the following need(s) for routine maintenance or deficiencies in
the Stormwater Management Facilities:
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance (as enacted November 4, 2014)
Page 8 of 9
Town of York, Maine
7. On___________________________,20_____, The following routine maintenance was performed
or the following corrective action(s) was taken to address deficiencies in the Stormwater
Management Facilities described in 6 above:
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
8. As of the date of this certification, the Stormwater Management Facilities are functioning as
intended and described in the approved Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan for the
Property.
Dated: _____________________________, 20_____ By: ________________________________
Signature
________________________________
Print Name
STATE OF MAINE
___________________________,ss. ____________________________________, 20_______
Personally appeared the above-named ________________________________________________,
the _________________________________of_________________________________________,
to acknowledge the foregoing Annual Certification to be said person’s free act and deed in said capacity.
Before me,
_________________________________________
Notary Public/Attorney at Law
_________________________________________
Print Name
Mail this certification to the Town of York,
CEO at the following address:
TOWN OF YORK – Code Enforcement
186 York Street
York, ME 03909
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance (as enacted November 4, 2014)
Page 9 of 9

ORDINANCE FOR PRIVATE USE HELICOPTERS
SECTION 1
SHORT TITLE: This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as Ordinance for
Heliports.
SUMMARY: Helicopter landings, take-offs, and hovering are prohibited within the
corporate boundaries of the Town of York unless these activities are performed at a heliport
(commercial or private use) that has a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) approval and
are conducted in a manner that is compliant with the tenets of this Ordinance.
SECTION 2
DEFINITIONS: As used in this Ordinance:
1. Heliport – A heliport (used privately or commercially) is unidentifiable area on land,
water, or a structure, including any building or facilities thereon, used or intended to
be used for the landing and take-off of helicopters.
2. Takeoff and Landing Area – A cleared area containing a final approach and takeoff
area (FATO) available for the takeoff and landing of helicopters.
3. Heliport Transitional Surfaces – These surfaces extend outward and upward from
the lateral boundaries of the heliport primary surface and from the approach surfaces
at a slope of 2 to 1 for a distance of 250 feet measured horizontally from the
centerline and approach surfaces.
4. Primary Surface – The specific area used for the landing or takeoff of helicopters.
Also called a helipad, ground level, or a helideck, above ground.
5. Approach/Departure Surface – The imaginary surface which is centered on each
designated approach and departure route. The approach surface may also serve as a
departure surface. (See Figure 1-1 attached).
6. Final Approach and Takeoff Area (FATO) – A defined area over which the final
phase of the approach maneuver to hover or landing is completed and from which
the takeoff maneuver is commenced. (See Figure 1-1 attached).
7. Obstruction – Any structure, growth or other object, including a mobile object
which exceeds the obstruction standard of FAR 77.23.
8. Structure – (Definition for this Ordinance only). An object including a mobile
object, constructed or installed by a human being, including but without limitation,
buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formation, and overhead transmission
lines.
9. Growth – Any object of natural growth.
10. Ground Effect – Improvement in flight capability that develops when a helicopter
flies or hovers near the ground or other surface, resulting from the cushion of air
built up between the ground and the helicopter by the air displaced downward by the
rotor resulting in ground disturbance.
11. Wind Direction Indicator – A means of indicating wind direction, preferably a wind
cone.
SECTION 3
No area within the incorporated boundaries of the Town of York, shall be used for the
landing of helicopters without the specific written approval of the Code Enforcement
Officer, and the concurrences of the Police Department and the appropriate Fire
Department of the Town of York.
No tenet propounded herein shall contravene or circumvent the Federal Aviation
Regulations as they pertain to the operation of helicopters, or the federal reporting
requirements stipulated for the establishment of helicopter landing areas.
Persons proposing to construct, activate or deactivate a heliport are required to notify the
FAA of their intent (currently form 7480-1). The written results of the FAA determination,
and a copy of the form submitted to the FAA, shall be submitted along with any other
documentation required by the Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) to the Town of York
CEO for his approval and the issuance of a permit for a heliport.
The CEO will assure that all criteria set forth in this Ordinance is met prior to the issuance
of a heliport permit.
SECTION 4
Any appeal of a decision made by the Code Enforcement Officer must take place within
thirty (30) calendar days of the specific decision being appealed.
The appeal will be made in writing to the Board of Selectmen who will be required to hold a
hearing within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of receipt (by the Board of Selectmen) of
the appeal.
When the appeal pertains to the approval or disapproval of the landing of helicopters all
residents and property owners within 500 yards of the designated area will be notified at least
ten (100 workdays prior to the hearing of the appeal.
Upon completion of the hearing the Board of Selectmen are required to provide a decision
in writing within ten (10) workdays of the hearing date.
Action times may be changed with the approval of the appellant(s) and the Board of
Selectmen.
SECTION 5
It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to administer and enforce the regulations
prescribed herein. Applications for permits and appeals shall be made to the Code
Enforcement Officer. Applications required by this Ordinance shall be promptly
considered and granted or denied.
SECTION 6
This Ordinance has no “grandfathering”. Any former, current or future use of an area for
the purpose of the landing or takeoff of helicopters will be subject to the conditions of this
Ordinance upon approval of the Ordinance by the Legislative body.
SECTION 7
A heliport must also have the approval of the FAA (where applicable) in accordance with
Federal Aviation Regulations, Parts 157 and 77 and any other part(s) deemed applicable. An
unobstructed takeoff and landing area is required by the Town of York and must be in
accordance with Federal Aviation Regulations, Volume XI, Part 77.
The ground effect of takeoffs, landings and hoverings must not disturb the property, structure,
or growth of an abutter, nor shall it cause an abutter to suspend or interrupt any outside
activities that they perform on their property.
SECTION 8
The primary surface (helipad) will have specific markings, at ground level (or on helideck),
indicating the perimeters of the touchdown location. Markings may also include marker
bushes that do not exceed two (2) feet in height. The helipad surface can vary from turf to
an all paved surface and must be load bearing. An above ground primary surface (helideck)
and paved helipads must have a skid resistant surface. Any helideck raised four (4) feet or
more above ground/water must have a horizontal safety net installed.
Minimum lengths, width or diameter of helipad, is 1.5 times critical helicopter undercarriage
length or width, whichever is greater.
The primary surface area may be located on the ground, on a water surface, or an elevated
platform.
SECTION 9
No more than two helicopters may use heliports without specific permission of the Code
Enforcement Officer. A parking area must be provided if more than one helicopter at a
time is to be accommodated. The helicopter parking area should be of a size and location
that parked helicopters will not obstruct the clear area for takeoffs and landings or the
approach and departure routes.
Parked helicopters must be at least fifty (50) feet away from any structure, collocated on the
same property that is normally occupied by people. A minimum of 250 feet is required
between a parked helicopter and any structure on an abutter’s property that is normally
occupied by people.
SECTION 10
No storage of fuel or fueling of the helicopter will occur at a heliport, unless the storage of
fuel is currently permitted in the zone and has been inspected by the appropriate Fire
Department and received approval of the Code Enforcement Officer,
SECTION 11
A means of indicating wind direction is essential. The indicator should be located so as not
to interfere with flight operations and yet be able to give a true indication of the wind’s
direction and relative magnitude at the primary surface.
SECTION 12
No helicopter engine start, run-up, taxing, take-off, hovering or landings will be permitted
one-half (1/2) hour after official sunset or until one-half (1/2) hour after official sunrise.
Exception only for Military/Coast Guard/Medical/Police purpose.
All takeoffs, hoverings and landings shall be conducted only under FAA defined visual flight
rule (VFR) weather conditions.
All heliports shall have tie-down capabilities to secure all parked helicopters during adverse
weather conditions.
SECTION 13
Military, Coast Guard or Police landings or takeoffs may occur at any time for emergency
purposes at specified locations. Use of helicopters for medical emergency purposes may also
occur with prior notification to the appropriate Fire Department. (This does not exempt
any organization from meeting the requirements of this Ordinance if repetitive landings are
expected.)
The fire department should provide fire apparatus to assure safety of those concerned when
these exceptions are made.
An exception may be made for the Governor of Maine upon notification of the Police and
the appropriate Fire Department.
SECTION 14
Any person who violates this ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty of $100.00 for the
first offense, $250.00 for the second offense, and $500.00 for the third and subsequent
offenses. Each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
SECTION 15
Waiver/Payment of Fines: Any person charged with a violation of this section, shall be allowed
to waive such violation and tender to the Town of York the fine amount if paid within 20 days
of issuance of the summons. If the waiver fine is paid, no appearance before a District Court
Judge or other judicial officer shall be required. If the offender pays the waiver fine, the matter
will be closed in the York Police Records system and listed as a subsequent offense for future
violations.
If the offender chooses not to pay the waiver fine, he/she shall appear in court on the specified
date to answer for the ordinance violation. If the offender is found to have committed the
offense in court, fines, applicable court fees, attorney’s fees, and prosecution costs may apply.
SECTION 16
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this
Ordinance and any other regulations applicable to the same area, the more stringent limitation
or requirements shall govern and prevail.
SECTION 17
If any provision of this Ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances
are held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the
Ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application and to this
end, the provisions of this Ordinance are declared to be severable.
Adopted at Special Town Meeting – June 5, 1989
Amended: May 16, 2015


ORDINANCE PROHIBITING OBSCENITY
FOR COMMERCIAL GAIN
Section 1: Purpose
Purpose of this Ordinance is to prohibit any commercial enterprise from presenting or
engaging in any obscene exhibitions for profit. It is not intended to suppress or inhibit the
free exchange of ideas or artistic expression. The Town of York has enacted this Ordinance
for the purpose of promoting and protecting the general welfare, public safety, public order
and morals.
Section 2: Definitions
CommercialEnterprise Any business, corporation, association or natural person
established for pecuniary gain other than a theater.
Theater
a. Any building or hall designed primarily for showing motion pictures, having a
permanent movie screen and permanently fixed seats arranged in fashion as to allow
spectators an unobstructed view of the screen
b. Any open-air theater designed primarily for showing motion pictures, having a
permanent movie screen and permanent devices for broadcasting movie sound tracks
inmotor vehicles.
c. Any playhouse, hall, or similar structure designed primarily for legitimate artistic
express10n.
Present To show, reveal, display or expose to any person.
Engage In To solicit, produce, direct, finance, physically participate in, compensate
others for, further the interest of, or be otherwise involved with the prescribed conduct.
Obscene Any conduct of a sexual nature which:
a. To the average individual applying contemporary community standards, considered
as awhole appeals to the prurient interest;
b. Presents in a patently offensive manner actual or simulated ultimate sexual acts,
sodomy, beastiality, excretory functions, masturbation, direct physical stimulation of
the unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in context of ultimate sexual acts, lewd
exhibition of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, buttocks or the female
breast below the top of the nipple; and
c. Considered as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
Exhibition Any aural, visual, or tactile performance, dramatization, show or display which
includes any amount of human, animal, or animated conduct whether presented live or by
way of mechanical reproduction, sound recording, audio-visual cassette or tape, silhouette
depiction or by any other means.
Section 3: Prohibition
a. It shall be unlawful for any commercial enterprise to present for profit any obscene
exhibition within the Town of York.
b. It shall be unlawful for any commercial enterprise to engage in any obscene exhibition
for profit within the Town of York.
c. It shall be unlawful for any commercial enterprise to solicit, permit, promote, or assist
any commercial enterprise or person to present or engage in any obscene exhibition
within the Town of York.
Section 4: Exceptions
This Ordinance is not intended to regulate any conduct expressly regulated by existing State
Statute.
Section 5: Penalty
a. Any person who violates this ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty of $500.00 for
each offense. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
b. In addition to any other penalty provided by law, the commission of acts prohibited by
this Ordinance shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the Town seeking an
injunction to prohibit further and continued violations.
Section 6: Waiver / Payment of Fines
a. Any person charged with a violation of this section, shall be allowed to waive such violation
and tender to the Town of York the fine amount if paid within 20 days of issuance of the
summons. If the waiver fine is paid, no appearance before a District Court Judge or other
judicial officer shall be required. If the offender pays the waiver fine, the matter will be
closed in the York Police Records system and listed as a subsequent offense for future
violations
b. If the offender chooses not to pay the waiver fine, he/she shall appear in court on the
specified date to answer for the ordinance violation. If the offender is found to have
committed the offense in court, fines, applicable court fees, attorney’s fees, and prosecution
costs may apply.
Section 6: Severability
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance is for any reason
held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this Ordinance.
Adopted June 12, 1980






Page 1
Property Tax Relief Ordinance
(Adopted May 21, 2016 to
replace the Property Tax
Fairness Credit Relief for
Low Income Circuit Breaker
Program Ordinance)
1. Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide relief to York residents who earn low to modest incomes
and are taxpayers or renters of the Town of York.
2. Definitions
Homestead. “Homestead” shall have the same meaning as in 36 M.R.S.A. § 5219-KK (1) (C), as may
be amended from time to time.
3. Program Description
Under this program, the Town of York will provide a supplemental benefit to individuals who
qualify as York residents and beneficiaries of the Maine Property Tax Fairness Credit Program
established by Chapter 822, section 5219-KK of Title 36, M.R.S.A. (the “State Program”).
Eligible persons who received a t a x credit under the Sta te Program may present proof of such
tax credit a n d e l i g i b i l i ty to the Town of York’s General Assistance Coordinator or designee
(the “Town”) and shall automatically qualify for a supplemental benefit from the Town of York.
The amount of the supplemental benefit shall be a percentage of the State Program tax credit, as
prescribed herein.
4. Eligible Persons
In order to be eligible for a supplemental benefit from the Town of York under this Ordinance, an
applicant must demonstrate all of the following:
a. The applicant has a homestead in the Town of York at the time of application.
b. The applicant pays property taxes on a homestead to the Town of York or pays rent for the rental
of a homestead.
c. The applicant has received a tax credit under the State Program for the prior year’s income tax.
However, an owner of multiple residences in the Town of York shall not b e e l i g i b l e fo r a
b e n e f i t .
Page 2
5. Eligible Amounts
York residents who qualify for a tax credit under the State Program shall be eligible for a benefit of
up to 50% of the tax credit calculated under the State Program; provided, the benefit to be received
by any applicant shall not exceed the sum of $450.00 per household per year.
6. Application and Benefit Payment
York residents may fill out a Town application between February 1 and June 15 relative to the prior
year’s income tax for a benefit as prescribed in this ordinance. Each form must be accompanied by
satisfactory evidence of eligibility and t a x credit payment by the State of Maine under the State
Program for the prior year’s income tax, including a statement regarding the amount of the State
Program tax credit. The Town shall review and determine if the application is complete a n d accurate
and if the applicant is eligible for a benefit.
If the Town determines that the applicant is eligible for a benefit, the Town shall then determine the
total benefit amount based on the formula set forth in Section 5 of this ordinance, and the Town
shall pay this amount within thirty (30) days upon approval of the application if sufficient funds
remain in the budgetary account.
7. Benefit Limits
Approved benefits shall be distributed by the Town on a first-come first-served basis until the budgetary
account is exhausted. Approved benefits that remain unpaid after exhaustion of the budgetary account
will not carry over to the next year.
8. Failure to Appropriate Funds
Failure of the voters of York to appropriate funds to pay for this program shall constitute a
suspension of the program for that year.
9. Effective Date
This Ordinance shall apply to benefit applications filed with the Town on or after February 1, 2017,
for a benefit relative to the 2016 income tax year and subsequent income tax years.

Town of York, Maine
Public Road Acceptance Ordinance – Revised November 7, 2017
Page 1 of 7
Public Road Acceptance Ordinance
1. Purpose. This Ordinance details the standards and procedures for the
Town to accept ownership of roads. This Ordinance shall also provide nonbinding
direction for any Town road construction projects.
2. Minimum Road Standards. Any road which is presented for Town
acceptance shall meet the following standards:
A. Right of way shall extend a minimum of 20 feet on each side of
center line of road, except right of ways approved by the York
Planning Board under subdivision review procedures shall extend
25 feet from center line.
B. No stumps, wood debris or organic matter shall be covered in the
road bed at any depth and no ledge or large boulders shall be left
within 18" of the finished road surface. Where necessary to facilitate
drainage, line of sight or snow removal, all ledge, large boulders,
trees and tree stumps shall be removed from the right of way to a
depth of not less than 12” below the road surface. Road grades
shall conform in general to the natural terrain.
C. Culverts shall be reinforced concrete, corrugated aluminum alloy, or
high density polyethylene pipe. Culverts and drainage system shall
be sized to meet the criteria of a fifty year storm event.
D. Base gravel shall contain no stones larger than 4" in diameter, shall
comply in thickness with the table of standards in §2.J and shall
extend the full width of the pavement and shoulders. Crushed
gravel that will pass through a 2" square sieve shall be placed over
the base gravel, shall comply in thickness with the table of
standards in §2.J, and shall extend the full width of the pavement
and shoulders.
E. Side slopes, back slopes and ditches shall be graded to a slope not
steeper than 1' vertical to 3' horizontal within the right-of-way, and
not more than 1’ vertical to 2’ horizontal outside the right-of-way.
Except in ledge, all slopes shall be fertilized and seeded.
F. A dead-end road shall terminate in one of the following:
1. for any road, a cul-de-sac turnaround of not less than 75’
radius at the property line, with a 60’ radius at the outer edge
of pavement and a 40’ radius at the inner edge of pavement
with a pervious, vegetated center island; or
Town of York, Maine
Public Road Acceptance Ordinance – Revised November 7, 2017
Page 2 of 7
2. for a local road, a hammerhead turnaround shall be permitted
in lieu of a cul-de-sac, provided it meets the following design
criteria:
Hammerhead Turnaround
G. Where proposed, underground utilities shall be installed prior to the
placement of the road base gravel, and all underground utilities
shall be stubbed out to the edge of the right-of-way for each
possible service connection.
H. The road shall not have less than three dwellings completed for
occupancy.
I. Bituminous Concrete (hot top) shall be applied in two courses, a
base course and a surface course, each of which shall meet
applicable Maine D.O.T. specifications, and which shall comply in
thickness with the table of standards in §2.J.
Town of York, Maine
Public Road Acceptance Ordinance – Revised November 7, 2017
Page 3 of 7
J. Finished standards shall be:
Finished Standards Local
Road
Collector
Road
Arterial
Road
Min. Pavement Width 18’ 20’ 24’
Min. Shoulder Width 3’ 3’ 4’
Min. Centerline Grade 0.5% 0.5% 0.5%
Max. Centerline Grade 7% 6% 5%
Min. Roadway Crown ¼”/foot ¼”/foot ¼”/foot
Min. Centerline Radius 100’ 350’ 350’
Min. Tangent Between Reverse
Curves
50’ 150’ 150’
Min. Angle of Road Intersections 85º 90º 90º
Design Speed 25 30 35
Max. Grade within 75’ of an
Intersection
2% 2% 2%
Min. Pavement Edge Radius at
Intersection
15’ 15’ 20’
Min. Roadway Culvert Diameter 15” 15” 15”
Min. Driveway Culvert Diameter 15” 15” 15”
Base Gravel Course 18” 21” 24”
Crushed Gravel Course 3” 3” 3”
Base Course of Bituminous Concrete 2” 2½” 3”
Surface Course of Bituminous
Concrete
1½” 1½” 1½”
Numeric minimum and maximum standards shall be interpreted
literally as written, not as rounded to these amounts.
K. Road Hierarchy. The following shall apply:
1. A new arterial road shall not be a dead-end road, and must
connect directly to an existing arterial road.
2. A new collector road must connect directly to an existing
collector or arterial road.
3. A public road must connect directly to an existing public road.
L. Easements. When the road is offered for public acceptance,
acceptance may be conditioned upon concurrent receipt of related
easements, including but not limited to slope maintenance
easements where side slopes extend outside the right-of-way,
clearing easements to ensure preservation of safe sight distances
at intersections, and drainage easements.
M. Public and Private Responsibilities. The request for a road to be
accepted by the Town shall include a statement about the
responsibilities for utility bills (as for street lights and fire hydrants)
and maintenance of landscaping (as in the center of a cul-de-sac),
either linking these responsibilities to road ownership or assigning
them permanently to another party. If these responsibilities are
Town of York, Maine
Public Road Acceptance Ordinance – Revised November 7, 2017
Page 4 of 7
assigned to the Town, the Public Works Department shall be
permitted to engage in maintenance in the most economical
manner, even to the extent of removing landscaping that is difficult
or expensive to maintain, or replacing custom lighting fixtures with
standard fixtures. The assignment of these responsibilities to the
Town does not ensure continued compliance with design standards
in place at the time the road was designed or accepted.
N. Divided Entrances. If the Town accepts a road with a landscaped
divider, sign, or other structure at the beginning of the road, the
Board of Selectmen may at any time require the divider, sign or
other structure to be removed to make snow plowing and
maintenance easier and more economical.
3. Procedures. The following procedural requirements shall be followed when
a road is proposed for Town ownership pursuant to this Ordinance:
A. This Ordinance does not apply to Planning Board development
review procedures. Planning Board approval of a road during the
development review process does not guarantee compliance with
this Ordinance, nor does Planning Board approval guarantee road
acceptance by the Town. The Planning Board may impose different
standards for road construction pursuant to applicable codes.
B. The owner of a road shall be the party to request public
acceptance. The request shall be made in writing, and shall be
delivered to the Board of Selectmen, with copies to the Town
Manager and the Superintendent of Public Works. The written
request shall include the following:
1. A cover letter which summarizes the request.
2. A plan of the road and the road right-of-way, which shall
have been recorded at the York County Registry of Deeds
prior to the time the road acceptance request is submitted to
the Town.
3. A warranty deed to the property within the street right-ofway,
and for all easements offered in conjunction with the
road.
Town of York, Maine
Public Road Acceptance Ordinance – Revised November 7, 2017
Page 5 of 7
4. A set of as-built plans, each of which shall be certified by a
Maine-licensed Professional Land Surveyor, which shall
include the following:
a. A plan view of the road and right-of-way as constructed,
showing:
1. the right-of-way property boundaries, and
information to describe each property boundary
which intersects the right-of-way boundary;
2. survey monumentation and bearings and distances
of property boundaries, sufficient to allow ready
location of the right-of-way on the ground;
3. edge of pavement, edge of shoulder, edge of
sidewalk, and edge of curb;
4. complete curve data for all horizontal curves;
5. turning radii at all intersections;
6. pavement marking;
7. road signs;
8. street lights, utility poles, fire hydrants, pump
stations, and other utility features visible on the
ground;
9. elevation contours at not greater than 2’ intervals;
10. other roads which intersect this road, with an
indication of ownership (private or public) for each;
11. indication of the location of the sample crosssection;
and
12. other features as relevant.
b. A profile plan of the road at a scale not larger than 50’=1”
with a vertical exaggeration not in excess of 10:1. This
plan shall show the profile of the centerline of the road,
and shall indicate grades at critical points along the
centerline, and shall include complete curve data for all
vertical curves.
c. A sample cross-section of the road drawn to a horizontal
scale no larger than 5’=1” and a vertical scale of 1’=1”.
The location of this cross-section shall be indicated on
the plan view.
d. A plan showing the size and location of all existing water
lines, sewer lines, storm drains, culverts, underdrains and
other underground utilities within the right-of-way,
including all service feeds to properties along the road.
Town of York, Maine
Public Road Acceptance Ordinance – Revised November 7, 2017
Page 6 of 7
5. Certification by a Maine-licensed Professional Land
Surveyor that all survey monuments shown on the
recorded plan and as-built plans exist and have been
physically located by the surveyor within 30 days prior to
submittal of the road acceptance request.
6. A report by a Maine-licensed Professional Engineer which
assesses the road and its compliance with the standards of
this Ordinance and its compliance with generally accepted
engineering practices.
C. The Superintendent may require data from cores (test borings) be
provided for any road proposed for public acceptance to ensure
adequacy of construction.
D. The Superintendent shall prepare a written report regarding
compliance of the road with the standards of this Ordinance. The
opinion shall explicitly address each standard in Section 2 of the
Ordinance. The Superintendent shall have the authority, but is not
required, to make a recommendation for road acceptance even if
the road does not comply with the standards of this Ordinance,
provided the road design meets sound engineering standards and
practices (for instance, where steeper side slopes may be
appropriate through an area of ledge). Any such substitution of
standards shall be specifically called out and explained in the
report. The report shall also include recommendations for any
conditions associated with road acceptance pursuant to this
Ordinance, including but not limited to inclusion of easements,
responsibility for utility bills, and posting a financial security to
guarantee repair of minor defects. This report shall be prepared for
and delivered to the Town Manager and Board of Selectmen.
E. Upon receiving the Superintendent’s report, the Board of
Selectmen shall schedule a public hearing within 30 days to obtain
input on the request.
F. Following the public hearing, the Board of Selectmen shall make a
decision whether to present the request to the voters. If the Board
of Selectmen receives a recommendation for public acceptance
from the Superintendent of Public Works, it shall bring the matter to
the voters at the next scheduled General or Special General
Referendum. The Board of Selectmen may include reasonable
conditions relating to road acceptance as part of the ballot question.
Town of York, Maine
Public Road Acceptance Ordinance – Revised November 7, 2017
Page 7 of 7
G. The ballot question presented to the voters shall include a
recommendation for or against passage from both the
Superintendent of Public Works and the Board of Selectmen.
H. When a road is accepted by the voters, the effective date of road
acceptance shall be the next business day following the vote.
4. Saving Clause. In the event any provision of this Ordinance is found by a
court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, this finding shall not affect the
remainder of this Ordinance.
5. Effective Date. This Ordinance, and amendments thereto, shall take effect
upon passage by the voters of the Town of York.
Amended: November 7, 2017
May 19, 2012
November 6, 2007
November 2, 1993
Originally adopted: July 24, 1985


SHELLFISH CONSERVATION ORDINANCE
ADOPTED FEBRUARY 10, 1998
AND AS AMENDED
1. AUTHORITY: This ordinance is enacted in accordance with 12 M.R.S.A.
§6671.
2. PURPOSE: To establish a shellfish conservation program for the Town of
York which will insure the protection and optimum utilization of shellfish
resources within its limits. These goals will be achieved by means which may
include:
A. Licensing;
B. Limiting the number of shellfish harvesters;
C. Restricting the time and area where digging is permitted;
D. Limiting the minimum size of clams taken; and
E. Limiting the amount of clams taken daily by a harvester.
3. SHELLFISH CONSERVATION COMMITTEE: The Shellfish Conservation
Program for the Town of York will be administered by the Shellfish
Conservation Committee consisting of five (5) members to be appointed by
the Selectmen for terms of three (3) years. The Committee's responsibilities
include:
A. Establishing annually in conjunction with the Department of Marine
Resources the number of shellfish digging licenses to be issued;
B. Submitting to the Board of Selectmen proposals for the expenditures of
funds for the purpose of shellfish conservation;
C. Keeping this ordinance under review and making recommendations for
its amendments;
D. Securing and maintaining records of shellfish harvest from the town's
managed shellfish areas and closed areas that are conditionally opened by
the Department of Marine Resources;
E. Recommending conservation closures and openings to the Board of
Selectmen in conjunction with the Area Biologists of the Department of
Marine Resources;
F. Submitting an annual report to the Municipality and the Department of
Marine Resources covering the above topics and all other committee
activities.
2
Adopted February 10, 1998
.
4. DEFINITIONS
A. RESIDENT: The term "resident" refers to a person who has been
domiciled in the Municipality for at least three months next prior to the
time his claim of such residence is made.
EXCEPTION: Any person who is a real estate taxpayer of the Town of
York shall be considered a /1resident" for the purpose of licensing, digging,
and taking of shellfish.
B. NONRESIDENT: The word "nonresident" means anyone not qualified as
a resident under this ordinance.
C. SHELLFISH, CLAMS AND INTERTIDAL SHELLFISH RESOURCES:
When used in the context of this ordinance, the words "shellfish",
11clams", and /1intertidal shellfish resources" means soft-shell clams, Mya
arenaria, quahog (cherry stones), and Mercenaria mercenaria.
D. MUNICIPALITY: Refers to the Town of York, Maine.
E. JUNIOR LICENSEE: This term refers to any person 14 years old and
younger.
5. LICENSING: Municipal ShellfishDiggingLicense is required. Itisunlawful
for any person to dig or take shellfish from the shores and flats of this
Municipality without having a current license issued by the Municipality as
provided by this ordinance.
A. DESIGNATION, SCOPEANDQUALIFICATIONS:
1. Resident Recreat ional Shel l f i sh License: The license is available
to residents and real estate taxpayers of this municipality and entitles
the holder to dig and take no more than one peck of shellfish in any
oneday
for the use of the licensee and their family.
3
Adopted February 10, 1998
2. Nonresident Recreational Shellfish Licensee: The license is available to
any person not a resident of this municipality and entitles the holder to
dig and take not more than one peck of shellfish in any one-day for the
use of the licensee and their family.
3. License must be signed: The licensee must sign the license to make
it valid.
4. Junior Resident Shellfish License: The license is available to junior
residents of this municipality and entitles the holder to dig and take no
more than one peck of shellfish in any one-day for the use of the
licensee and their family.
5. Nonresident Junior Shellfish License: The license is available to junior
nonresidents of this municipality and entitles the holder to dig and
take no more than one peck of shellfish in any one-day for the use of
the licensee and their family.
B. APPLICATION PROCEDURE: Any person may apply to the Town Clerk
for the licenses required by this ordinance on forms provided by the
Municipality.
1. Contents of the Application: The application must be in the form of an
affidavit and must contain the applicant's name, current address, birth
date, height, weight and signature.
2. Misrepresentation: Any person who gives false information on a
license will cause said license to become invalid and void.
C. FEES: The fees for the license are as stated below and must accompany in
full the application for the respective license. The Town Clerk shall pay
all fees received to the Town Treasurer. Fees received for shellfish
licensing shall be used by the Town for shellfish management,
conservation and enforcement.
Resident Recreational:
Nonresident Recreational:
Junior Resident
Junior Non-resident
$15.00
$30.00
No Charge
No Charge
D. LIMITATION OF DIGGERS: Because the shellfish resources are limited
and because a commercial or recreational digger can be expected to
4
Adopted February 10, 1998
harvest a certain volume of clams per year, the number of diggers must be
controlled. This number will vary from year to year depending upon
estimates of the resource capabilities and management requirements
consistent with good resource utilization. The following procedures will
be followed to exercise the control:
1. Annually, the Town Shellfish Conservation Committee with the approval
of the Commissioner of Marine Resources will establish the number of
noncommercial licenses to be permitted following the requirements of 12
M.R.S.A. § 6671 (3).
2. The Shellfish Conservation Committee will notif y the Town Clerk in
writing prior to July 1st of the number of licenses to be issued.
3. Notices of the number of licenses to be issued and the procedure for
application shall be published in a trade or industry publication, or in
a newspaper or combination of newspapers with general circulation,
which the municipal officers consider effective in reaching persons
affected, not less than ten (10) days prior to the period of issuance and
shall be posted in the municipal offices until the period concludes.
4. The Town Clerk shall issue licenses to residents and nonresidents on a
first-come first-served basis.
5. Shellfish may be taken only between the first day of October and the
thirtieth day of April. During this period, digging will be allowed on
Sunday only from Sunrise to Sunset.
E. License Expiration Date: Each license issued under authority of this
ordinance expires at midnight on the 30th day of April next following
date of issue unless extended by the Shellfish Conservation Commission
and Commissioner of Marine Resources.
F. Reciprocal Harvesting Privileges: Licenses from any other municipality
cooperating with this Municipality on a joint shellfish management
program may harvest shellfish according to the terms of their licenses.
6. OPENING AND CLOSING OF FLATS: The municipal Officers, upon the
approval of the Commissioner of Marine Resources, may open and close
areas for shellfish harvest. Upon recommendation of the Shellfish
Conservation Committee and concurrence of the Department of Marine
Resources area biologist that the status of shellfish resource and other factors
bearing sound management indicate that an area should be opened or closed,
5
Adopted February 10, 1998
theMunicipal Off icers may call a public hearing on ten-days' notice published
in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town, stating the time, place
and subject matter of the hearing, and shall send a copy of the notice to the
Department of Marine Resources. The decision of the Municipal Officers made
after the hearing shall be based on findings of fact.
It shall be unlawful for any person to harvest, take or possess shellfish from any areas
closed by the Town of York in accordance with DMR Regulation, Chapter 7.
Harvesting shellfish in a closed area is a violation of the Town of York Shellfish
Conservation Ordinance and is punishable under MRSA Title 12 section 6671.
Boundaries of conservation closures are explicitly defined in the conservation closure
application submitted by the Town of York to DMR and are part of the resulting
permit issued by DMR. These permits are posted at the town office and online:
http://www.maine.gov/dmr/shellfish-sanitationmanagement/
programs/municipal/ordinances/towninfo.html .
7. MINIMUM LEGAL SIZE OF SOFTSHELL CLAMS: It is unlawful for
any person to possess soft-shell clams within the Town of York, York County,
which are less than two (2) inches in the longest diameter except as provided
by subsection B of this section.
A. DEFINITIONS:
1. Lot: The word "lot" as used in this ordinance means the total number
of soft-shell clams in any bulk pile. Where soft-shell clams are in a box,
barrel, or other container, the contents of each box, barrel, or other
container constitutes a separate lot.
2. Possess: For the purposes of this section, "possess" means dig, take,
harvest, ship, transport, hold, buy, and sell retail and wholesale sof tshell
clam shell stock.
B. TOLERANCE: Any person may possess soft-shell clams that are less than
two inches if they comprise less than 10% of any lot. The tolerance shall
be determined by numerical count of not less than one peck, nor more than
four pecks taken at random from various parts of the lot or by a count of
the entire lot if it contains less than one peck.
8. PENALTY: Any person who violates this ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty
of $100.00 for the first offense per day per violation, $150.00 for the second offense
per day per violation, and $250.00 for the third and subsequent offenses per day per
violation, except that for taking shellfish from a closed area or digging for shellfish
6
Adopted February 10, 1998
without a license, the fine shall be $750.00 per day per violation.
9. WAIVER/PAYMENT OF FINES: Any person charged with a violation of this
section, shall be allowed to waive such violation and tender to the Town of York the
fine amount if paid within 20 days of issuance of the summons. If the waiver fine is
paid, no appearance before a District Court Judge or other judicial officer shall be
required. If the offender pays the waiver fine, the matter will be closed in the York
Police Records system and listed as a subsequent offense for future violations.
If the offender chooses not to pay the waiver fine, he/she shall appear in court on the
specified date to answer for the ordinance violation. If the offender is found to have
committed the offense in court, fines, applicable court fees, attorney’s fees, and
prosecution costs may apply.
10.EFFECTIVE DATE: This ordinance, which has been approved by the
Commissioner of Marine Resources, shall become effective af ter its adoption
by the municipality provided a certified copy of the ordinance is filed with
the Commissioner within twenty (20) days of its adoption.
11.SEPARABILITY: If any section, subsection, sentence or part of this ordinance
is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decisions shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance.
12.REPEAL: Any ordinance regulating the harvesting or conservation of shellfish
in the town and any provisions of any other town ordinance, which is
inconsistent with this ordinance, is hereby repealed.
Adopted at Special General Referendum February 10, 1998.





Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 2
ARTICLE 1 ... PURPOSES & CRITERIA OF APPROVAL
1.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of these Regulations is to assure the comfort, convenience, safety, health and welfare
of the people of the Town of York, to protect the environment, and to promote the development of
an economically sound and stable community. These Regulations shall be administered to ensure
orderly growth and development, and shall supplement and facilitate the provisions in the
Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning Ordinances, and the capital budget of the Town of York.
1.2 CRITERIA OF APPROVAL
Before granting approval to any application pursuant to this code, the Planning Board must find that
the proposal meets the following criteria (reference MRSA Title 30-A §4404) and shall make written
findings of fact to this effect.
1.2.1 Pollution. The development will not result in undue water or air pollution. In making this
determination, the Board shall at least consider the elevation of the land above sea level
and its relation to the floodplains, the nature of soils and subsoils and their ability to
adequately support waste disposal, the slope of the land and its effect on effluents, the
availability of streams for disposal of effluents, and applicable state and local health and
water resource rules and regulations;
1.2.2 Sufficient Water. The development has sufficient water available for the reasonably
foreseeable needs of the development;
1.2.3 Municipal Water Supply. The development will not cause an unreasonable burden of an
existing water supply, if one is to be utilized;
1.2.4 Erosion. The development will not cause unreasonable soil erosion or a reduction in the
capacity of the land to hold water so that a dangerous or unhealthy condition results;
1.2.5 Traffic. The development will not cause unreasonable highway or public road congestion
or unsafe conditions with respect to use of the highways or public roads existing or
proposed, and if the proposed development requires driveways or entrances onto a state
or state-aid highway located outside the urban compact area of an urban compact
municipality as defined by Title 23 §754, the Maine Department of Transportation has
provided documentation indicating that the driveways or entrances conform to Title 23
§704 and any rules adopted under that section;
1.2.6 Sewage Disposal. The development will provide for adequate sewage waste disposal and
will not cause an unreasonable burden on municipal services if they are utilized;
1.2.7 Municipal Solid Waste Disposal. The development will not cause an unreasonable burden
on the Town’s ability to dispose of solid waste if municipal services are to be utilized;
1.2.8 Aesthetic, Cultural and Natural Values. The development will not have an undue adverse
effect on the scenic or natural beauty of the area, aesthetics, historic sites, significant
wildlife habitat identified by the Department of Inland Fishers and Wildlife or the
municipality, or rare and irreplaceable natural areas or any public rights for physical or
visual access to the shoreline;
1.2.9 Conformity with Local Ordinances and Plans. The development is in conformance with
these Regulations, Zoning and other Town land use codes, and the Comprehensive Plan.
In making this determination, the Planning Board is authorized to interpret these
Ordinances and Plans.
1.2.10 Technical and Financial Capacity. The developer has adequate financial and technical
capacity to meet the required standards;
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 3
1.2.11 Surface Waters. Whenever situated entirely or partially within the watershed of any pond
or lake or within 250 feet of wetland, great pond or river as defined in Title 38, Chapter 3,
Subchapter 1, Article 2-B, the proposed development will not adversely affect the quality
of that body of water or unreasonably affect the shoreline of that body of water.
1.2.12 Ground Water. The development will not, alone or in conjunction with existing activities,
adversely affect the quality or quantity of groundwater.
1.2.13 Flood Areas. Based on the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s Flood Boundary
and Floodway Maps and Flood Insurance Rate Maps, and information presented by the
applicant, the Planning Board will determine whether the development is in a flood-prone
area. If the development, or any part of it, is in such an area, the developer shall
determine the 100-year flood elevation and flood hazard boundaries within the
development. The proposed plan must include a condition of approval requiring that
principal structures in the development will be constructed with their lowest floor, including
the basement, at least two feet above the 100-year flood elevation.
1.2.14 Freshwater Wetlands. All freshwater wetlands within the proposed development have
been identified on any maps submitted as part of the application, regardless of the size of
these wetlands.
1.2.15 River, Stream or Brook. Any river, stream or brook within or abutting the proposed
development has been identified on any maps submitted as part of the application. For
purposes of this section, “river, stream or brook” has the same meaning as in Title 38
§480-B.9.
1.2.16 Stormwater. The proposed development will provide for adequate stormwater
management.
1.2.17 Spaghetti Lots Prohibited. If any lots in a proposed subdivision have shore frontage on a
river, stream, brook, great pond or coastal wetland as these features are defined in Title
38 §480-B, none of the lots created within the subdivision have a lot-depth-to-shorefrontage
ratio greater than 5 to 1.
1.2.18 Lake Phosphorous Concentration. The long-term cumulative effects of the propose
development will not unreasonably increase a great pond’s phosphorous concentration
during the construction phase and life of the proposed development.
1.2.19 Impact on Adjoining Municipality. For any proposed development that crosses municipal
boundaries, the proposed development will not cause unreasonable traffic congestion or
unsafe conditions with respect to the use of existing public ways in an adjoining
municipality in which part of the development is located.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 4
ARTICLE 2 ... AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATION
2.1 AUTHORITY
2.1.1 These Regulations have been adopted in accordance with the provisions of Title 30-A
M.R.S.A., Sections 4401 through 4407.
2.1.2 These Regulations shall be known and may be cited as the “Subdivision and Site Plan
Regulations of the Planning Board of the Town of York”, and are hereinafter referred to as
“the Regulations”.
2.2 ADMINISTRATION
2.2.1 The Planning Board of the Town of York, hereinafter called “the Board”, and the Code
Enforcement Officer of the Town of York shall administer these standards.
2.2.2 The provisions in these Regulations shall pertain to all land within the boundaries of the
Town of York proposed for subdivision as defined in these Regulations, Title 30-A
M.R.S.A., Section 4401 and in the Town of York’s Functional Subdivision Site Plan
Review Ordinance.
2.2.3 These Regulations shall become effective on the date of adoption by the Planning Board.
2.2.4 This Ordinance may be amended by a majority vote of the Planning Board after holding 2
public hearings. Prior notice of the hearings shall be provided to the public at least 7 days
prior to the hearing. At a minimum, notice shall be posted in Town Hall and published in a
newspaper that has general circulation in the community.
2.3 FEES
2.3.1 The fees for Planning Board review of projects under these Regulations shall be as
follows:
A. Fees shall be paid prior to an application being reviewed by staff. The amounts
are as follows:
1. Sketch Plan: $350.00 per meeting
2. Subdivision: $500.00 plus $200.00 per additional lot and/or unit.
3. Site Plan: $500.00 plus:
a. $200.00 per additional dwelling unit; and
b. $0.10 per square foot of additional gross floor area for nonresidential
uses.
4. Revisions to Approved Plans: $200.00
These application fees collected shall be utilized by the Planning Department to
cover any expense associated with the review of the project, including but not
limited to the costs of in-house staff review, recording secretary, printing,
postage, archival of records, scanning of records, posting of notices, and legal
advertising.
B. Duplicate Fees. In the event an application requires both Subdivision and Site
Plan review (ie: a new multi-family building), the applicant shall pay the higher of
the subdivision or Site Plan fees, but not both.
C. Each application shall include a $500 engineering review deposit. The Board
may waive this requirement for simple applications that involve minimal physical
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 5
construction or site alteration. The engineering review deposit shall be placed in
a separate account. The Town does not have a staff engineer, so all engineering
work, including review of applications, is contracted out. The money in this fund
will be utilized to pay for such engineering review. In the event the review costs
more than $500, additional funds must be paid by the applicant. In the event the
funds are not spent, any remaining balance shall be returned to the applicant at
the conclusion of the process.
D. Reimbursement for Outsourced Technical Assistance. In the event the Planning
Board requires technical assistance other than engineering review, the applicant
shall be responsible for reimbursing the Town for the cost of such assistance.
The contractor shall work for and report to the Town. Reimbursement of such
costs shall be made a condition of approval as required.
2.3.2 Fees for Inspection - Before final approval, the applicant must deposit with the Planning
Board an amount equal to 2% of the estimated cost of the required improvements (per
Sections 6.4.18 and 6.4.19) to pay for the costs of Town inspection of the public
improvements in the project. Whenever the balance in this account shall be drawn down
by 75% of the initial balance, the Town shall notify the applicant, and require that an
additional 1% be deposited by the applicant. All further inspections by the Town Engineer
and any public improvement construction except such as shall be determined by the Town
Engineer or Code Enforcement Officer as being necessary to provide for public health,
safety and welfare shall cease until the additional deposit is made. Any balance in the
account remaining after any Performance Guarantee has been released shall be returned
to the applicant. Any interest accrued shall remain with the Town.
2.4 INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT AND SEVERABILITY
2.4.1 The provisions of these regulations shall be construed as minimum requirements. More
stringent provisions may be required if it is demonstrated that such are necessary to
promote the public health, safety and welfare.
2.4.2 Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of these Regulations are either more
restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions
of these Regulations or any other applicable law, ordinance, or regulation of any kind, the
regulations which are more restrictive and impose higher standards or requirements shall
govern.
2.4.3 The provisions of these Regulations are separable. If any portion of these Regulations is
declared by the courts to be invalid, the decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of these Regulations.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 6
ARTICLE 3 ... DEFINITIONS
3.1 Certain words and terms used herein are defined as follows. Any word not specifically defined here
shall take on the customary dictionary definition.
3.1.1 COMPLETE APPLICATION - An application which has been reviewed by the Planning
Board and found by the Planning Board to contain all the submissions required by these
Regulations including the applicable fees. The Planning Board may waive the submission
of required information in response to a written request submitted with the application.
The Board, or other authorized agent shall issue a receipt to the applicant upon the
determination by the Planning Board that an application is complete.
3.1.2 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN OR POLICY STATEMENT - Any part or element of the overall
plan or policy for development of the Town as defined in Title 30-A M.R.S.A., Sections
4301-4344, and as amended.
3.1.3 CONSTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION DEBRIS - Materials and spoil resulting from
construction, remodeling, repair or demolition of structures including building materials,
wall board, pipes, metal conduits, and other mixed materials, used in the construction of a
building, but excluding special wastes as defined by the Department of Environmental
Protection’s Solid Waste Rules.
3.1.4 DEVELOPED AREA - Any area on which a site improvement or change is made, including
but not limited to, buildings, landscaping, lawns and parking areas.
3.1.5 DWELLING UNIT - One or more rooms used for or arranged for the use of one or more
individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, with cooking, living, sanitary and
sleeping facilities.
3.1.6 FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAN - The final drawings on which the developer’s plan or
subdivision is presented to the Board for approval and which if approved will be recorded
at the Registry of Deeds.
3.1.7 FLOOD (100 YEAR) - The highest level of flood that, on the average, is likely to occur
once every 100 years (i.e. that has a one percent change of occurring in any year).
3.1.8 HIGH INTENSITY SOIL SURVEY - A drawing prepared by a Certified Soil Scientist,
licensed in the State of Maine, identifying the soil types on 1/8 acre or less at a scale
consistent with the plan submitted. The soils shall be identified in accordance with the
National Cooperative Soil Survey. The map shall show the location of all test pits used to
identify the soils, and shall be accompanied by a log of each sample point identifying the
textural classification and depth to seasonal high water table or bedrock at that point. Soil
test pits and their evaluation for suitability for subsurface wastewater disposal systems
shall not be considered to constitute high intensity soil surveys.
3.1.9 INDUSTRIAL PARK OR DEVELOPMENT - An area zoned and planned for varied
industrial uses and which may be developed and managed as a unit, usually with
provision for common services for the users.
3.1.10 NET DEVELOPABLE ACREAGE - The total acreage available for the Site Plan or
subdivision as shown on the proposed Subdivision Plan minus: 1) the area for rights-ofway
for streets, 2) other areas of rights-of-way and access, and 3) areas which are
unsuitable for development as outlined in Section 7.4.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 7
3.1.11 NORMAL HIGH WATER MARK OF COASTAL WATERS - Along the shore of all tidal
waters, the Normal High Water Mark shall be determined as follows:
a. The Normal High Water Mark of Coastal or Tidal Waters shall be determined as
that elevation at which vegetation changes from predominately tolerant of
saltwater inundation to predominately intolerant of salt water inundation. Where
vegetation is not present, the elevation shall be used from the nearest area
where it can be determined by the above method.
b. Where rivers, streams or other waterbodies are still tidal but support primarily
fresh water vegetation, the Normal High Water Mark of Inland Waters shall be
used.
c. In the event that it is not possible to determine the Normal High Water Mark in
the above manner, the elevation of the average of the highest predicted tidal
levels each year for York for the most recent 19 year tidal epoch shall be used.
For the 1960-1978 tidal epoch the elevation used shall be 10.8 feet above Mean
Low Water (MLW) which is equivalent to 6.9 feet above National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD), based on current tidal benchmark sheets available from
the National Ocean Service.
This elevation may be measured relative to the N.O.S. benchmark 8419518 York, Maine,
or relative to NGVD. Since data indicates that tidal elevations are rising in this area, the
tidal datum are updated based on 19 year tidal epochs, the elevation used shall reflect the
most recent tidal epoch, and current Tidal Benchmarks and tidal datum information should
be obtained from the National Ocean Service (U.S. Department of Commerce/NOAA).
All measurements from the Normal High Water Mark shall be made horizontally and all
setbacks shall be laid out parallel to the High Water Mark.
3.1.12 NORMAL HIGH WATER MARK OF INLAND WATERS - That elevation on the shores and
banks of ponds, great ponds, rivers, streams and inland or freshwater wetlands, which is
apparent because of the prolonged action or presence of the water. Relative to
vegetation, it is that elevation where the vegetation changes from predominately aquatic
or wetland species to predominately upland or non-wetland species. In places where the
shore or bank is of such character that the high water mark cannot be easily determined
(rock slides, ledges, rapidly eroding or slumping banks) the normal high water mark
elevation shall be measured from the nearest area where it can be determined by the
above method.
3.1.13 PERSON - Includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or
corporation, as well as an individual.
3.1.14 PLANNING BOARD - The Planning Board of the Town of York.
3.1.15 PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAN - The preliminary drawings indicating the proposed
layout of the subdivision and other supporting documentation as required by Section 6.3 to
be submitted to the Planning Board for its consideration.
3.1.16 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS - Any aspect of the Final Plan that is imposed by the Planning
Board for the public good, including but not limited to roads, sidewalks, curbs, drainage,
detention ponds, erosion and sedimentation control, water lines, sewer lines or any other
means of sewage disposal, hydrants, fire ponds, dry hydrants, required landscaping,
parks and recreation areas, electrical and telephone service, and street lighting.
3.1.17 REVISION TO AN APPROVED PLAN - The division of any lot in an existing subdivision,
or any change of an approved plan which affects any lot line, lot size, the location of any
street, or any revision to any aspect of the plan that is under the jurisdiction of the
Planning Board.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 8
3.1.18 SITE PLAN (MAJOR) - Any non-residential development in which 10,000 square feet or
more of floor space is developed or constructed within a five year period.
3.1.19 SITE PLAN (MINOR) - Any non-residential development in which less than 10,000 square
feet of floor space is constructed within a five-year period.
3.1.20 STREET - Public and private ways designed for the passage of motor vehicles such as
avenues, boulevards, highways, and roads, and their associated rights-of-way. Due to the
similarity of the two terms, the terms “road” and “street” are used interchangeably in these
Regulations and are intended to have the same meaning.
STREET CLASSIFICATION
Streets serve two primary functions: to provide access from adjacent properties onto the
transportation system, and to facilitate the movement of vehicles from one place to
another. Streets are classified based on their balance between these two functions, as
follows:
Arterial Street. A major thoroughfare which serves as a major traffic way for travel
between and through towns. The primary function of the arterial street is traffic
movement. Access to adjacent properties is limited, or in some cases prohibited.
Collector Street. A large street that collects traffic from minor streets and forms an integral
part of the overall street network. The primary function of the collector street is a
balance between traffic movement and property access. Access to adjacent
properties is allowed.
Minor Street. Also referred to as Local Street. A street designed to provide access to
adjacent properties and to discourage through traffic. The primary function of the
minor street is property access.
3.1.21 SUBDIVISION - The definition of Subdivision in these Regulations shall be that in place in
State law, specifically Title 30-A §4401.4.
NOTE: The terms “Site Plan”, “subdivision”, and “development” may be used
interchangeably throughout these Regulations.
3.1.22 SUBDIVISION (MAJOR) - Any subdivision in which more than four (4) lots are created or
more than 4 dwelling units are created within a five-year period.
3.1.23 SUBDIVISION (MINOR) - Any subdivision in which not more than four (4) lots are created
or in which not more than 4 dwelling units are created within a five year period.
3.1.24 TOWN - The town of York, Maine.
3.1.25 TOWN ENGINEER - Any engineer or engineering firm with which the Town has
contracted to provide engineering services for assistance with the review of applications
and construction inspections.
3.1.26 TRACT OR PARCEL OF LAND - All contiguous land in the same ownership, whether or
not the tract is separated at any point by: 1) an intermittent or non-navigable stream, or 2)
tidal waters where there is no flow at low tide.
3.1.27 WOODWASTES - Uncontaminated brush, stumps, lumber, bark, wood chips, shavings,
slabs, edgings, slash and sawdust.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 9
ARTICLE 4 ... STANDARDS FOR SUBMITTALS, PLAN SHEETS AND REPORTS
4.1 SIZE
Based on size limits of the Town’s flat files and document scanners, sheet size shall not exceed 24”
by 36.”
4.2 MATERIAL
All plans provided to the Board shall be printed on paper, except as required for approval sheets
(see §4.8).
4.3 BASIC INFORMATION
All plans shall include the following information.
A. Title Block. The title block shall indicate:
1. Title of the sheet.
2. Project name, if applicable.
3. Name of the property owner.
4. Name of the developer, if other than the owner.
5. Property address, including Town and State.
6. Name and address of the person or company that prepared the sheet.
B. Scale. The scale of the plan shall be indicated in text and graphic form.
C. North Arrow.
D. Dates. On each sheet, the original date of preparation shall be indicated, along with the
date and nature of subsequent revisions.
4.4 MULTIPLE SHEETS
Where the size of the property and scale of the plan require multiple sheets, match lines shall be
provided.
4.5 SCALE
The scale of plans shall be suitable for the type of application and the size of the property. The
plans must strike a balance between detail and overview. In general, Site Plans should be at a
scale of 1” = 40’ and Subdivision Plans should be at a scale of 1” = 100’. The plan of a building
facade shall be scaled to fit on a single sheet. The Board may require plans drawn to specific
scales if it experiences difficulty reading or interpreting scales other than those listed in this section.
4.6 AREA OF COVERAGE
Plans submitted pursuant to these Regulations shall depict the entire area and boundary of the
property. However, the Board may allow a plan that depicts only a portion of the property if the
Board finds the area of plan coverage is adequate for the development or change proposed.
4.7 PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATION
Submittals, plan sheets and reports shall be prepared by Maine-licensed professionals where
required by State or Town law, and shall be certified by stamp and signature of the license-holder
prior to submittal to the Town. At a minimum, the following shall apply:
A. Professional Land Surveyors. A Maine-licensed Professional Land Surveyor (PLS) shall
prepare all boundary surveys and existing conditions plans.
B. Professional Engineers. A Maine-licensed Professional Engineer (PE), with appropriate
expertise and/or specialization, shall prepare all plans dealing with the design of physical
alteration of and/or improvements to the site. The PE may also prepare building plans in
lieu of having such plans prepared by an Architect where this practice is permitted by
State law.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 10
C. Architects. A Maine-licensed Architect shall prepare all plans representing the physical as
required by State law showing alteration of existing buildings or construction of new
buildings, except where such plans may be prepared by a PE as permitted by State law.
Note that this includes all technical drawings including building façade plans.
D. Landscape Architects. Unless noted elsewhere in these Regulations, a Maine-licensed
Landscape Architect is not required to prepare landscape plans. However, any plan
prepared by a Maine-licensed Landscape Architect must be properly certified.
E. Soils Scientists. All soils maps and reports shall be prepared by a Maine-certified Soil
Scientist. This shall not apply to plans which depict soils data derived solely from the York
County Soils Survey.
4.8 APPROVAL SHEETS
In addition to other standards, the sheets which the Planning Board will sign to indicate its approval
of an application shall also meet the following requirements:
A. The complete set of plans to be signed shall be printed on mylar.
B. Each sheet in the plan set shall be signed in accordance with the following:
1. Full Board. There shall be an approval block on the plan sheet(s) that depicts
the proposed design and the Plan Notes, for the signature of Board members:
a. The title shall be, “Approval of the Planning Board of York, Maine.”
b. There shall be 5 signature and date lines. The first line shall be labeled
“Chair” under the line and is to be signed by the Chair only.
c. A note at the bottom of the block that states, “The signatures of 3 or
more Planning Board members indicate approval of this plan.”
2. Chair Only. There shall be a signature block on all sheets not signed by the
Board, and this shall be used for the Chair only to sign to indicate original sheets
in the approved plan set.
3. Town Departments. The following departments may be required to review the
application, offer comments to the Planning Board, and sign the plans to indicate
they have reviewed the plan. Their input does not constitute an approval or
denial. The sheet that depicts the proposed design and that is signed by the full
Board shall also include a sign-off block for the York Police Department, York
Village Fire Department or York Beach Fire Department, and York Public Works
Department. The following shall be required:
a. The title shall be, “Town Department Reviews”
b. There shall be a signature and date line for each Department required
to review the application.
c. A note at the bottom of the block that states, “This application has been
reviewed by these departments, which have offered comments to the
Planning Board.”
4. Water and Sewer Districts. For applications that will connect to municipal water
and/or sewer systems, approval of these independent quasi-municipal districts is
required. The sheet that depicts the proposed design and that is signed by the
full Board shall also include a sign-off block for the utility district(s) involved. The
following shall be required:
a. The title shall be, “Utility District Approvals.”
b. There shall be a signature and date line for each District to indicate its
approval of the application.
c. A note at the bottom of the block that states, “This application has been
reviewed and approved by the utility districts, as indicated by the
signature of their superintendents.”
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 11
C. Plan notes shall be provided to document the nature, terms and conditions of approval,
including at a minimum, the following:
1. A list indicating the title and most recent date of revision for all supplemental
sheets in the plan set.
2. Reference to all existing and proposed easements, covenants and deed
restrictions.
3. Indication of the base zoning district(s), any applicable overlay zoning districts,
and any other applicable regulatory designations.
4. List of all waivers granted by the Planning Board.
5. Other as required by the Board, including but not limited to notes that impose
restrictions, limitations or other requirements.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 12
ARTICLE 4-A ... SITE PLANNING FOR TEMPORARY EVENTS
4.1 APPLICABILITY
Temporary non-residential private activities which require 25 or more parking spaces
shall require Site Plan approval from the Planning Board as a Temporary Event.
Temporary events shall include one-time-only events, and regularly recurring events
which occur not more than annually. In either case, duration of a temporary event shall
not exceed 3 days. Temporary events shall be reviewed under the standards of this
Article, and shall not be subject to other provisions of these Regulations.
4.2 PROCEDURES
The application review process shall follow the procedures for a minor Site Plan review
with concurrent preliminary and final review, as described in Article 5.
4.3 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
An application shall provide 10 copies of an application packet. Each packet shall
include the following information:
A. Site Sketch. The applicant shall provide a sketch of the proposed site layout for
the temporary event. This sketch shall also show the relationship to neighboring
properties and roads.
B. Aerial Photograph. The applicant shall utilize the computer mapping available
on the Town’s web page (www.yorkmaine.org, and find links to “GIS Maps”) to
show an aerial photograph of the site. This may be a black & white photocopy of
such a photograph. The approximate location and orientation of the site sketch
shall be sketched onto this photo.
C. Project Narrative. The applicant shall prepare a written description of the
proposed temporary event, to include the following:
1. Describe the event, including anticipated attendance.
2. Date(s) of the event.
3. Proposed hours of operation.
4. Description of applicable Town ordinances and regulations (Zoning
Ordinance, Noise Ordinance, etc.) and how this event will comply with all
such codes.
5. Impact mitigation for:
a. parking for the anticipated number of vehicles;
b. pedestrian safety;
c. traffic control plan approved by the Chief of Police;
d. trash disposal and recycling;
e. toilet facilities, including potable water;
f. noise control;
g. site restoration; and
h. other as may be deemed applicable to the circumstances by the Board.
6. Document contact with the Police Department and Fire Department for their
review of public safety concerns.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 13
4.4 CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL
An application may be approved, approved with conditions, or denied. This decision
shall be based on compliance with the following criteria:
A. The Board finds the applicant’s submittals accurately represent the activity
proposed.
B. The Board finds the event is temporary only, as defined in Section 1.
C. The Board finds the proposed use(s) or activities will not violate any applicable
Town ordinance or regulations.
D. The Board receives written approval from the Chief of Police and the appropriate
Fire Chief.
E. The Board finds the applicant has proposed adequate mitigation of likely adverse
impacts.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 14
ARTICLE 5 ... APPLICATION PROCEDURE
5.1 GENERAL
5.1.1 If the tract of land containing a proposed development lies in more than one town, York
Planning Board approval of that project is required in addition to any review that is
required by the neighboring municipality. This provision shall not apply if there are to be
no improvements and no impacts on the portion of the property which lies within the Town
of York. Arrangements for the joint, or coordinated review of the project should be
established with the Planning Department at the start of the project.
5.1.2 Application to the Town. Each applicant shall complete a standard application form
provided by the Town prior to appearing before the Planning Board. For purposes of
administration and enforcement of this regulation, the owner of the property shall be
considered the applicant.
5.1.3 Number of Active Applications. There shall be no more than one active Planning Board
application on a property at any time. An application shall be considered active beginning
at the initial submittal of an application, and shall end when the Planning Board reaches its
final decision on the application and either: 1) if no appeal is filed per §13.1, when the
appeal deadline expires, or 2) if an appeal is filed per §13.1, when all activity relating to
the appeal is completed and the matter is resolved.
5.1.4 In order to avoid unnecessary delays in processing applications for review, the Planning
Board shall prepare an agenda for each regularly scheduled meeting. The agenda shall
be written and posted one week before the regularly scheduled meeting.
5.1.5 Approval Required Prior to Site Work. Prior to land clearing, site preparation, construction
or other such activity begins on a site, approval under these Regulations shall be required.
Subsequently, all such activity shall be in accordance with the approval.
5.2 PROCEDURE FOR SKETCH PLAN
5.2.1 Submission of sketch plan requirements (Section 6.1) to the Planning Department or
Planning Board. If an application is reviewed by the Board, 15 copies of all submittals are
required.
5.2.2 Review of submissions of Sketch Plan by Code and Planning Department within thirty (30)
days of submission date. The Code and Planning Department will advise the applicant as
to which Ordinances/Regulations apply to the project. The Department shall determine if
a Sketch Plan for a Subdivision or Site Plan shall be subject to review by the Planning
Board. The purpose of Board review of a Sketch Plan is to allow the Board to ask
questions and make suggestions to be incorporated by the applicant into the application.
5.2.3 The Code and Planning Department shall notify owners of abutting property, including
property located directly across a street, by first class mail of any Sketch Plan application
scheduled for review by the Planning Board. This notice shall be sent a minimum of
seven days prior to the Board meeting, and shall include the location and a general
description of the proposed project, and the date, time and place of the meeting. When
the development abuts another municipality, or involves land within another municipality,
the Department shall also notify both the Town Clerk and the Planning Board of that
municipality.
5.2.4 The Planning Board may choose to conduct a public hearing on the Sketch Plan
application. Notice of the hearing to abutters shall be provided as stipulated in Section
5.2.3. Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation at
least one time and at least seven days prior to the hearing and shall be posted in Town
Hall.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 15
5.2.5 The submission or review of the Sketch Plan by the Code and Planning Department or
Planning Board shall not be considered the initiation of substantive review for the
purposes of bringing the Plan under the protection of Title 1, M.R.S.A., Section 302. The
applicant shall obtain no vested rights by submittal or review of a Sketch Plan.
5.3 PROCEDURE FOR PRELIMINARY PLAN
5.3.1 A minor subdivision or Site Plan may opt to submit all the information required for a
Preliminary and Final Plan in one step. A major subdivision must follow the two-step
process, unless waived by the Board.
5.3.2 The applicant must submit 15 copies of requirements for the Preliminary Plan to the
Planning Department. The Planning Department will review the application to determine if
all necessary items were submitted. When the staff review documents that a submittal
was incomplete, subsequent reviews by staff may be postponed until all other pending
applications are reviewed. This review shall not constitute a substantive review of the
content of the submissions. When the Planning Department determines that all necessary
submissions have been made, a dated receipt shall be issued and the project shall be
placed on a Planning Board agenda within 30 days.
5.3.3 The Code and Planning Department shall notify owners of abutting property including
property located directly across a street by first class mail that the application has been
submitted. This notice shall be sent a minimum of 7 days prior to the Board meeting and
shall include the location and a general description of the project and date, time and
location of the Planning Board meeting. When the development abuts another
municipality, the Department shall also notify both the Town Clerk and the Planning Board
of that municipality.
5.3.4 Reserved
5.3.5 The applicant, or his duly authorized representative shall attend the meeting of the
Planning Board to discuss the Preliminary Plan.
5.3.6 The Board will review all submissions and make a written determination as to whether the
application is complete. If the Preliminary Plan application is found to be incomplete, the
Planning Board will notify the applicant in writing and specify the additional material
needed to complete the application. Substantive review shall not take place until the
Planning Board makes a formal vote to accept the Preliminary Plan application as
complete. When the Board determines the application is complete, it will take a formal
vote to “accept” the Preliminary Plan thus determining the application to be a complete
application (see Section 3.1.1). The board or other authorized agent will issue a receipt to
the applicant upon the determination that an application is complete. A formal vote by the
Planning Board to “accept” the complete application will bring the plan under the
protection of Title 1, M.R.S.A., Section 302.
5.3.7 The Planning Board will conduct a public hearing on a Preliminary Plan application. The
hearing shall be held within 30 days of the Board’s acceptance of a complete application,
unless an extension is agreed to by both the Planning Board and the applicant. The
Board shall publish notice of the date, time and place of the hearing in a newspaper of
general circulation in the municipality, at least two (2) times, the date of the first
publication to be at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing and post the notice in at least
three (3) prominent places at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. Notice of the
hearing to abutters shall be provided as stipulated in Section 5.3.3.
If any portion of a development is located within 500 feet of a municipal boundary, the
Planning Board will notify the Clerk and the Planning Board of the adjacent municipality
involved, at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. If the Site Plan or subdivision is
located in more than one municipality, the Board may have a joint meeting with the
Planning Board of the adjacent municipality to discuss the Plan. Comments and
recommendations made by the Planning Board of the adjacent municipality shall be given
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 16
due consideration in the deliberations and decision-making process of the York Planning
Board.
5.3.8 Within thirty days of a public hearing, or if no hearing is held, within sixty days of
determination by the Board that there is a complete application, or within another time limit
as may be otherwise mutually agreed to by the Board and the applicant, the Board shall
make Findings of Fact on the application, and approve, approve with conditions, or deny
the Preliminary Plan application. The Board shall specify, in writing, its Findings of Fact
and reasons for any conditions or denial.
5.3.9 When granting approval to a Preliminary Plan, the Planning Board shall state the
conditions of such approval, if any, with respect to: a) the specific changes which it will
require in the Final Plan; b) the character and extent of the required improvements for
which waivers may have been requested and which the Board finds may be waived
without jeopardy to the public health, safety, and general welfare and, c) the construction
items for which cost estimates and performance guarantees will be required as a
prerequisite to approval of the Final Plan.
5.3.10 Approval of the Preliminary Plan does not constitute approval of the Final Plan, or intent to
approve the Final Plan, but rather, it shall be deemed an expression of approval of the
design of the Preliminary Plan to be used as a guide to preparation of the Final Plan.
Prior to the approval of the Final Plan, the Board may require additional information be
submitted and changes in the Plan be made as a result of further study of the proposed
development from new information received.
5.4 PROCEDURE FOR FINAL PLAN
5.4.1 The applicant shall, within six months after the approval of the Preliminary Plan, submit to
the Planning Department 15 copies of a complete application for approval of the Final
Plan.
5.4.2 The Final Plan shall approximate the layout shown on the Preliminary Plan, including
changes required by the Board, and address all submission requirements for a Final Plan
stipulated in Regulation 6.4. The Code and Planning Department shall review the
application to determine if all required information has been submitted. When the staff
review documents that a submittal was incomplete, subsequent reviews by staff may be
postponed until all other pending applications are reviewed. If a Plan includes all
necessary submissions, the Department shall issue a dated receipt and schedule it for
review by the Planning Board within thirty (30) days. If a complete application for the Final
Plan is not submitted within six (6) months after Preliminary Plan approval, the Board shall
require submission of the Preliminary Plan, or may grant an extension to the submission
deadline. An extension must be requested in writing by the applicant prior to the
expiration of the filing period. In considering the request for an extension, the Board shall
make findings that the applicant has made due progress in preparing the Final Plan and in
pursuing approval of Plans before other agencies, and that municipal ordinances or
regulations which may impact the proposed development have not been amended.
5.4.3 The Code and Planning Department shall notify all parties who received notice of the
Preliminary Plan application by first class mail that a Final Plan application has been
submitted. This notice shall be sent a minimum of seven (7) days prior to the Board
meeting and shall include the location and a general description of the project and the
date, time, and location of the Planning Board meeting.
5.4.4 The Board will review the Final Plan submissions and make a written determination as to
whether the application is complete. Substantive review shall not take place until the
Planning Board makes a formal vote to accept the Final Plan application as complete. If
the Final Plan application is found to be incomplete, the Planning Board will notify the
applicant in writing and specify the additional material needed to complete the application.
When the Board determines that the application is complete, it will take a formal vote to
“accept” the Final Plan, thus determining the application to be a complete application (see
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 17
Section 3.1.1.). The Board, or other authorized agent will issue a receipt to the applicant
upon determination that an application is complete.
5.4.5 After the Planning Board has made a formal vote to accept the Final Plan application as
complete, the Plan will be forwarded to the Town Engineer for review. The Town
Engineer shall verify that all information has been correctly presented, and that the
technical aspects of the plans are in compliance with these Regulations.
5.4.6 The Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing on Final Plan application within thirty
(30) days after the Planning Board accepts the complete application for the Final Plan.
Notice of this hearing shall be advertised in a newspaper of local circulation at least two
(2) times, the date of the first publication to be at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing
and shall be posted in at least three (3) prominent places at least seven (7) days prior to
the hearing.
5.4.7 Before the Board grants approval of the Final Plan, the applicant shall meet the
performance guarantee requirements contained in Article 10, and shall pay the inspection
fee required in Section 2.3.2.
5.4.8 The applicant is responsible for obtaining all necessary approvals or permits required.
Final approval of the Final Plan shall be granted upon determination that all required
approvals and permits from agencies other than the Town of York have been obtained,
and advisory opinions have been received per §6.4.5.
5.4.9 The Board, 1) within thirty days from the public hearing, or 2) if no hearing is held, within
sixty days of receiving a complete final application, or 3) within another time limit as may
be otherwise mutually agreed to by the Board and applicant shall make Findings of Fact
and conclusions of law relative to the standards contained in Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section
4404 and in these Regulations. If the Board finds that all standards of the Statute and
these Regulations and the Zoning Ordinances have been met, it shall approve the Final
Plan. If the Board finds that any of the standards of the Statute, of these Regulations, or
of the Zoning Ordinance have not been met, the Board shall either deny the application or
approve the application with conditions to ensure all of the standards shall be met by the
development. Conditions precedent shall be met by the applicant within one year or the
approval shall lapse. The reasons for any conditions shall be stated in the record of the
Board. Failure of the Board to act upon the plan shall not constitute approval of the plan.
5.5 FINAL APPROVAL AND FILING
5.5.1 No Plan shall be approved by the Board as long as the applicant is in violation of the
provisions of a previously approved Plan within the Town or in violation of Town of York
Zoning Ordinances.
5.5.2 Upon voting to approve the application the Board shall sign the Final Plan mylar, and the
Chair shall sign all supplemental sheets. The Final Plan set shall be on mylar or other
reproducible original for the Board’s approval.
5.5.2.1 Subdivision Plan mylars shall be filed by the applicant in the York County
Registry of Deeds. Four paper prints of the signed plan, with the Registry of
Deeds official recording stamp shall be returned to the Community Development
Department; three copies for use in the Community Development Department
and one copy for the Town Tax Assessor. Any Subdivision not recorded in the
Registry of Deeds and returned to the Community Development
Department within ninety days of the date upon which the plan is approved and
signed by the Board shall become null and void.
5.5.2.2 Site Plan mylars shall be returned to the applicant. Four paper prints of the
signed plans shall be returned to the Community Development Department; 3
copies for use in the Community Development Department and one copy to the
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 18
Town Tax Assessor. Any Site Plan not returned to the Community Development
Department within ninety days of the date upon which the plan is approved and
signed by the Board shall become null and void. Site Plans filed with the York
Country Registry of Deeds shall follow the procedure outlined in §5.5.2.1.
5.5.3 At the time the Board grants Final Plan approval, the Board shall address phasing of the
subdivision as required in §7.30.
5.5.4 No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be made in any Final Plan after
approval has been given by the Board, unless the revised final Plan is first submitted and
the Board approves any modifications. The Board shall make findings that the revised
plan meets the standards of Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 4404, and these Regulations and
all applicable Town Ordinances. If a revised Plan is recorded without complying with this
requirement, it shall be considered null and void and the Board shall institute proceedings
to have the Plan stricken from the records of the Registry of Deeds.
5.5.5 Except in the case of a phased Subdivision Plan, failure to commence substantial
construction of a Site Plan or subdivision within three years of the date of approval and
signing of the Plan shall render the Plan null and void. Grading and earthmoving alone
shall not constitute substantial construction. Substantial construction shall not be deemed
to have taken place until the applicant has constructed improvements that use 25 percent
of the materials needed for required public improvements. Upon determining that a Site
Plan or subdivision’s approval has expired under this paragraph, the Planning Board shall
have a notice placed in the Registry of Deeds to that effect.
5.6 REVISIONS TO APPROVED PLANS
5.6.1 If the revision involves revisions to these items normally submitted under the Preliminary
Plan phase, the procedures for a Preliminary and Final Plan approval shall be followed. If
the revision involves revisions to items normally submitted under the Final Plan phase,
without the creation of additional lots or dwelling units, only the procedures for Final Plan
approval shall be followed.
5.6.2 The applicant shall submit a copy of the approved plan, as well as the ten copies of the
proposed revisions. The application shall also include supporting documentation for any
and all aspects of the revised plan that fall under the jurisdiction of these Regulations. All
submissions shall be in the format described in the Submissions sections of these
Regulations (Article 6.3 and 6.4).
5.6.3 The Board’s scope of review shall be limited to 1) those portions of the plan which are
proposed to be changed and 2) other areas affected directly or indirectly by the change.
The Board will review the application to make a determination as to if the proposed
revisions meet the standards of these Regulations and other applicable Codes and
Ordinances.
5.6.4 Any revisions to the original plan must be recorded in the Registry of Deeds, pursuant to
30-A M.R.S.A., Section 4407, after approval by the Board.
5.6.5 Field Changes. Minor changes made to previously approved Site Plans or Subdivisions
may be presented to the Planning Board for approval as Field Changes. Items that qualify
as Field Changes include:
• color/material change to a building if these aspects of the building were specified in
the original approval;
• minor grading changes that do not alter the drainage patterns or capacity of the
site;
• planting substitutions that are equivalent in number and buffer effectiveness;
• changes to approved outdoor lighting fixtures that have been reviewed and
approved by the Planning Board; and
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 19
• other similar minor changes that do not substantially alter a prior approval.
None of the following shall be considered as Field Changes:
• Changes that significantly reduce approved buffering or landscaping;
• any change that involves a condition that was part of a previous conditional
approval;
• any increase in the number of subdivision lots;
• any alignment or material change to a public or private road and their rights of way
previously reviewed as part of a Site Plan or Subdivision;
• any change to traffic circulation that effects safety;
• any change that negatively effects the approved stormwater management plan for
the property;
• any significant change to site layout such as building placement and building
footprint;
• and any increase in wetland impact.
During construction, the applicant may propose Field Changes necessary to correct minor
construction-related errors on the design plans or to account for unexpected site
conditions. Field changes shall be prepared in writing and certified by the applicant’s
professional engineer (or other design professional where appropriate). The Board shall
have the authority to approve or deny the Field Change, or determine it constitutes a
revision to an approved plan (see §5.6.1-3). Field Changes proposed after completion of
construction and granting of Final Occupancy shall be submitted prior to the change being
implemented. These changes shall also be accompanied by a statement from a design
professional where appropriate, as to the need for the change, and its impact to the site.
Any work completed prior to Planning Board approval is undertaken at the applicant’s own
risk; work based on a Field Change that is denied shall be removed. This policy shall be
reflected in the plan notes (see §4.8.C.5), and any approved field changes shall be
acknowledged in the professional certifications (see §11.1). All Field Changes shall be
reviewed at the next scheduled Planning Board meeting.
5.7 PUBLIC ACCEPTANCE OF STREETS, RECREATION AREAS
5.7.1 The approval by the Planning Board of a Site Plan or Subdivision Plan shall not be
deemed to constitute or be evidence of any acceptance by the Town of any street,
easement, or other open space shown on such plan.
5.7.2 When a park, playground, or other recreation area shall have been shown on the Plan,
approval of the Plan shall not constitute or be evidence of, an acceptance by the Town of
such areas. The Planning Board shall require the Plan to be endorsed with appropriate
notes to that effect. The Board may require the filing or a written agreement between the
applicant and the Board of Selectmen covering future deed and title, dedication, and
provision for the cost of grading, development, equipment and maintenance of any such
recreation area.
5.8 SITE VISITS
The Planning Board may conduct a site visit for any application made to the Board. The following
standards shall apply to all site visits.
A. The purpose of the site walk is solely to familiarize people with the physical conditions of
the site, and to understand the development concepts contained in the application.
B. A site visit is a public meeting. As such, the Board shall:
1. provide advance notice to the applicant, abutters and the public;
2. permit anyone interested to attend the site visit; and
3. shall reflect the following information about the site walk in the minutes of their
next regularly scheduled meeting: date, time, place, members in attendance.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 20
C. Because of the difficulty in keeping a large group together and focused on a single
conversation during a site walk, the Board shall not engage in substantive review or
discussions about the application during the site walk. The Board shall not make
decisions about the application during the site walk.
5.9 EX PARTE CONTACT
Members of the Planning Board shall not discuss applications with any involved party (applicant,
property owner, developer, neighbor, opponent, supporter, interested citizen, etc.) except at
Planning Board meetings. This is a legal requirement to ensure the Board members remain neutral
until all information is presented, to ensure that all Board members receive the same input from all
interested parties, and to ensure that all information presented to the Board is subject to cross
examination by people with different opinions.
5.10 SUBMITTAL OF SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
When submitting supplemental information in advance of a Board meeting, the applicant shall
submit complete materials a minimum of 17 days in advance of the meeting at which the
application will be heard. Information submitted after this deadline shall not be considered by the
Board at the meeting.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 21
ARTICLE 6 - SUBMISSIONS
6.1 SUBMISSIONS FOR SKETCH PLAN
6.1.1 The Sketch Plan shall show, in simple sketch form, the proposed layout of streets, lots,
buildings and other features in relation to existing conditions. The Sketch Plan, which may
be a free-hand penciled sketch, should be supplemented with general information to
describe or outline the existing conditions of the site and the proposed development. The
Sketch Plan shall be accompanied by a copy of a portion of the U.S.G.S. topographic map
of the area showing the outline of the proposed development, unless the proposed
development is less than ten acres in size.
6.1.2 Any information that will help describe or outline the existing conditions of the site and the
proposed development as necessary to supplement the drawing required above shall also
be submitted. This information shall include, but not be limited to, data on existing
covenants, medium intensity soil survey, available Town facilities and utilities, information
describing the development proposal such as number of lots, their principal lots, typical lot
width and depth, playgrounds, park areas and other public areas, proposed protective
covenants, a description of the proposed stormwater drainage plan, proposed utilities and
street improvements.
6.1.3 For any conceptual review requested by an applicant, the application shall include
payment of the application fee as specified in §2.3. Fees for conceptual reviews shall be
paid on a per meeting basis, and are separate from and in addition to fees paid for the
preliminary/final application.
6.2 GENERAL
6.2.1 The Planning Board may require, where it deems it necessary for the protection of public
health, safety, and welfare, that a Minor Site Plan or Minor Subdivision comply with all or
any of the requirements specified for Major Plans.
6.2.2 In Section 6.3 Submissions for Preliminary Plan and Section 6.4 Submissions for Final
Plan, those items marked MAJOR are only required for a Minor Plan upon request by the
Planning Board.
6.2.3 The developer of a Minor Site Plan or Minor Subdivision application may elect to submit
the Preliminary and Final Plans simultaneously. All major plans must go through the twostep
process.
6.3 SUBMISSIONS FOR PRELIMINARY PLAN
A complete Preliminary Plan shall include the following:
6.3.1 Reserved.
6.3.2 A boundary survey of the entire property. The boundary survey shall indicate the following
information:
A. distances, deflection angles, curve radii, arc lengths, control angles, monument
locations and other necessary survey data;
B. the names of all abutters, including map and lot numbers;
C. roads, rights-of-way, and intersections within 50’ of the lot;
D. location and nature of easements of record, deed restrictions, and covenants;
E. references to deeds, earlier surveys, prior approvals, and other pertinent
information as determined by the surveyor; and
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 22
F. locus map sufficient to orient the Board as to the location of the property within
the Town.
6.3.3 An existing conditions plan depicting conditions on the property in its pre-application
condition, and at a minimum shall include the following information in plan view:
A. Physical environment on the property, including:
1. size and road frontage of the property;
2. elevation contours at 2’ intervals referenced to NGVD of 1929;
3. surface waters and wetlands;
4. vegetation in general, specifically noting any trees larger than 24” in
diameter at breast height;
5. ledge outcroppings;
6. land deemed not suitable for development per §7.4.1; and
7. areas with a high water table or seasonal high water table as defined in
§7.4.2.
8. a description of stormwater effecting the property that originates from
abutting properties and by what means the stormwater is conveyed,
whether by streams, swales, culverts or other sources.
9. a description of existing drainage conditions on abutting downstream
lots.
B. Existing development and improvements on the property, including buildings,
wells, septic systems, water lines, sewer lines, drainage facilities, utilities,
driveways, parking lots, sidewalks, stone walls, fences, cemeteries, and other
such improvements, with description of uses and sizes as applicable.
C. The approximate location of property boundaries, buildings, wells, septic
systems, wetlands, surface waters, driveways, roads and intersections within
100’ of the property.
D. Regulatory constraints affecting the property, including:
1. Town boundaries;
2. base zoning districts, and boundaries if applicable;
3. overlay zoning districts and boundaries, as applicable;
4. regulatory boundaries from other Town, state or federal laws, including
but not limited to the Floodplain Management Ordinance, Well
Ordinance, and Wireless Communications Facilities Ordinance; and
5. setback requirements applicable to the property.
6.3.4 The location of all natural features or site elements to be preserved shall be depicted on
the plan.
6.3.5 Impact Statements - The developer shall submit an impact statement which describes the
impact of the proposed development on the community as a whole, and specifically on the
following areas:
a. water supply for domestic consumption;
b. water supply for fire protection;
c. wastewater treatment and disposal;
d. police, fire and ambulance services;
e. stormwater management, with particular attention to watersheds that experience
flooding at this time, with reference to culverts, streets, swales and retention
areas;
f. transportation systems, focusing especially on anticipated traffic impacts on the
street network near the project;
g. on-site parking, and potential for off-site parking impacts;
h. water quality;
i. environmental quality;
j. historic and archeological resources;
k. anticipated fiscal impacts on the Town and district capital and operating budgets;
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 23
l. scale of the project in terms of the expected number of residents, number of
employees, size of buildings, and amount of impervious surface;
m. for applications with residential uses, address impacts on public school
enrollment and bussing; and
n. for applications with residential uses, address impacts on public recreation
facilities and services.
The information provided shall be utilized by the Board to evaluate the need for off-site
improvements and impact mitigation by the applicant.
6.3.6 A plan showing the proposed development, showing the general arrangement of streets,
lots, parking lots, buildings, storm water drainage systems, utilities and similar features.
6.3.7 A grading and landscape design plan which meets the requirements of §7.3.
6.3.8 A copy of the Initial Assessment of traffic impacts, where required per Zoning Article 15-A,
and documentation this has been submitted to the Public Works Director for review.
6.3.9 A copy of the most recent deed for the property, and the source deed if the current deed
differs from the source deed.
6.3.10 Proof of ownership or if the developer is not the owner of the property, evidence of the
developer’s right, title or interest to the property shall be submitted.
6.3.11 A copy of all easements, rights-of-way, or other encumbrances currently affecting the
property shall be submitted.
6.3.12 Phosphorous Pollution. Where a proposed development is located within the watershed of
a great pond, the applicant shall provide information required to assess compliance with
§1.2.18 and §7.27.
6.3.13 Scenic Resources. Provide information to identify any scenic resources identified and
recommended for protection in the Comprehensive Plan, as addressed in §1.2.8 and
§7.28.
6.3.14 Regarding historic and archaeological resources, the following information shall be
provided:
A. The applicant shall identify any of the following on the property or within 500’ of
the property:
1. Local Historic Districts or Landmarks;
2. National Historic Districts;
3. Properties listed on the National Register of Historic Places; and
4. Cemeteries or family burial plots.
B. The application shall include written documentation from the York Historic District
Commission (HDC) regarding the presence of any known or suspected historic
resources on the property, and on the potential impact of this project on any
resources identified in §6.3.14.A (above). The application shall include written
documentation from the Maine Historic Preservation Commission (MHPC)
regarding the presence of any known or suspected archaeological resources on
the property, and on the potential impact of this project on any resources
identified in §6.3.14.A (above). In the event historic or archaeological resources
are or may be located on the property, the application shall be accompanied by
an analysis from a qualified expert that describes the resources, outlines the
significance of the resources, and provides options for the conservation of the
resources.
6.3.15 Provide a map of sufficient scale to identify the location of the applicant’s property with
respect to watersheds in the Town. A map of the 8 major watersheds is found in the
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 24
Natural Resources Chapter of the Inventory & Analysis Section of the Comprehensive
Plan, and this may be used as a base.
6.3.16 Identify the location of the applicant’s property with respect to Undeveloped Habitat
Blocks, High Value Plant and Animal Habitats, and Focus Areas of Ecological Significance
as mapped by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife’s Beginning With
Habitat program. Where the property is found to be located within an Undeveloped
Habitat Block of 500+ acres, coincides with any habitat identified on the High Value Plant
and Animal Habitats map, or falls within the Mount Agamenticus or Greater Brave Boat
Harbor/Gerrish Island focus areas, the application shall include an analysis of the property
and the proposed development. This shall be prepared by a wildlife biologist with work
experience in this region. The analysis shall be based on research of existing data and
site visits made during the appropriate season(s). The report shall include
recommendations with respect to the design of the development proposal in order to
maximize the habitat values following development. This may include alteration of the onsite
design to minimize off-site habitat impacts, such as but not limited to protecting a
corridor which allows wildlife passage between undeveloped habitat blocks.
6.3.17 The locations, widths and names of any existing, filed or proposed streets or rights-of-way
which are adjacent to the parcel or will be used as access to/from the development shall
appear on the plan. There should also be a notation on the plan as to the status (i.e.,
Town road, private road, paper road) of every street that will be a regular travel way for
traffic to/from the proposed development.
6.3.18 Reserved.
6.3.19 The proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions and approximate area of net
developable acreage shall appear on the plan.
6.3.20 All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use shall be depicted on the plan.
An outline of the conditions of such dedication and provisions for maintenance and/or
management must also be submitted.
6.3.21 Reserved.
6.3.22 If any portion of the Site Plan or Subdivision Plan is in a flood-prone area, the boundaries
of any flood hazard areas and the 100-year flood elevation shall be delineated on the plan
as determined through hydrological determinations. Determinations of flood-prone or
flood hazard areas shall be in accordance with information provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
6.3.23 Reserved
6.3.24 Indication of the type of sewage disposal to be used in the subdivision shall appear on the
plan.
6.3.24.1 Public Sewage Disposal - When sewage disposal is to be accomplished
by connection to the public sewer, a written statement from the Sewer
District stating that the District has the capability to collect and treat the
wastewater shall be submitted.
6.3.24.2 Private Sewage Disposal - When sewage disposal is to be
accomplished by subsurface wastewater disposal systems, test pit
analyses, prepared by a Licensed Site Evaluator shall be provided. The
location of all test pits dug on the site (whether passing or not) shall be
shown on the Site Plan or Subdivision Plan. The developer must submit
evidence that the Local Plumbing Inspector has reviewed and approved
the test pit log sheets (State of Maine form HHE-200) and septic system
design for compliance with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 25
Disposal Rules (Chapter 241) and any local plumbing or subsurface
wastewater disposal ordinance of the Town.
6.3.24.3 For subdivisions, a minimum of one acceptable test pit must be shown
on each proposed lot, and two may be required per Article 7.9.2.1.
6.3.25 Indication of the type of water supply system(s) to be used in the proposed development
shall appear on the plan.
6.3.25.1 Public Water - When water is to be supplied by public water supply, a
written statement from the servicing water district shall be submitted
indicating that there will be adequate supply and pressure for the
subdivision for domestic purposes.
6.3.25.2 Wells – The required protective radius shall be delineated around each
well.
6.3.26 A letter from the Fire Chief is required. This letter shall indicate the fire safety concerns
that the applicant must address prior to acceptance of the Final Plan. The Chief shall
have broad latitude to address issues, including but not limited to provision of
infrastructure (hydrants, fire ponds, etc.) design of the site (fire lanes, etc.), or sufficiency
of existing department equipment to protect public safety.
6.3.27 A sketch and narrative description prepared by a professional engineer, of the proposed
stormwater drainage plan shall be submitted. This discussion shall contain a description
of the measures to be taken to control stormwater leaving the property and a description
of the expected total run-off being detained and leaving the site. This submission shall
also indicate whether the drainage system will be underground or above ground, and shall
include an indication of any swales, underground piping, detention structures, etc.
proposed to be used to contain or direct stormwater. The capacity of abutting downstream
properties to manage a 100 year storm shall be addressed by the applicant.
6.3.28 The location and size of existing and proposed sewers and water mains, culverts, bridges
and drainage ways on or adjacent to the property to be developed shall appear on the
plan.
6.3.29 Temporary markers adequate to enable staff or the Board to locate readily and appraise
the basic layout in the field shall be placed on the site.
6.3.30 Sight distances for all new streets including driveways for commercial establishments shall
be depicted on the plan. Whenever there is potential for an insufficient sight distance for a
single-family residential driveway, the location of the driveway and the sight distance must
appear on the plan.
6.3.31 Reserved.
6.3.32 A high intensity soil survey signed and sealed by a Maine Certified Soil Scientist, indicting
the suitability of soil conditions for the uses proposed shall be submitted. This report must
meet the Maine Association of Professional Soil Scientists Standards for Soil Surveys for
a Class A Soil Survey (04/04/89 and as amended). The HISS plan shall indicate areas
subject to the requirements of Article 7.4.2.
6.3.33 For Site Plans or Subdivision Plans involving 40 or more parking spaces or projected to
generate more than 400 vehicle trips per day, a traffic impact analysis, prepared by a
Registered Professional Engineer with at least 3 years experience in traffic engineering,
shall be submitted. The analysis shall indicate the expected average daily vehicular trips,
peak hour volumes, access conditions at the site, distribution of traffic, types of vehicles
expected, effect upon the level of service of the street giving access to the site and
neighboring streets which may be affected, and recommended improvements to maintain
the required level of service on the affected streets. Trip generation rates used shall be
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 26
the mean value reported in Table 3 of Development and Application of Trip Generation
Rates, Kellerco, Inc. published by the Federal Highway Administration, January, 1985.
(MAJOR)
6.3.34 All requests for waivers from strict compliance with any of these regulations shall be
submitted in writing. All such waiver requests must refer to the section of these
regulations for which the waiver is being requested, and an explanation of the reasons
such waiver is considered necessary.
6.3.35 The Planning Board review fee, based on the fee schedule in Section 2.3.1 shall be
submitted.
6.4 SUBMISSIONS FOR FINAL PLAN
A complete Final Plan shall include the following:
6.4.1 All information presented on the Preliminary Plan and any amendments or conditions
requested or required by the Board must appear on the Final Plan.
6.4.2 An internal survey of the proposed development showing bearings and distances for all lot
lines, and the precise area of net developable acreage shall be submitted.
6.4.3 The water supply system design contained in the Site Plan or Subdivision Plan shall be
approved in writing by the appropriate agency or individual, and shall be submitted with
the Final Plan.
6.4.3.1 Public Water Supply - The servicing Water District must approve in writing all
specifications for water supply system that appear on the plan.
6.4.3.2 Private Wells – The required protective radius shall be delineated around each
well. Restrictions pertaining to the well protection area shall be indicated on the
plan.
6.4.3.3 Central Water Supply - The State of Maine Department of Human Services must
approve all proposals for a central water supply system, and the written approval
of that agency shall be submitted.
6.4.4 The sewage disposal system design contained in the Site Plan or Subdivision Plan shall
be properly endorsed and approved in writing by the appropriate agency, as listed below.
6.4.4.1 Public Sewage Disposal - The York Sewer District must approve all plans that
will connect to the public sewer line and all sewer line extensions. This approval
will cover issues of capacity as well as piping and pump station specifications.
6.4.4.2 Private Sewage Disposal – Areas designated for primary and back-up septic
system locations per Section 7.9.2.1 shall be precisely delineated, located, and
labeled on the plan. The restriction on uses in these areas shall be documented
in a note on the plan.
6.4.4.3 Engineered Septic Systems - For any system having a capacity of 2,000 gallons
per day or more, the system design must be submitted, and the Local Plumbing
Inspector (LPI) must verify in writing that the system is in compliance with all
local codes. Additionally, written approval of the Maine Department of Human
Services must be submitted.
6.4.5 The developer shall submit dated evidence that they have submitted copies of the
approved Preliminary Plan and any other relevant materials to the Superintendent of
Public Works, School Superintendent (residential development only), Police Chief and Fire
Chief (Beach or Village, as appropriate). This shall include information on the number of
dwelling units proposed, the length of roadways, the size and construction characteristics
of any multi-family, commercial or industrial buildings, and other relevant information. The
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 27
applicant shall request that these officials submit an advisory opinion within 30 days.
Such advisory opinions shall be based on the department’s ability to service the proposed
development.
6.4.6 A landscaping plan meeting the standards of Section 7.17 as well as all of the Ordinances
of the Town of York shall be submitted. This submission shall include identification of
species to be used, the size of the planting to be used, and the plan spacing being
proposed. On wooded sites, the Plan shall indicate the area where clearing for lawns and
structures shall be permitted.
6.4.7 A plan showing the location and dimensions of all proposed development improvements
and alterations.
6.4.8 Reserved.
6.4.9 The plan shall contain sufficient data to allow the location, bearing and length of every
street, lot line, and boundary line to be readily determined and be reproduced upon the
ground. These lines shall be tied to reference points previously established. The length
of all straight lines, the deflection angles radii, length of curves and central angles of
curves, tangent distances and tangent bearings for each street shall be included.
6.4.10 By proper designation, all public open space for which offers of cession are made by the
developer and those spaces to which title is reserved by the developer, or areas which are
to be commonly held by a condominium or owner’s association shall be noted on the plan.
6.4.11 Written offers of cession to the municipality of all public open space shown on the Plan,
and copies of agreements or other documents showing the manner in which those areas
to which title is reserved by the developer, or to which title is to be held commonly by an
owner’s association are to be maintained, shall be submitted.
6.4.12 Written evidence that the municipal officers are satisfied with the legal sufficiency of the
document referred to in Section 6.4.11 shall be submitted. Such written evidence shall not
constitute an acceptance by the Town of any public open space referred to in Section
6.4.11.
6.4.13 The locations permanent reference monuments shall appear on the Final Plan.
6.4.14 The Plan shall contain detailed drawings showing the specifications for the street and
storm drainage design. The information submitted shall include the following:
6.4.14.1 Plan view of all proposed roadways including all existing streets within
300 feet of any proposed intersections.
6.4.14.2 Cross sections of streets every 50 feet along the entire street proposed
in the development.
6.4.14.3 A longitudinal profile along the roadway center line.
6.4.14.4 Date, scale and magnetic or true north point on all plan pages.
6.4.14.5 Roadway and right-of-way limits including edge of pavement, edge of
shoulder, sidewalks and curbs.
6.4.14.6 Type, size, location, material, profile and cross-section of all existing and
proposed drainage structures and their location with respect to the
existing natural waterways and proposed drainage ways.
6.4.14.7 Complete curve data shall be indicated for all horizontal and vertical
curves.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 28
6.4.14.8 Turning radii at all intersections.
6.4.14.9 Centerline gradients.
6.4.14.10 Locations of all existing and proposed overhead and underground
utilities, including but not limited to water, sewer, fire hydrants or dry
hydrants, street lights, electricity, telephone, lighting, and cable
television.
6.4.14.11 The anticipated beginning and end dates of each major phase of street
construction.
6.4.14.12 The street numbers of the lots, laid out in accordance with the street
plan of the Town of York.
6.4.14.13 The location of all street name signs and traffic signs that will be
installed at the expense of the developer.
6.4.14.14 The location and design of all driveways (that portion within the right-ofway
only), and related plan notes, to reflect the requirements of §9.5.12.
6.4.15 Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan. A soil erosion and sedimentation control
plan meeting the standards in Section 9.10 and which is suitable and specific to the site
and the development proposed must be submitted, and must include the following items:
6.4.15.1 The Site Plan must show the areas which will be disturbed by
construction, buffer strips, grassed and riprapped ditches, existing or
proposed waterways.
6.4.15.2 The Site Plan must show the location of all temporary erosion controls
including but not limited to hay bale barriers, stone check dams, silt
fencing, and sedimentation basins.
6.4.15.3 The Site Plan must contain erosion control notes which specify
temporary and permanent stabilization measures for exposed soil,
including types and application rates for all seeding, lime, fertilizer and
mulch.
6.4.15.4 A schedule and procedure for installation, inspection, and maintenance
shall be submitted. This schedule will outline the erosion control and
construction sequence, final seeding dates, maximum time period after
completion of work that the site will remain unstabilized, and frequency
of erosion control and sedimentation control maintenance.
6.4.15.5 Details must be submitted for all permanent and temporary erosion
control measures, including but not limited to grassed and riprap ditches;
hay bale barriers, silt fences, and stone check dams; outlet protection
aprons; and sedimentation basins, or other similar features.
6.4.16 Stormwater Management Plan - The developer shall submit a plan and design for the
collection and disposal of surface drainage waters prepared by a Registered Engineer,
and which meets all the requirements of Sections 9.8 and 9.9.
6.4.16.1 The drainage plan shall include sufficient detail to insure that the
drainage system proposed by the engineer will be properly constructed
in the field and to allow technical evaluation of its adequacy. This shall
include drainage calculations, delineation of drainage area and sub-area
boundaries, all man-made and natural drainage ways, locations of all
existing and proposed culverts and/or underground piping, culvert and
piping sizes, cross sections of all existing and proposed drainage
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 29
structures, downgrade and slide slopes, lining material (i.e. vegetation,
fabric, riprap, etc.) and other dimensional characteristics necessary for
construction and evaluation.
6.4.16.2 The developer must submit a statement from a Professional Engineer
which describes the measures taken for control of erosion, drainage,
and sedimentation and which certifies that the proposed development
will not create erosion, ponding, or flooding, either within the
development or on other properties, as well as the calculations that
support this conclusion.
6.4.17 A hydrogeologic assessment must be submitted when the Site Plan or Subdivision Plan is
not served by public sewer and; a) any part of the site is located over a sand and gravel
aquifer, as shown on a map entitled “Hydrogeologic Data for Significant Sand and Gravel
Aquifers”, by the Maine Geological Survey, Map Numbers 1 and 2; or b) the site has an
average density of less than 100,000 square feet per dwelling unit, or c) when the
Planning Board, after consultation with the Town Engineer, determines such information is
necessary to adequately evaluate the impact on ground or surface waters. The
hydrogeologic assessment shall be prepared by a Maine Certified Geologist or Mainelicensed
Professional Engineer, provided that the professional has at least three years
experience in hydrogeology and shall meet the standards of both this Section and Section
7.16. (MAJOR)
6.4.17.1 A high intensity soil survey map meeting the standards of Article 6.3.32.
6.4.17.2 The depth to the water table at representative points throughout the
subdivision.
6.4.17.3 Drainage conditions throughout the subdivision.
6.4.17.4 Data on the existing ground water quality, either from test wells in the
subdivision or from existing wells on neighboring properties.
6.4.17.5 An analysis and evaluation of the effect of the proposed development on
ground water resources. In the case of residential developments, the
evaluation shall, at a minimum, include a projection of post development
nitrate-nitrogen concentrations at any wells within the subdivision, at the
subdivision boundaries and at a distance of 1,000 feet from potential
contamination sources, whichever is the shorter distance. For
developments within the watershed of a lake, projections of the
development’s impact on ground water phosphate concentrations shall
also be provided.
6.4.17.6 A map showing the location of any subsurface wastewater disposal
systems and any existing or proposed drinking water wells within the
development and within 200 feet of the development boundaries.
6.4.18 A list of construction items with cost estimates for all public improvements proposed by the
developer shall be submitted. This shall include, but not be limited to: a) streets; b)
drainage facilities; c) sewer and water mains; d) erosion and sedimentation control plans;
e) recreational areas and parks. This submission shall include a critical path method
construction schedule, cost estimates for each major phase of construction taking into
account inflation, provisions for inspections of each phase of construction, and a
completion date after which the developer will be in default and the Town shall have the
option to access the funds in the performance guarantee to finish construction.
6.4.19 A copy of covenants and deed restrictions as are intended to cover all or part of the tract
shall be submitted.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 30
6.4.20 The Final Plan shall show 2 foot contour lines of both existing and proposed topography in
relation to the NGVD of 1929.
6.4.21 To aid the Board’s understanding of a development, elevation view drawings may
accompany the proposal.
6.4.22 The plot plan must be prepared with a signature block for the signatures of the Planning
Board upon approval. This page will be filed by the developer in the Registry of Deeds. If
necessary, more than one page will be signed by the Board and filed at the Registry.
6.4.23 All requests for waivers from strict compliance with any of these regulations shall be
submitted in writing. All such waiver requests must refer to the section of these
Regulations for which the waiver is being requested, and shall contain an explanation of
the reasons such waiver is considered necessary and why the granting of such a waiver
would be consistent with these Regulations.
6.4.24 Elevation drawings for each side of each non-residential building if the building is either
new or is to be altered pursuant to this application.
6.4.25 Identification of the type and amount of the required performance guarantee.
6.4.26 The Board shall require submittal of all information necessary to determine compliance
with other codes. This includes, but is not limited to: Zoning Ordinance, including overlay
districts: Floodplain Management Ordinance; Well Ordinance; and Wireless
Communications Facilities Ordinance. In addition, the Planning Board may require any
additional information the Board feels is reasonably necessary to insure that the health,
safety and welfare of the public is protected.
6.4.27 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Decisions. The applicant shall prepare a
written draft of a document entitled, “Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and
Decisions,” for the Planning Board to consider. This document, in combination with the
plan set, explains in detail the application, the issues considered, and the decisions made.
The purpose of this document is to make the public record crystal clear to ensure that
decisions of the Board are easily understood and defensible in case of appeal. If the
applicant cuts corners with this documentation, it runs the risk of being granted an
approval that is easily overturned on appeal. When making its final decision, the Board
shall direct the applicant to amend the draft as necessary, and a final copy for the Chair’s
signature shall be delivered along with the mylars submitted for the Board members’
signatures.
A. The document shall begin with a header in the following format:
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, & Decisions
Planning Board, Town of York, Maine
<date>
Regarding an application by
<applicant>
Tax Map __/Lot __
<street address>
B. The document shall provide a compilation of relevant facts pertaining to the
application in a section titled Findings of Fact. At a minimum, this shall include
the following subject matter and order:
1. street address of the property or properties;
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 31
2. property ownership, as indicated on the application form and deed;
3. other parties to the application;
4. description of the existing use or uses of the property;
5. description of the proposed use or uses of the property, and the nature
of the application;
6. base zoning district in which the property is located;
7. overlay zoning district(s) in which the property is wholly or partially
located;
8. other relevant regulatory districts in which the property is wholly or
partially located (relating to the Floodplain Management Ordinance,
Wireless Communications Ordinance, Well Ordinance, etc.);
9. comprehensive list of materials submitted by the applicant as part of the
application;
10. date or dates on which the Board met to consider the application;
11. date or dates on which the Board conducted a public hearing on the
application; and
12. a brief description of the substantive materials and testimony received
at the public hearing.
C. The document shall provide a compilation of legal findings pertaining to the
application in a section titled Conclusions of Law. At a minimum, this shall
include the following subject matter and order:
1. Description of the Planning Board’s jurisdiction over the application. List
all statutes, ordinances, and regulations that are applicable, and which
permits and approvals are required. For instance, the Zoning Ordinance
is almost always applicable, but not all applications require a Wetland
Permit.
2. For each applicable land use code or permit, explain how the proposal
complies with each of the relevant requirements of each of the relevant
land use codes. Many permits have a list of required criteria of approval
which can form the basis for this requirement. (See, for example, §1.2 of
this Regulation. Each difficult or questionable issue should be detailed
to ensure the final decision is defensible. The more contentious the
application, and the more difficult the decisions, the more detail is
important.)
D. The document shall provide a list of decisions made by the Planning Board
regarding the application, to be documented in a section titled Decisions. At a
minimum, this shall include the following subject matter and order:
1. The date on which the application was reviewed and found by a vote of
the Board to be substantively complete and was accepted for review.
2. A list of each waiver granted, specifying the exact section waived, the
date of each decision, and the rationale for each waiver.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 32
3. A list of each decision on which the Board voted during the review
process which relates to interpretation or application of the codes.
4. The date on which the application received preliminary approval, if
required, along with a description of direction provided to the applicant
for changes required at final submittal.
5. The date on which the application received final approval, along with a
listing of all conditions precedent or subsequent imposed by the Board
6. The date on which a conditional final approval will expire if the
conditions precedent are not satisfied.
E. At the end of the document, there shall be a place for the Chair of the Board to
sign and date the document.
6.4.28. Financial Capacity. The applicant shall provide documentation from a bank or other
established financial institution acceptable to the Planning Board with an evaluation as to
the applicant’s financial capacity to successfully undertaken and complete the proposed
project.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 33
ARTICLE 7 ... GENERAL STANDARDS
7.1 In reviewing applications, the Board shall consider the following general standards and making
findings that each has been met prior to the approval of a Final Plan. In all instances the burden of
proof shall be upon the applicant.
7.2 CONFORMANCE WITH COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
All proposed Site Plans and Subdivision Plans shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan of the
Town of York and with the provisions of all pertinent federal, state, and local codes, ordinances,
and regulations.
7.3 PRESERVATION OF NATURAL AND HISTORIC FEATURES
7.3.1 The Board shall require that a proposed Site Plan or Subdivision Design include a grading
and landscape design plan that shows the preservation of existing trees (6” diameter or
larger at 4 feet 6 inches), the replacement of trees and vegetation, existing and final
contours, streams and the preservation of scenic, geologic, historic or environmentally
desirable areas. Significant trees or stands of trees, and species or clumps of trees that
are rare to the area or of particular horticultural or landscape value shall be preserved.
Likewise, geologic rock outcroppings significant to the area and landscape shall be
preserved. The street and lot layout shall be adapted to the topography. Extensive
grading and filling shall be avoided as far as possible.
A. To ensure the Board understands the extent of protection or proposed alteration of
the site landforms and landscaping, the following shall be clearly documented on the
plans:
1. the net volume of all materials in cuts and fills, and the net volume of all materials
brought in to or removed from the development site for changes including but not
limited to foundations (other than building foundations), driveways, septic
systems, drainage systems, and roads;
2. identification of all areas where elevations change more than 5 feet; and
3. the extent and volume of all grading work proposed outside the road right-of-way
which is related to road construction and driveways.
B. All proposed grading changes which affect bufferyards shall be designed to preserve
and protect existing trees and natural landscaping and geological features within the
buffer.
C. Except under building footprints, changes in pre- and post-development ground
elevation which exceed 10 feet may be permitted by the Board only when the
applicant demonstrates why the change is necessary and provides an analysis to
ensure there are no adverse impacts as a result.
D. New slopes established by re-grading a site shall not exceed 20%, except for the
allowed 33% shoulder slope along proposed roads.
E. To the maximum extent possible, roads and driveways shall follow landform contours
and minimize deep cuts.
F. The Board shall require the applicant to show a grading design which preserves the
natural landform and the application shall minimize the total landform disturbance.
7.3.2 The Planning Board may require the preservation of certain other natural characteristics,
for example, that trees along northerly borders are retained to provide a natural wind
buffer.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 34
7.3.3 The plan shall, by notes on the final plan and deed restrictions, limit the clearing of trees to
those areas designated on the plan.
7.3.4 The project shall be designed to maximize the habitat values of the property following
development. This shall be based on the information presented in the report of the wildlife
biologist as submitted per §6.3.16, and additional sources as the Board may find relevant.
7.3.5 Any public rights of access to the shoreline of a water body shall be maintained by means
of easements or rights-of-way, or should be included in the open space, with provisions
made for continued public access.
7.3.6 With respect to historic and/or archaeological resources, the Planning Board shall act to
protect such resources.
A. Where initial information indicates there may be significant resources on the site,
the Board may require a comprehensive site analysis by a qualified professional.
This shall be paid for by the applicant.
B. The Board may require alteration of the proposed design and/or permanent
protection of identified resources. It shall consider the information provided by
the applicant, and may seek advice from the Historic District Commission, Maine
Historic Preservation Commission, or other qualified sources. The Board shall
weigh the relative significance of resources affected and the magnitude of impact
on the proposed development in making its decision.
C. The Board may require a plan note to address any archaeological findings
discovered during site construction, as follows:
Archeological Findings. If, during excavations, any archeological
findings are uncovered, all work shall stop and the State Archeologist be
consulted, and may commence again only after conservation of the
resources is addressed to the satisfaction of the State Archeologist.
7.4 LAND NOT SUITABLE FOR DEVELOPMENT
7.4.1 The board shall not include in the calculation of lot size and portion of the land that:
7.4.1.1 Is at a lower elevation than the normal high water mark of any body of water that
is situated below sea level.
7.4.1.2 Is located within the 100 year frequency floodplain as identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or the Department of Housing and Urban
Development, Flood Insurance Administration, unless the developer shows proof
through the submittal of materials prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor which
show that the property in question lies at least two feet above the 100 year flood
level (elevation not to include filled or made land).
7.4.1.3 Is part of a right-of-way or easement of passage of any width, or is part of a utility
easement greater than 90 feet wide.
7.4.1.4 Is defined by federal, state, or Town of York law, regulations or ordinances as
being wetlands.
7.4.1.5 Has a slope greater than 20%.
7.4.2 Whenever the high intensity soils survey reveals areas with a high water table, or
seasonally high water table (within 10 inches of surface for at least 3 months of the year),
these areas shall be depicted on the Plan. Additionally, a note shall be added to the plan
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 35
instructing future landowners that any construction in these areas may require special
construction practices.
7.5 BLOCKS
7.5.1 Where street lengths exceed 1,000 feet between intersections with other streets, the
Board may require a utility/pedestrian easement, at least 20 feet in width, to provide for
underground utility crossings and/or a pedestrian pathway of at least five feet in width.
Maintenance obligations shall be included in the written description of the easement, and
shall be so noted on the plan.
7.6 LOTS
7.6.1 All lots shall meet the minimum requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for the zoning
district in which they are located. The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation and the
minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location and type of
development and use contemplated. Land that is not suitable for construction as
delineated in Section 7.4 shall not be included in the calculation of the lot area.
Additionally, portions of land with a seasonally high water table may not comprise more
than 25% of any lot under 1/2 acre, or more than 50% of any lot over 1/2 acre.
7.6.2 Lot configuration and area shall be designed to provide for adequate off-street parking and
service facilities based upon the type of development contemplated.
7.6.3 Lots with multiple frontages shall be avoided wherever possible. When lots do have
frontage on two or more streets, the Planning Board shall determine proper egress and
ingress to maximize safety. Both the plan and deed shall contain restrictions indicating
the location for vehicular access.
7.6.4 Side lot lines shall be substantially perpendicular to the street.
7.6.5 Where a tract is subdivided into lots substantially larger than the minimum size required in
the Zoning District in which a subdivision is located, the Board may require that the streets
and lots be laid out in such a manner as to provide for future resubdivision. Where public
utilities could be extended into the subdivision in the foreseeable future, the subdivision
shall be designed to accommodate the extensions of utilities.
7.6.6 If a lot on one side of a “stream or tidal water” 25 feet wide or more (measured between
high water marks), street, or other similar barrier fails to meet the minimum requirement
for lot size, it may not be combined with a lot on the other side of the stream, tidal water,
street or barrier to meet the minimum lot size.
7.6.7 Flag lots and other odd shaped lots in which narrow strips are joined to other parcels in
order to meet minimum lot size requirements are prohibited. The ratio of lot length to
width shall not be more than four to one (4:1).
7.7 UTILITIES
7.7.1 The size, type and location of public utilities, such as street lights, electricity, gas lines, fire
hydrants, etc. shall be shown on the plan.
7.7.2 Utilities shall be installed underground.
7.7.3 Underground utilities shall be installed prior to the installation of the final gravel base of
the street.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 36
7.8 WATER SUPPLY
A water supply system which supplies both domestic water and water for fire-fighting purposes
must be provided.
7.8.1 Public Water Supply System
7.8.1.1 When a Site Plan or Subdivision Plan is to be served by a public water system,
the complete supply system, including fire hydrants, shall be installed at the
expense of the developer. The Board shall require connection to the public water
system if an existing public water system line with adequate supply is within 750
feet of the site.
7.8.1.2 The developer shall provide a written statement from the servicing water district
that adequate water for both domestic and fire fighting purposes can be provided
without placing an undue burden on the source, treatment facilities or distribution
system involved. The developer shall be responsible for paying the costs of
system improvements necessary to serve the site.
7.8.1.3 The size and location of mains, gate valves, hydrants, and service connections
shall be reviewed and approved in writing by the servicing water district and the
Fire Chief.
7.8.1.4 The property owner(s) shall be responsible for payment of water service costs for
each fire hydrant on private property. In the event that required water charges
are not paid, the Town shall lien each affected property to ensure continued
operation of each hydrant. The Town shall charge each property owner their
respective share of the costs, plus a 25% penalty to help cover administrative
costs. This subsequent condition shall be included in the plan notes on the
signed plan.
7.8.2 Private Water Supply
7.8.2.1 When the location of a proposed development is greater than 750 feet from the
public water system, the Board may allow the use of individual wells or a private
community water system.
7.8.2.2 Dug (shallow) wells shall be permitted only if it is demonstrated to be not
economically feasible to develop other ground water sources, and shall be
constructed so as to prevent infiltration of surface water into the well. Unless
otherwise permitted by the Board, dug wells shall be prohibited.
7.8.2.3 If a central water supply system is provided by the developer, the location and
protection of the source, and the design, construction and operation of the
system shall conform to the standards of the Maine Rules Relating to Drinking
Water (10-144 A.C.M.R. 231).
7.8.2.4 The developer shall construct ponds and dry hydrants to provide for adequate
water storage for firefighting purposes. An easement shall be granted to the
municipality granting access to and maintenance of the dry hydrants where
necessary. The Board may waive the requirement for fire ponds only when the
developer makes arrangements to provide alternate firefighting provisions.
7.8.2.5 The location of all existing and proposed wells shall be shown on the lot.
7.8.2.6 Lot configuration and site design shall provide for a protective radius of 100’
around every well on the property. A larger radius shall be provided if required
by State standards. The well protection area shall be contained entirely on the
lot, or may extend onto adjacent lots if an easement is provided. For
subdivisions with common lands, the easement may extend into the common
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 37
land. Septic systems, backup septic system areas, underground storage tanks,
and roads shall be prohibited in the well protection area.
7.8.2.7 If there is concern about sufficiency of the water quantity or quality available onsite,
or about off-site domestic water quantity or quality impacts caused by the
development, the Board may require the developer to submit documentation from
a qualified professional as to the adequacy of the proposal in these respects.
7.9 SEWAGE DISPOSAL
7.9.1 Public Sewage Disposal System
7.9.1.1 A public sewer system shall be installed at the expense of the developer when
there is a public sewer line capable of servicing the development within 1,500
feet of the proposed development at its nearest point. The Sewer District shall
certify that providing service to the proposed development is within the capacity
of the system’s collection and treatment system.
7.9.1.2 The developer shall request a review by the Sewer District of the design and
proposed construction of the sewage system. Approval of the Sewer District in
writing is required prior to Planning Board approval.
7.9.2 Private Sewage Disposal System
7.9.2.1 The applicant shall submit evidence of soil suitability for subsurface sewage
disposal prepared by a Maine Licensed Site Evaluator in full compliance with the
requirements of the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules and
the Ordinances of the Town of York. In addition, on lots in which the limiting
factor has been identified as being within 24 inches of the surface, a second site
with suitable soils shall be shown as a reserve area for future replacement of the
disposal area. The reserve area shall be shown on the plan and restricted so as
not to be built upon. All setbacks and other such requirements normally
associated with a septic system shall also be observed for the reserve area.
7.9.2.2 In no instance shall a disposal area be permitted on soils or on a lot which
requires a New System Variance from the Subsurface Wastewater Disposal
Rules.
7.9.2.3 Overboard discharge systems which discharge treated, untreated or
inadequately treated pollutants including, but not limited to, animal or human
waste, into any waterbody or watercourse within or abutting the Town of York
shall not be permitted.
7.10 SURFACE DRAINAGE
7.10.1 The stormwater management plan submitted in accordance with Sections 6.4.16, 9.8 and
9.9 shall be installed.
7.11 LAND FEATURES
7.11.1 Topsoil shall be considered part of the site and shall not be removed from the site except
for surplus topsoil from streets, parking areas and the areas occupied by the proposed
buildings.
7.11.2 Except for normal thinning and landscaping, existing vegetation shall be left intact to
prevent soil erosion and to minimize stormwater run-off. Additionally, all erosion control
and sedimentation provisions in Article 9.10 must be met.
7.11.3 To prevent soil erosion in the shoreline areas, tree cutting in the strip extending one
hundred feet inland from the normal high water mark of any waterbody shall be limited in
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 38
accordance with the Town of York’s Shoreland Zoning Ordinance and State law. These
restrictions shall appear as a note on the plan and in the deeds to the affected lots.
7.11.4 Site and road layout shall minimize wetland impacts as much as practical based on
assessment of functional values from the wetlands assessment required by the Zoning
Ordinance. The Board can reduce the total number of lots in the subdivision and may
require other design changes to achieve this result.
7.12 DISPOSAL OF CONSTRUCTION WASTE AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS
7.12.1 The developer shall legally dispose of construction and demolition debris, stumps, brush
and wood waste, bituminous asphalt and pavement products, inert fill and wood wastes
and will provide a description of such disposal arrangements on the final plan. These
arrangements must meet all applicable requirements to the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) Solid Waste Management Rules, Chapter 404 as
amended. If an on-site disposal area for the disposal of stumps and debris is proposed,
the site shall be indicated on the plan, and shall be suitably covered with fill and topsoil,
limed, fertilized and seeded.
7.13 RETENTION OF PROPOSED PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES
7.13.1 For conventional design subdivision (not a cluster design subdivision), the Board shall
require the reservation of at least 10% of the gross lot area as open space in order to
provide for the recreational needs of the occupants of the subdivision, to maintain the
scenic or natural beauty of the area, or to manage wildlife habitat. In evaluating the
design of the open space, the Board shall consider the proximity of the subdivision to
neighboring dedicated open space or recreation facilities; the needs identified in the
Comprehensive Plan for open space or recreational facilities in the neighborhood
surrounding the subdivision; the type of development and the demographic characteristics
of potential residents in the subdivision; the wildlife habitat values of the property; and the
density or lot sizes of the development.
7.13.2 Reserved land acceptable to the Board and the developer may be presented to the Town
or other suitable agency as described in Section 7.14 for acceptance. However, approval
of a plan on which reserved land or recreation area is depicted shall not constitute an
acceptance by the municipality or other agency of such areas and the Plan shall contain a
notation to this effect. The Planning Board may, where appropriate, require a written
agreement between the applicant and the Board of Selectmen covering future deed and
title, dedication, equipment, and maintenance of any such recreation area.
7.13.3 Land reserved for open space purposes shall be of a character, configuration and location
suitable for the particular use intended. A site to be used for active recreation purposes,
such as a playground or a play field, should be relatively level and dry, have suitable
access for the proposed uses of the site, and have both a depth and width of at least 200
feet.
7.13.4 Undeveloped open space sites selected primarily for scenic or passive recreation should
be left in their natural state. The plan may specify certain improvements proposed by the
developer such as the cutting of trails for walking or jogging, or provision of picnic areas,
etc. In addition, the Planning Board may require the developer to make other
improvements, such as removing dead or diseased trees, thinning trees or other
vegetation to encourage more desirable growth, grading, and seeding. Sites selected for
these purposes shall have such access as the Board may deem suitable and shall have
no less than 25 feet of street frontage. The configuration of such sites shall be reviewed
for adequacy by the Board with regard to scenic attributes to be preserved, together with
sufficient areas for trails, lookouts, etc. where necessary and appropriate.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 39
7.14 DEDICATION AND MAINTENANCE OF COMMON OPEN SPACE AND SERVICES
All common open space or facilities must be noted on the plan along with appropriate provisions on
the plan to specify the ownership and maintenance of these common properties or facilities. This
may involve any or all of the situations described below:
7.14.1 Common property may be deeded in fee or through use of a conservation easement to an
agency or association defined as a holder under Title 33 M.R.S.A. Section 4476. The
Planning Board must approve of the holder and its adequacy to protect the values for
which the parcel is to be preserved.
7.14.2 All or a portion of the common property or facilities may be proposed for acceptance by
the municipality. If the municipality does not accept them, the common properties and
facilities must become the responsibility of an owner’s association pursuant to Section
7.14.3
7.14.3 All or a portion of the common properties may be held in common through means of an
owner’s association. The dedication of the proposed owner’s association shall specify
maintenance responsibilities and shall be reviewed by the Board. Covenants for
mandatory membership in the homeowner’s association setting forth the owners’ rights,
interests, financial obligations, and privileges shall be reviewed by the Board and must be
included in the deeds for the affected lots or dwelling units, and shall be so stated on the
plan.
7.14.3.1 The developer shall maintain and operate the common property until
51% of the lots, units, or total constructed space, whichever is
appropriate, has been sold to persons other than the developer, at
which time the responsibility for the maintenance and operation of the
common property may be turned over to the Homeowner’s Association.
This section does not apply to required public improvements for which
the developer is responsible until he is released from the performance
guarantee.
7.14.4 Further subdivision of the common land or its use for other than non-commercial
recreation or conservation purposes, except for easements for underground utilities, shall
be prohibited. The use of open space land must continue in perpetuity for the purpose
specified. Structures and buildings accessory to non-commercial recreation or
conservation uses may be erected on the common land. This prohibition shall be noted
on the plan.
7.15 CONSTRUCTION IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
When any part of a Site Plan or subdivision is located in a special flood hazard area (Zones A, A1-
A30, AE, AO, AH, V1-V30 and/or VE as identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency), the plan shall indicate that all principal structures in the development shall be constructed
with their lowest floor, including the basement, at least two feet above the 100 year flood elevation
and that all other conditions of the Town of York Flood Management Ordinance shall be met. Such
a restriction shall be included in the deed for any lot which is included or partially included in the
flood hazard area.
7.16 IMPACT ON GROUNDWATER
7.16.1 When required through the provisions in Section 6.4.17, the developer shall submit a
groundwater purity hydrogeologic assessment containing the information outlined in
Section 6.4.17 and meeting the following standards so as to prove that here will be no
problems relating to groundwater mounding or groundwater contamination.
7.16.1.1 Projections of groundwater quality shall be based on the assumption of
60% of annual average participation.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 40
7.16.1.2 No Site Plan or Subdivision Plan shall increase any contaminants
concentration in the ground water to more than one half of the State of
Maine Primary Drinking Water Standards. No Site Plan or Subdivision
Plan shall increase any contaminant concentration in the ground water
to more than the State of Maine Secondary Drinking Water Standards.
7.16.1.3 If ground water already contains contaminants in excess of the primary
standards, and the Site Plan or Subdivision Plan is to be served by onsite
ground water supplies, the applicant shall demonstrate how water
quality will be improved or treated.
7.16.1.4 If ground water already contains contaminants in excess of the
secondary standards, the subdivision shall not cause the concentration
of the parameters in question to exceed 150% of the ambient
concentration.
7.16.1.5 Subsurface wastewater disposal systems and drinking water well shall
be constructed as shown on the map submitted with the assessment. If
construction standards for drinking water wells are recommended by
the hydrogeologist’s assessment, those standards shall be included as
a note on the Final Plan, and as restrictions in the deeds to the affected
lots.
7.17 LANDSCAPING
7.17.1 In addition to specific landscaping provisions in the Town of York ordinances, street trees,
esplanades, and open green spaces may be required at the discretion of the Planning
Board. Reasonable landscaping should be provided at site entrances, in public areas,
and adjacent to buildings. The type and amount of landscaping required may vary
depending on the type of development. Landscaping materials shall be appropriate for
the local environment, soil conditions, and availability of water.
7.17.2 The site design shall minimize the possibility of noise pollution either from within or without
the development from highway or industrial sources by providing and maintaining a green
shrubbery buffer strip between abutting properties that are so endangered.
7.17.3 Where landscaping improvements are required, they shall be maintained and replaced
within one growing season if they die. They shall be incorporated into the Final Plan and
be executed by the developer as construction of the development progresses.
7.18 MONUMENTS
7.18.1 Drilled stone or reinforced concrete with inset galvanized steel posts shall be set at all
street intersections and points of curvature, but no further than 750 feet apart along street
lines without curves or intersections.
7.18.2 Drilled stone or reinforced concrete with inset galvanized steel posts shall be set at all
corners and angle points of the site boundaries where the interior angle of the site
boundaries is 135 degrees or less.
7.18.3 Drilled stone or reinforced concrete with inset galvanized steel posts shall be a minimum
of four inches square at the top and four feet in length, and set in the ground at final grade
level. After they are set, drill holes, 1/2 inch deep shall locate the point or points described
above.
7.18.4 All other site boundary corners and angle points, as well as all lot boundary corners and
angle points shall be marked by same monumentation.
7.18.5 Survey monumentation shall be required for conservation easements. Monumentation
shall be sufficient to enable the boundary of the easement to be easily located in the field.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 41
7.18.6 Proper and complete monumentation shall be installed prior to final approval of the
application. The applicant’s surveyor shall certify in writing that all monuments have been
installed according to the submitted plan, using the form entitled “Certificate of Monument
Installation.” This form must be submitted to the Board prior to the receipt of final approval
of the application. A copy of this form is contained in Appendix B.
7.19 IMPACT MITIGATION
The Planning Board may require the construction of off-site improvements if the Board determines
such improvements are specifically required to address a public health, safety or welfare concern
caused by the proposed project.
7.20 STREET AND STORM DRAINAGE DESIGN, EROSION CONTROL
Street and stormwater drainage design, and erosion control and sedimentation plans shall meet the
standards of Article 9.
7.21 REFUSE DISPOSAL AND RECYCLING
A non-residential use shall provide adequate facilities to collect and dispose of refuse and recycle
solid wastes on a timely basis and in an environmentally friendly manner. All refuse and recycling
facilities shall be screened from view by a four-sided solid enclosure. The fence shall be a
minimum of six feet in height. A wooden stockade fence is preferred; metal wire fence is prohibited
as a screen.
7.22 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
7.22.1 Explosive Materials. Highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be
stored in a manner that complies with State and Federal regulations, and shall be subject
to the Fire Chief’s approval.
7.22.2 Chemical/Fuel Storage. All storage facilities for fuel, chemicals, chemical or industrial
wastes, and potentially harmful raw materials shall be completely screened from view
from streets, shall comply with State and Federal regulations, and shall be subject to the
Fire Chief’s approval.
7.23 A.D.A. COMPLIANCE
For all Site Plans, adequate provisions shall be made to ensure compliance with the Americans
With Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA). The following measures are required as appropriate.
7.23.1 Curb ramps are required as necessary.
7.23.2. It is recommended, though not required, that a “drop-off” area be located at wheelchairaccessible
entrances.
7.23.3 Where necessary, wheelchair ramps shall be provided, with a slope not exceeding one
foot of rise per 12 feet of run, and a width as required by ADA.
7.23.4 All sites shall provide wheelchair-accessible parking spaces and accompanying access
aisles in accordance with ADA, in particular 23 CFR Part 36, Appendix A, §4.1.2(5) (see
Federal Register, Volume 56, #144, July 26, 1991), or as amended.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 42
a. For the convenience of readers, the number of accessible spaces required for
smaller parking lots are as follows:
Total Parking Spaces Minimum Accessible Spaces
1 - 25 1
26 – 50 2
51 – 75 3
76 – 100 4
100 – 150 5
151 – 200 6
201 – 300 7
b. One in every 8 accessible spaces, but never less than one, shall be designated
as “van accessible”. Such spaces shall be served by an 8 foot wide access aisle.
c. Accessible parking spaces shall be served by a parallel access aisle, which shall
be a minimum of 5 feet wide for standard spaces and 8 feet wide for van
accessible spaces. Adjacent spaces may share an access aisle.
d. Accessible parking spaces and adjacent access aisles shall be paved flush to the
ground, and the pavement shall extend all the way to the nearest wheelchairaccessible
entrance. Parked vehicle overhangs shall not reduce the clear width
of an accessible route.
e. Accessible parking spaces shall be located adjacent to wheelchair-accessible
entrances. Wherever practical, the main entrance shall be wheelchairaccessible.
f. Each accessible space shall be identified with pavement marking and a sign.
Signs shall be mounted such that they are not obscured by other parked
vehicles. Van accessible spaces shall have an additional sign indicating the
space is van accessible.
g. Accessible parking stalls shall be large enough to fully contain a rectangle 8 feet
wide by 20 feet long.
h. The slope of accessible parking spaces and adjacent access aisles shall not
exceed a slope in any direction exceeding one foot of rise per 50 feet of run.
7.24 IMPACT ON AIR QUALITY
The proposed development shall not unduly affect air quality. Any required State or Federal
emissions permits shall be obtained prior to final approval.
7.25 STATE PERMITS
Prior to, or as a precedent condition to granting final approval of an application, all required State
permits shall be obtained.
7.26 TRAFFIC IMPACT ON ADJACENT MUNICIPALITIES
If the proposed development crosses municipal boundaries, the Board shall review the application
jointly with Planning Board of the adjacent municipality. The York Planning Board shall require
mitigation or take other action to ensure the proposed development does not cause unreasonable
traffic congestion or unsafe conditions with respect to the use of existing public ways in the
adjoining municipality.
7.27. PHOSPHOROUS POLLUTION
Where a proposed development is located within the watershed of a great pond, the applicant shall
ensure the long-term cumulative effects of the propose development will not unreasonably increase
a great pond’s phosphorous concentration during the construction phase and life of the proposed
development.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 43
7.28 SCENIC RESOURCES
The Planning Board may require reasonable modification of a proposed development if such
modification will help mitigate adverse impacts on aesthetic, scenic, or natural beauty of the area.
This standard shall be applied only to resources specifically identified and recommended for
protection in the Comprehensive Plan.
7.29 TIMEFRAME FOR CONSTRUCTION. It is in the community’s interest to ensure the construction
of roads and site improvements is completed in a timely manner, and/or limited to times that will
minimize public impact. The Board may require the plan to include a plan note that specifies a
maximum duration for completion of roads and/or site improvements. The deadlines shall be
proposed by the applicant. The Board shall review the deadlines, and shall have the authority to
amend the deadlines. Failure to meet the deadline shall be grounds for the Town to use the posted
financial security to complete the work, and this shall be reflected in the language of the financial
security. The Board may also require the plan to include a plan note that restricts the timing of
construction when such limits will prevent undue disturbance or adverse impact to the public or the
neighborhood.
7.30 SUBDIVISION PHASING
The Comprehensive Plan designates both Growth and Rural areas, and in Policy #1.3.1 calls for
the control of subdivision phasing.
A. Growth Area. The Planning Board may impose phasing limits on a major subdivision
where this is necessary to help mitigate adverse impacts of the subdivision.
B. Rural Area. The Planning Board shall require phasing of major subdivisions containing
10 or more lots or residential units, as follows:
1. The scope of the Preliminary Plan shall include all anticipated and potential
phases to demonstrate the anticipated maximum buildout of the subdivision. This
will help the Board understand the scope and potential impacts associated with
the project at buildout.
2. Not more than one phase shall be permitted per year in each subdivision.
3. No phase shall contain more than 10 lots or 10 residential units, whichever is more
restrictive.
C. Standards for All Phased Subdivisions. The following shall apply in all cases. See also
§5.5.5 and §10.7.
1. The order of construction of phases shall be expressly called out on the
Subdivision Plan in the plan notes.
2. The timeline for construction of the subdivision as addressed in §5.5.5 shall apply
to the first phase from the initial date of Preliminary Plan approval. This standard
shall apply to each subsequent phase, with the time requirement beginning at
completion of all required infrastructure of the prior phase.
3. This standard shall be applied to all contiguous lands which are or become under
common ownership during the timeframe in which the subdivision phases are
being constructed, through the date on which the final phase is completed. When
interpreting common ownership, this shall include ownership by different
corporations in which one or more directors and/or shareholders are the same
individual, their spouse, or other family members.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 44
ARTICLE 8 ... ACCESS CONTROL AND TRAFFIC IMPACTS
8.1 GENERAL
8.1.1 Provision shall be made for vehicular access to the development and circulation within the
development in such a manner as to safeguard against hazards to traffic and pedestrians
in existing streets and within the development, to avoid traffic congestion on any street
and to provide safe and convenient circulation on public streets and within subdivisions.
More specifically, access and circulation shall conform to the standards and design criteria
in this Article, as well as Article 9.
8.1.2 The vehicular access to the subdivision shall be arranged to avoid traffic congestion of
existing local residential streets.
8.1.3 Where a lot has frontage on two or more streets, the access to the lot shall be provided
from the street where there is lesser potential for traffic congestion and lesser potential for
hazards to traffic and pedestrians. In general, all new driveways should access from the
new subdivision street, rather than an existing street, so as to minimize curb cuts on the
more heavily traveled street.
8.1.4 The street giving access to the development, and neighboring streets which can be
expected to carry traffic to and from the development, shall have sufficient traffic carrying
capacity and shall be suitably improved by the developer to accommodate the amount and
types of traffic generated by the proposed development. No development shall increase
the volume: capacity ratio of any street above 0.8 nor reduce the street’s Level of Service
to “D” or below, as defined by the most recent edition of the Highway Capacity Manual
(published by the Transportation Research Board).
8.1.5 Where necessary to safeguard against hazards to traffic and pedestrians and/or to avoid
traffic congestion, provision shall be made for turning lanes, traffic directional islands,
frontage streets, and traffic controls within public streets. Traffic control devises shall
conform to the most recent edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
(MUTCD), unless otherwise specified in Subsection 8.4.
8.1.6 Access to the development shall be of a design and have sufficient capacity to avoid
queuing of entering vehicles on any street.
8.1.7 Where topographical and other conditions allow, provisions shall be made for circulation
access connections to adjoining lots of similar existing or potential use. These shall be
required:
8.1.7.1 When such access connection will facilitate fire protection services; or
8.1.7.2 When such access will enable the public to travel between two existing or
potential uses, generally open to the public, without the need to travel upon a
street outside the development.
8.1.8 All non-residential sites shall provide off-street loading facilities sufficient to meet the need
of the use. The loading facility shall be located and designed so that delivery vehicles can
be parked completely on site. The loading area shall not obstruct on-site traffic flow, but
may allow for temporary use or blocking of some on-site parking spaces.
8.1.9 Snow removal shall be reviewed for all sites, and the general plan for snow removal shall
be indicated on the plan. Areas suitable for snow storage shall be designated on the plan,
and removal of snow from the site may be required if insufficient storage is provided. The
landscaping and snow removal plans must work in harmony with on another.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 45
8.2 SITE PLAN DRIVEWAY DESIGN STANDARDS
8.2.1 The design standards of this Section shall apply to all new or modified driveways subject
to Site Plan review. Further, the Board may require compliance with these standards
when a site is being expanded or redeveloped and, in the opinion of the Board, there is
concern about the adequacy of the existing access.
8.2.2 Access design shall be based on the estimated volume using the access classification
defined below.
Low Volume Access Less than 25 vehicle trips per day
Medium Volume Access Any access that is not a low volume or a high volume access.
High Volume Access Peak hour volume of 400 vehicles or greater
8.2.3 Sight Distances - Accesses shall be designed in profile and grading and shall be located
to provide the required sight distance measured along the street in each direction. Sight
distances shall be measured from the driver’s seat of a vehicle standing on that portion of
the exit with the front of the vehicle a minimum of 10 feet behind the curb line or edge of
shoulder, with the height of the eye 3 ½ feet, to the top of an object 4 ¼ feet above the
pavement. A sight distance of ten feet for each mile per hour of posted speed limit shall
be maintained or provided.
Where necessary, corner lots shall be cleared of all growth and sight obstructions,
including ground excavation, to achieve the required visibility.
8.2.4 Vertical Alignment - Accesses shall be flat enough to prevent the dragging of any vehicle
undercarriage. Accesses shall have vertical of alignments which conform to current Maine
Department of Transportation driveway standards. In addition, low volume accesses shall
not have, at any point, a slope greater than 15%, and medium and high volume accesses
shall not have, at any point, a slope greater than 8%.
8.2.5 Low Volume Accesses
8.2.5.1 Angle of Intersection - Low volume accesses shall be two-way operation and
shall intersect the street at an angle as nearly equaling 90 degrees as site
conditions permit. Under special site conditions, the Planning Board may waive
this requirement to no less than 70 degrees.
8.2.5.2 Curb Radius - The curb radius shall be no less than 5 feet and no more than 15
feet.
8.2.5.3 Access Width - The width of the access shall be no less than 12 feet and no
more than 20 feet.
8.2.6 Medium Volume Accesses
8.2.6.1 Angle of Intersection - Medium volume accesses may be either one-way or twoway
operation and shall intersect the street at an angle as nearly equaling 90
degrees as site conditions permit. Under special site conditions, the Planning
Board may waive this requirement to no less than 70 degrees.
8.2.6.2 Curb Radius - Curb radius will vary depending on whether the access is one-way
or two-way operation. On a two-way access the curb radii shall be no less than
15 feet and no more than 30 feet. One one-way accesses, the curb radii shall be
no less than 15 and no more than 30 feet for right turns into and out of the site,
with a 5 foot radius on the opposite curb.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 46
8.2.6.3 Access Width - On a two-way access the width shall be no less than 24 feet and
no more than 36 feet. However, where truck traffic is anticipated, the width may
be no more than 40 feet. On a one-way access the width shall be no less than
16 feet and no more than 20 feet.
8.2.7 High Volume Accesses
8.2.7.1 Angle of Intersection - High volume accesses shall intersect the street at an
angle as nearly equaling 90 degrees as site conditions permit. Under special site
conditions, the Planning Board may waive this provision to no less than 70
degrees.
8.2.7.2 Curb Radius - Without channelization islands for right-turn movements into and
out of the site, the curb radii shall be no less than 30 feet and no more than 50
feet. With channelization islands, the curb radii shall be no less than 75 feet and
no more than 100 feet.
8.2.7.3 Entering and existing accesses shall be separated by a raised median which
shall be no less than 6 feet and no more than 10 feet in width. Medians
separating traffic flows shall be no less than 25 feet in length.
8.2.7.4 Access Width - Access widths shall be no less than 20 feet and no more than 30
feet on each side of the median. Right turn only lanes established by a
channelization island shall be no less than 16 feet and no more than 20 feet.
8.2.7.5 Appropriate traffic control signage shall be erected at the intersection of the
access and the street and on medians and channelization islands and shall
conform to the standards for the types of signs or devises set by the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD).
8.2.8 Special Case Accesses - Special case accesses are one-way or two-way drives serving
medium or high volume uses with partial access (right turn only) permitted. These
accesses are allowed only on roadway segments where there is a raised median and no
median breaks are provided opposite the proposed access. These accesses are usually
located along the approaches to major signalized intersections where a raised median
may be provided to protect left-turning vehicles and separate opposing traffic flows.
8.2.8.1 Perpendicular Driveways
8.2.8.1.1 Curb Radii - Curb radii shall be no less than 30 feet and no
more than 50 feet, with a preferred radius of 50 feet.
8.2.8.1.2 Access Width - Access width shall be no less than 26 feet and
no more than 30 feet. On two-way accesses, a triangular
channelization island shall be provided at the intersection with
the street. On each side of the island the one-way drive shall
be no less than 15 feet and no more than 24 feet.
8.2.8.1.3 Channelization Island - The channelization island on two-way
accesses shall be raised and curbed. Corner radii shall be 2
feet.
8.2.8.2 Skewed Accesses
8.2.8.2.1 Angle of Intersection - Access shall intersect the street at an
angle no less than 45 degrees and no more than 60 degrees.
8.2.8.2.2 Curb Radii - Curb radii shall be no less than 30 feet and no
more than 50 feet on the obtuse side of the intersection. Curb
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 47
radii shall be no less than 5 feet and no more than 10 feet on
the acute side of the intersection.
8.2.8.2.3 Access Width - The width of the access shall be no less than
15 feet and no more than 24 feet. Where entering and exiting
access meet, the width shall be no less than 24 feet and no
more than 30 feet.
8.3 ACCESS LOCATION AND SPACING
8.3.1 Minimum Corner Clearance - Corner clearance shall be measured from the point of
tangency (PT) for the corner to the point of tangency for the access. In general the
developer should provide the maximum practical corner clearance possible based on site
constraints. Minimum corner clearances are listed below based upon access or minor
street volume and intersection type.
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR CORNER CLEARANCE
MINIMUM CORNER CLEARANCE (Feet)
INTERSECTION INTERSECTION
ACCESS TYPE SIGNALIZED UNSIGNALIZED
Low Volume 150 50
Medium Volume 150 50
High Volume 500 250
Special Case
Right turn in only 50 50
Right turn out only 100 100
Right turn in or out only 100 50
Where the minimum standard for a full access drive cannot be met, only special case accesses
shall be permitted. If based on the above criteria, full access to the site cannot be provided on
either the major or minor streets, the site shall be restricted to partial access. Alternately,
construction of a shared access drive with an adjacent parcel is recommended.
8.3.2 Access Spacing - Accesses and street intersections shall be separated from adjacent
accesses, streets and property lines as indicated in the table below, in order to allow
major through routes to effectively serve their primary function of conducting through
traffic. The distance shall be measured from the access point of tangency to the access
point of tangency for spacing between accesses and from the access point of tangency to
a projection of the property line at the edge of the roadway for access spacing to the
property line.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 48
MINIMUM ACCESS SPACING
NOTE: This chart applies to the accesses on the property being developed only
Minimum Spacing to Adjacent Access by Access Type 2 (DSP) 3
MINIMUM
SPACING TO
PROPERTY HIGH HIGH SPECIAL
ACCESS LINE (DPL) 1 LOW MEDIUM w/o RT* w/RT** CASE
TYPE (FEET) (FEET) (FEET) (FEET) (FEET) (FEET)
VOLUME
Low 5 *** - - - -
Medium 10 - 75 - - -
High-w/o RT* 75 - 75 150 - -
High-w RT** 75 - 75 250 500 -
Special Case 10 - 75 75 75 40 ****
1 DPL measured from point of tangency of access to projection of property line on roadway edge.
2 For two or more accesses serving a single parcel, or from a proposed access from an existing
access.
3 DSP measured from point of tangency of access to point of tangency of adjacent access.
* High volume access without right turn channelization.
** High volume access with right turn channelization.
*** Low volume accesses are not permitted in combination with other access types on a single lot.
**** Right turn in only upstream of right turn out only. Right turn out followed by right turn in not
allowed.
8.3.3 Number of Accesses - The maximum number of accesses onto a single street is
controlled by the available site frontage and the table above. In addition, the following
criteria shall limit the number of accesses independent of frontage length.
8.3.3.1 No low volume traffic generator shall have more than two-way access onto a
single roadway.
8.3.3.2 No medium or high volume traffic generator shall have more than two two-way
accesses or three accesses in total onto a single roadway.
8.3.4 Construction Materials/Paving
8.3.4.1 All accesses entering a curbed street shall be curbed with materials matching the
street curbing. Sloped curbing is required around all raised channelized islands
or medians.
8.3.4.2 All accesses shall be paved with bituminous concrete pavement within the street
right-of-way. All commercial accesses regardless of access volume shall be
paved with bituminous concrete pavement within 30 feet of the street right-ofway.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 49
8.4 TRAFFIC SIGNAL STANDARDS
8.4.1 Purpose - Where traffic signals are to be added or modified, the Town seeks to
standardize all equipment and processes associated with traffic signals in order to:
enhance the function of the road network to safely accommodate vehicle, bicycle and
pedestrian movement; facilitate priority movement of emergency vehicles; minimize,
economize and simplify future maintenance and programming and conserve energy.
8.4.2 Required Actions - In addition to actions required elsewhere in these Regulations, the
following actions are required:
a. For any development which may adversely impact an individual signalized
intersection or group of signalized intersections, a Professional Engineer
specializing in transportation engineering shall evaluate the signal hardware and
programming at each signal and throughout the system if appropriate. The
Engineer shall verify the sufficiency of the current hardware and programming,
and shall offer modifications which improve traffic flow. Interconnection shall be
required where it will improve traffic system function. The function of the traffic
system shall be given higher priority than the function of individual intersections
unless otherwise directed by the Department of Public Works.
b. Following installations and initial programming, a final operational inspection shall
be made by the designing Professional Engineer to review the effectiveness of
the signal timing, signal layout, construction and coordination timing/operation.
The Professional Engineer shall specify adjustments needed to ensure safe and
efficient operation, and shall subsequently provide to the Public Works Director a
written report detailing all aspects of the system.
c. When a new or replacement traffic signal controller is required, the intersection
shall be equipped with emergency optical pre-emption.
d. A development which meets both of the following criteria shall provide to the
Town one emergency optical pre-emption emitter:
1. the development necessitates either the addition of a traffic signal or the
modification of signal programming; and
2. the development generates 1,000 or more vehicle trips per day in the
summer season.
e. Modifications to existing traffic signals shall include provisions to replace
substandard equipment with new equipment which meets current specifications.
The extent to which this replacement falls partially or fully upon the applicant
shall be determined by the Planning Board based on the extent of the expected
traffic impact.
8.4.3 Specifications - All traffic signal system design, construction and equipment shall meet the
Town of York standards, as established and periodically updated by the York Public
Works Department.
8.4.4 Required Approval - All traffic signal designs, equipment and programming shall be
reviewed and approved by the Department of Public Works.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 50
ARTICLE 9 ... STREETS, STORM DRAINAGE DESIGN AND EROSION CONTROL
9.1 The Board shall not approve any Subdivision Plan unless proposed streets and stormwater
management systems are designed in accordance with all local Ordinances and the specifications
contained in these regulations. Approval of the Final Plan by the Board shall not be deemed to
constitute or be evidence of acceptance by the municipality of any street or easement.
9.2 All plans submitted shall meet the submission standards outlined in Section 6.4.14.
9.3 Where the developer proposes improvements, at his expense, within existing public streets, the
proposed design and construction details shall be approved in writing by the Superintendent of the
Department of Public Works or the Maine Department of Transportation, as appropriate.
9.4 All plans submitted to the Planning Board will be reviewed by the Town Engineer as described in
Section 2.3.1 and 5.4.5.
9.5 STREET DESIGN STANDARDS
9.5.1 These design standards shall be met by all streets within the subdivisions, and shall
control the roadway, shoulders, curbs, sidewalks, drainage systems, culverts, and other
appurtenances.
9.5.2 Streets shall be designed to discourage through traffic on minor streets within a residential
subdivision.
9.5.3 The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets shall be
considered in relation to existing or planned streets, topographical conditions, public
convenience and safety, and the proposed use of the land to be served by the street.
Within the parameters of Section 9.5.9, grades of streets shall conform as closely as
possible to the original topography.
9.5.4 The Planning Board may require the reservation of a 50-foot easement connecting the
new street with an external boundary to provide a continuation of the street where future
subdivision is possible. This future street will allow for safe future traffic circulation. In a
case where the subdivision would land lock hitherto accessible land, the 50-foot reserve
strip shall be required by the Planning Board. The Board may also require the reservation
of a twenty-foot easement in an appropriate location to provide continuation of pedestrian
traffic or utilities to the next street. All easements proposed under this regulation must be
deeded to the Town to facilitate their future use for the public good. (Also see Section
7.5.1).
9.5.5 In the event a residential development is proposed in an area zoned for commercial use,
the street right-of-way and/or the pavement width shall be increased the amount
necessary to bring the street into conformance with the standards for commercial streets
in these regulations.
9.5.6 Adequate off-street loading space, paved to the standards herein, shall be provided in
connection with lots designed for commercial use.
9.5.7 Where a subdivision boarders an existing street below the standards set herein or when
the Comprehensive Plan indicates plans for realignment, widening or improvement of a
street that would require use of some of the land in the subdivision, the Plan must show
areas reserved for this widening, realigning, or improvement. Land reserved for such
purposes may not be counted in satisfying setback, yard, or area requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance.
9.5.8 Developments containing fifteen (15) residential units or more, or which generates
average daily traffic of 150 trips per day or more, shall have at least two street
connections either with existing public streets, or with streets on an approved Subdivision
Plan for which a performance guarantee has been filed and accepted. The reason for this
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 51
policy is to ensure the volume of traffic passing in front of any house on the street remains
at a low, neighborhood-friendly level.
A. Alternatively, a residential street network may be designed with a central
Collector street with Minor or Alternative Minor streets accessing the Collector
street. No house shall have driveway access onto the collector street. Not more
than 14 residential units shall be permitted on each Minor street. Not more than 9
residential units shall be permitted on each Alternative Minor street. With this
design option, a dead-end collector street shall not be longer than 2,000’, and not
more than 50 residential units shall be accommodated on a dead-end collector
street.
9.5.9 The following design standards apply according to street classification:
TYPE OF STREET (4)
DESCRIPTION ARTERIAL COLLECTOR MINOR ALTERNATIVE
MINOR (3)
IND/COMM
Minimum right-of-way width 80’ 60’ 50’ 50’ 80’
Minimum pavement width
Curbed 44’ 34’ 26’ Not permitted 44’
Uncurbed 44’ 24’ 20’ 18’ 44’
Minimum width of shoulders
uncurbed (each side) 3’ 3’ 3’ 2’ 3’
Minimum sidewalk width 8’ 5’ 5’ Not permitted 8’
Minimum grade .5% .5% .5% .5% .5%
Maximum grade 5% 6% 7% 10% 5%
Maximum grade within 75’ of
any intersection 2% 2% 2% 2% 2%
Minimum centerline radius 800’ 300’ 150’ 150’ 800’
Minimum tangent between
curves of reverse alignment 300’ 200’ 100’ 100’ 300’
Roadway crown ¼”/ft ¼”/ft ¼”/ft ¼”/ft ¼”/ft
Minimum angle of street
Intersection (1) 90° 90° 88° 88° 90°
Curb radii at intersection 30’ 20’ 15’ 15’ 30’ (2)
Minimum property line radii
at intersections 20’ 10’ 10’ 10’ 20’
Maximum Design Speed - - 25 MPH 25 MPH -
Dead-End Design n.a. Cul-de-sac Cul-de-sac or
hammer head
Hammer head Cul-de-sac
(1) Street intersection angles shall be as close to 90° as feasible, but no less than the listed angle
(2) Should be based on the turning radii of expected commercial vehicles, but no less than 30 feet
(3) Alternative Minor standards may apply only on dead-end residential streets which provide access
to not more than 9 residential units. All other design and construction standards which apply to
Minor Streets shall apply to streets designed under this alternative. Roads constructed to these
standards shall remain in private ownership because they will not meet standards for public road
acceptance.
(4) Compliance with these standards does not ensure compliance with standards for public acceptance
of streets. Public acceptance of streets is regulated by the Road Specifications Ordinance (which is
scheduled to amended later in 2007). A plan note shall be required for any subdivision which
includes a new road. This note shall indicate whether or not the applicant intends to design the
roads for public road acceptance, and shall offer a warning to potential buyers that Planning Board
approval is not a guarantee of public acceptance of the street.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 52
9.5.10 The centerline of the roadway shall be the centerline of the right-of-way.
9.5.11 Dead-end Streets - In addition to the standards in Section 9.5.9, dead-end streets shall be
constructed so as to provide a cul-de-sac or hammer head turnaround with the following
requirements:
Property line .................................................................75’ radius
Outer edge of pavement...............................................60’ radius
Inner edge of pavement................................................40’ radius
Hammer head...............................................................60’ by 20’, designed in accordance
with the following sketch:
Where the cul-de-sac is in a wooded area prior to development, a stand of trees shall be
maintained within the center of the cul-de-sac.
9.5.12 Driveways.
A. Along any proposed new or reconstructed street or street segment, the
design of the street shall include the design for each driveway along that
segment. The design shall be limited in scope to the portion of the driveway
located within the street right-of-way, and shall ensure that each driveway is
designed to accommodate the project’s drainage design and traffic safety.
The portion of each driveway in the street right-of-way shall be constructed
at the same time the road and drainage improvements are constructed to
ensure compatibility of design and proper construction, and the cost of
driveway construction within the right-of-way shall be included in the
financial security for the project. These requirements shall be indicated on
the approved plan by means of a plan note.
B. For a lot proposed for a single-family or duplex dwelling unit, the Board may
permit the applicant to reserve alternative driveway locations for access to
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 53
the lot. In such cases, the applicant shall provide a design for each potential
driveway, but the requirement for construction during road construction shall
be deferred. An additional plan note shall be included on the approved plan
to indicate this arrangement. This note shall indicate that the financial
security relating to the driveway will be released to the lot owner upon
provision of an inspection report by a professional engineer that one of the
driveways has been constructed in accordance with the approved plans, and that all
work in the right-of-way is consistent with the approved plans.
9.5.13 The Comprehensive Plan includes a map which depicts the classification of existing
streets (see Policy 2.4.9). To help ensure that new streets are properly integrated into this
system, the following standards shall apply:
A. A new arterial street must connect to an existing arterial street.
B. A new collector street must connect to an existing arterial or collector street.
9.6 GRADES, INTERSECTIONS AND SIGHT DISTANCES
9.6.1 All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves in order to provide the following
minimum stopping sight distances based on the street design speed.
Design Speed (mph) 20 25 30 35
Stopping Sight Distance 125 150 200 250
Stopping sight distances shall be calculated with a height of eye at 3 ½ feet and the height
of object at ½ feet.
9.6.2 All new streets or accesses must meet the intersection sight distance requirements
outlined in Article 8.2.3 of these regulations.
9.6.3 Cross (four-cornered) street intersections shall be avoided whenever possible, except as
shown on the Comprehensive Plan or at other important traffic intersections. A distance
of at least two hundred (200) feet shall be maintained between center lines of offset
intersecting streets.
9.6.4 Sidewalks and Curbing
9.6.4.1 The Planning Board shall require sidewalks when the development is within 1
mile of any school. The Board may also require sidewalks in other locations
where appropriate.
9.6.4.2 The Planning Board shall require curbs when the development is located in a
section of Town where curbs are either existing, or are in the vicinity so that it
can be expected the curbs will form a continuum in the near future. Curbs shall
be designed with areas for handicap access.
9.6.4.3 Bituminous Sidewalks - The gravel aggregate sub-base course shall not be less
than 12 inches in thickness. The crushed aggregate base course shall be not
less than 2 inches in thickness. The not bituminous pavement surface course
shall be not less than 2 inches in thickness after compaction.
9.6.4.4 Portland Cement Concrete Sidewalks - The sand base shall be not less than 6
inches in thickness. The Portland Cement concrete shall be reinforced with 6-
inch square number 10 wire mesh and shall be no less than 4 inches in
thickness.
9.6.4.5 Granite or Portland Cement concrete curbing shall be installed on a thoroughly
compacted gravel base of six inches minimum thickness. Bituminous curbing
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 54
shall be installed on the base course of the pavement. The specified pavement
width shall be measured between the curbs. All curbs shall be vertical except
when sloped curbs are specifically allowed by the Planning Board.
9.7 STREET CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
9.7.1 Minimum thickness of materials after compaction:
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
STREET MATERIALS ARTERIAL COLLECTOR MINOR IND/COM
Aggregate sub-base course
(Maximum size stone = 4”) 18” 18” 18” 18”
Crushed aggregate base course 4” 3” 3” 4”
Hot bituminous pavement
(after compaction)
Total thickness 3 ¼” 2 ½” 2 ½” 3”
Surface course 1 ½” 1” 1” 1 ¼”
Base course 1 ¾” 1 ½” 1 ½” 1 ¾”
9.7.2 PREPARATION
9.7.2.1 Before any clearing has started on the right-of-way, the center line of the new
street shall be staked and sidestaked at 50-foot intervals. Limits of clearing shall
be marked by stakes or flagging distances from the center line shall be obtained
from the cross sections.
9.7.2.2 Before grading is started, the right-of-way area directly dedicated to the
construction of the roadway and shoulders shall be cleared of all stumps, roots,
brush, and other objectionable material. All ledge, large boulders, and tree
stumps shall be removed from this area.
9.7.2.3 No stumps, wood or organic material shall be covered in the road bed at any
depth and no ledge or large boulders shall be left within 18” of the finished road
surface. Where necessary to facilitate drainage, line of sight or snow removal, all
ledge, large boulders, trees and tree stumps shall be removed from the right of
way to a depth of not less than 12” below the road surface. Street grades shall
conform in general to the natural terrain. On soils which are not suitable for
roadways, the subsoil shall be removed from the street site to a depth of two feet
below the subgrade and replaced with material meeting the specifications for
gravel aggregate sub-base below.
9.7.2.4 Side slopes shall not be steeper than a slope of 3 feet horizontal to 1 foot
vertical, and shall be graded, fertilized, seeded and mulched according to the
erosion control standards in these regulations.
9.7.2.5 New or replacement culverts shall be reinforced, corrugated aluminum alloy,
polymer, or pre-coated galvanized corrugated steel pipe. Culverts and drainage
systems shall be sized to meet the criteria of a 100 year storm event. Culvert
diameter shall not be less than 15”, unless 12” is demonstrated to be more
appropriate to the site conditions. Decision to allow culvert diameter size
reduction shall be determined by the Planning Board.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 55
9.7.3 BASES AND PAVEMENT
9.7.3.1 Aggregate Sub-base Course - Gravel aggregate sub-base shall be sand or
gravel of hard durable particles free from vegetative matter, lumps, or balls of
clay and other deleterious substances. The matter shall not contain particles of
rock exceeding four (4) inches in any dimension and shall meet all Type “B”
aggregate requirements of Maine DOT.
Aggregate Base Course - Crushed aggregate base shall not contain particles of
rock that will not pass the two (2) inch square sieve and shall meet all Type “A”
aggregate requirements of Maine DOT.
9.7.3.2 Pavement - Minimum standards for the base layer of pavement shall be the
MDOT specifications for plant mix grade “C” with an aggregate size no more than
1-inch maximum. Minimum standards for the surface layer of pavement shall
meet the MDOT specifications for plant mix grade “D” with an aggregate size no
more than ¾ inch maximum. Where pavement placed joins an existing
pavement, the existing pavement shall be cut along a smooth line to a neat,
even, vertical joint.
9.8 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
9.8.1 Adequate provision shall be made for disposal of all stormwater generated within the
subdivision, and any drained ground water through a management system of swales,
culverts, underdrains, and storm drains. The stormwater management system shall be
designed to conduct storm water flows to existing watercourses or storm drains. No storm
water shall be permitted to drain across a street or intersection. All aspects of the
drainage plan must be signed and sealed by a Maine Certified Engineer.
9.8.2 All components of the stormwater management system shall be designed to limit the postdevelopment
peak discharge to pre-development levels for 2 year and 100 year , 24 hour
duration storms, frequencies, based on rainfall data for Portland, Maine. When the
subdivision discharges directly into a waterbody, peak discharge may be increased from
pre-development levels provided downstream drainage structures are suitably sized.
9.8.3 Where a subdivision is traversed by an existing stream, river, or surface water
drainageway, or where the Board feels that surface water run-off to be created by the
subdivision should be controlled, there shall be provided public drainage easements with
swales, culverts, catch basins or other means of channeling surface water within the
subdivision and over other properties. The Town shall be provided full right of access to
these easements.
9.8.4 Drainage easements for existing watercourses or proposed drainage ways shall be at
least twenty feet wide and shall conform substantially with the lines of existing natural
drainage. Wider easements will be required where necessary to insure that there can be
vehicular access, all flooding is controlled, and stormwater can be disposed of properly.
9.8.5 Appropriate conveyances for outlets to drainage systems must be provided. Where the
peak run-off from the subdivision onto other properties is increased either in volume,
duration, or direction, easements from the abutting property owners allowing such
discharges shall be obtained.
9.8.6 The minimum pipe size for any storm drainage pipe shall be 15 inches unless 12”
diameter pipe is demonstrated to be more appropriate to the site conditions. Decision to
allow pipe diameter size reduction shall be determined by the Planning Board. Maximum
trench width at the pipe crown shall be the outside diameter of the pipe plus two feet.
Pipe shall be bedded in a fine granular material, containing no stones larger than 3 inches,
lumps of clay, or organic matter, reaching a minimum of six inches below the bottom of the
pipe extending to six inches above the tope of the pipe.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 56
9.8.7 Catch basins shall be of an appropriate size and shall be located generally at the curb
line. Catch basins shall be placed away from the line of traffic flow, but shall be adequate
in design and strength to accommodate vehicular traffic.
9.8.8 The stormwater management system shall be designed to accommodate upstream
drainage, taking into account existing conditions and approved developments. Applicant
shall demonstrate in the Preliminary Application submission the upstream conditions and
any needed improvement. Upstream run-off shall be included in drainage calculations for
the lots under review. The Planning Board may require surplus design capacity, up to a
factor of 50%, if an assessment of site conditions and flooding history indicates a need for
greater capacity.
9.8.9 Existing or future downstream drainage requirements shall be studied to determine the
effect of the proposed subdivision. The storm drainage shall not overload (1) existing
storm drainage systems downstream from the subdivision nor (2) storm drainage systems
downstream from the subdivision which appear on an approved plan but which have not
yet been constructed. The subdivider shall be responsible for financing any improvements
to existing or previously approved drainage systems required to handle the increased
storm flows.
9.8.10 Outlets shall be stabilized against soil erosion by stone riprap or other suitable materials to
reduce storm water velocity. Wherever the storm drainage system is not within the rightof-
way of a public street, perpetual easements shall be provided to the Town allowing
maintenance and improvements of the system.
9.8.11 Where soils require a subsurface drainage system shall be installed to properly drain all
areas where the groundwater level is too high and would cause a hazard to the stability of
the roadway base. The subsurface drainage system shall be installed and maintained
separately from the stormwater drainage system.
9.8.12 All large parking areas (greater than 20 cars) shall be equipped with an oil/water
separation device. The design of such device(s) shall be appropriate for the site on which
it is to be located.
9.8.13. Low Impact Design. Each applicant is required to submit a statement to the Planning
Board documenting proposed Low Impact Design (LID) for the site, which will help to
reduce storm water volumes and help to enhance storm water quality. LID includes, but is
not limited to green roofs, rain gardens, tree wells, infiltration basins, and permeable
pavement. The applicant shall submit technical documentation about the suitability of
such designs with the request for LID features.
9.8.14 Stormwater management structures shall be maintained in perpetuity to function as
specified in the permit and accompanying deed covenants. In the event the property is
conveyed, the new owner shall be responsible for maintenance as specified by the permit
and the accompanying deed covenants. In addition the town shall have the right to
enforce the maintenance requirements or to maintain the drainage swales and structures
at the cost of the owner.
9.9 STORM DRAINAGE CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
9.9.1 Materials
9.9.1.1 Reinforced Concrete Pipe - Reinforced concrete pipe shall meet the
requirements of ASTM Designation C-76 (AASHTO M 170). Pipe classes shall
be required to meet the soil and traffic loads with a safety factor of 1.2 on the .01-
inch crack strength with a Class B bedding. Joints shall be of the rubber gasket
type meeting ASTM Designation C 443-70, or of an approved performed plastic
jointing material such as “Ramnek”. Perforated concrete pipe shall conform to
the requirements of AASHTO M 175 for the appropriate diameters.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 57
9.9.1.2 Corrugated Metal Pipe - Corrugated Metal Pipe shall be bituminous coated
meeting the requirements of AASHTO Designation M 190 Type “C” for iron or
steel pipe or AASHTO Designation M 196 for aluminum alloy pipe for sectional
dimensions and type of bituminous coating. Pipe gauge shall be as required to
meet the soil and traffic loads with a deflection of not more than 5%.
9.9.1.3 ABS Pipe - ABS (Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene) composite pipe and fittings
shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 264 and AASHTO M 265.
Perforated pipe shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 36, Type III.
9.9.1.4 Corrugated Plastic Pipe - Corrugated plastic pipe shall conform to the
requirements of AASHTO M 252.
9.9.1.5 Manholes - Manholes shall be of precast concrete truncated cone section
construction meeting the requirements of ASTM Designation C 139, radial type.
Bases may be cast in place 3,000 psi 28 day strength concrete or may be of
precast concrete placed on a compacted foundation of uniform density. Metal
frames and traps shall be set in a full mortar bed and with tops shall conform to
the requirements of AASHTO M 103 for carbon steel castings, AASHTO M 105,
Class 30 for gray iron castings or AASHTO M 183 (ASTM A 283, Grade “B” or
better) for structural steel.
9.9.1.6 Catch Basins - Catch basins shall be of precast concrete truncated cone section
construction meeting the requirements of ASTM Designation C 478 or precast
concrete manhole block construction meeting the requirements of ASTM
Designation C 139, radial type. Castings shall be square cast iron sized for the
particular inlet condition with the gratings perpendicular to the curb line. Bases
may be cast in place 3,000 psi 28 day strength concrete or may be of precast
concrete, placed on a compacted foundation of uniform density. Metal frames
and traps shall be set in a full mortar bed and with tops shall conform to the
requirements of AASHTO M 103 for carbon steel castings, AASHTO M 105,
Class 30 for gray iron castings or AASHTO M 183 (ASTM A 283, Grade B or
better) for structural steel.
9.9.2 Drain inlet alignment shall be straight in both horizontal and vertical alignment unless
specific approval of a curvilinear drain is obtained in writing from the Board, after
consultation with the Municipal Engineer.
9.9.3 Manholes shall be provided at all changes in vertical or horizontal alignment and at all
junctions. On straight runs, manholes shall be placed at a maximum of 400-foot intervals.
9.9.4 Upon completion each catch basin or manhole shall be cleaned of all accumulation of silt,
debris or foreign matter and shall be kept clean until final acceptance.
9.10 EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL STANDARDS
9.10.1 Procedures shall be undertaken during preparatory, construction and cleanup stages, to
prevent soil erosion and water pollution. The soil erosion and sedimentation plan must be
suitable and specific to the characteristics of the site and proposed development. Soil
erosion control and sedimentation plans must be submitted in sufficient detail so that all
erosion and sedimentation control measures may be properly constructed and maintained
in the field and shall meet or exceed the minimum requirements of this Section. (See
submission requirements at Section 6.4.15). All soil erosion and sedimentation control
plans must meet the Standards of the York County Soil Conservation Service and shall
make provisions for the following:
9.10.1.1 Only areas going into immediate construction shall be stripped and
graded.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 58
9.10.1.2 The installation, inspection, and maintenance schedule shall, at a
minimum, require installation prior to construction activities and
inspection and maintenance at the time of every storm, heavy rain, or
thaw.
9.10.1.3 All disturbed areas must be stabilized by temporary or permanent
measures within 15 days of exposure of the soil. All disturbed areas
within a roadway under construction shall also be stabilized in this time
frame in some suitable manner (i.e. paving, gravel base, etc.)
9.10.1.4 Permanent stabilization (loam, seeding, lime, fertilizer and mulch) must
be implemented within 60 days of exposure of the soil or by October 1,
whichever is earlier, except as provided below.
9.10.1.5 Permanent seeding must be implemented between April 15 and October
1 and shall be adequately watered if seeding is done during the months
of July and August. Plans must provide for an appropriate schedule of
temporary seeding and mulch (for example, winter rye) if seeding is not
complete by October 1.
9.10.1.6 In areas where work will be done between October 1 and April 15,
provisions shall be made for winter stabilization and such areas will be
reseeded by May 15 or within 30 days of exposure of the soil, whichever
is later.
9.10.1.7 Provision shall be made for appropriate stabilization of any area where
seeding does not “take” (at least 80% cover) within 30 days of planting,
and any area where seeding is not accomplished by October 1, such as
immediate reseeding or winter stabilization, whichever is appropriate.
9.10.1.8 Topsoil shall be considered part of the development. Except for surplus
topsoil from streets, parking areas, and building excavations, topsoil is
not to be removed from the site.
9.10.1.9 Except for normal thinning and landscaping, existing vegetation shall be
left intact to prevent soil erosion.
9.10.1.10 All work must comply with Standard Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Measures of Appendix A.
9.11 ADDITIONAL IMPROVEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS
9.11.1 Clean-Up - Following street construction, the developer or contractor shall conduct a
thorough clean-up of stumps and other debris from the entire street right-of-way. All
stumps must be disposed of consistent with Section 7.12 and/or any notations on the face
of the Plan.
9.11.2 Street Name, Street Signs and Street Lights - New streets shall be named in accordance
with York’s E911 Ordinance. Street name signs shall be furnished and installed by the
developer. The type, size and location of the signs shall be subject to approval by the
Public Works Department. Street lighting shall be installed as required by the Planning
Board.
9.11.3 Design and Construction Plans
9.11.3.1 Plans and illustrations submitted in accordance with Section 6.4.14 shall
be designed and prepared by a Professional Engineer registered in the
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 59
State of Maine. No construction will be permitted until the Planning
Board has approved the plans.
9.11.3.2 Utilities shall be installed prior to the street construction so as to avoid
re-excavation of the finished street.
9.11.3.3 Following construction, “as built” plans must be submitted to the
Department of Public Works.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 60
ARTICLE 10 ... PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE
10.1 TYPES OF PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES
With submittal of the application for final plan approval, the applicant shall provide one of the
following performance guarantees for an amount adequate to cover 125% of the total construction
costs of all required improvements, taking into account the time span of the construction schedule
and the inflation rate for construction costs:
10.1.1 Either a certified check payable to the Town of York or a savings account or certificate of
deposit naming the Town of York as owner, for the establishment of an escrow account.
10.1.2 A performance bond payable to the Town of York issued by a surety company, approved
by the Board of Selectmen or Town Manger.
10.1.3 An irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution approved by the Board of
Selectmen or Town Manger that establishes funding for the construction of the
subdivision, from which the Town of York may draw if construction is inadequate.
10.1.4 An offer of conditional approval limiting the number of units built or lots sold until all
required improvements have been constructed.
The conditions and amount of the performance guarantee shall be determined by the
Planning Board with the advice of the Town engineer, Code and Planning Department
staff, Town Manager, Attorney or similar Town representative.
10.2 CONTENTS OF GUARANTEE
The performance guarantee shall contain a construction schedule, cost estimates for each major
phase of construction taking into account inflation, provisions for inspections of each phase of
construction, provisions for the release of part or all of the performance guarantee to the developer,
and a date after which the applicant will be in default and the Town of York shall have access to the
funds to finish construction.
10.3 ESCROW ACCOUNT
A cash contribution to the establishment of an escrow account shall be made by either a certified
check made out to the Town of York, the direct deposit into a savings account, or the purchase of a
certificate of deposit. For any account opened by the applicant, the Town of York shall be named
as owner or co-owner, and the consent of the Town of York shall be required for a withdrawal. Any
interest earned on the escrow account shall be returned to the applicant unless the Town of York
has found it necessary to draw on the account, in which case the interest earned shall be
proportionately divided between the amount returned to the applicant and the amount withdrawn to
complete the required improvements.
10.4 PERFORMANCE BOND
A performance bond shall detail the conditions of the bond, the method for release of the bond or
portions of the bond to the applicant, and the procedures for collection by the Town of York. The
bond documents shall specifically reference the application for which approval is sought.
10.5 LETTER OF CREDIT
An irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other leading institution shall indicate that funds have
been set aside for the construction of the proposed development and may not be used for any
other project or loan.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 61
10.6 CONDITIONAL AGREEMENT
The Board, at its discretion, may provide for the applicant to enter into a binding
agreement with the Town of York in lieu of the other financial performance guarantees. Such an
agreement shall provide for approval of the final plan on the condition that no lots or units are sold
and no building permits may be obtained until either:
10.6.1 It is certified by the Board, or its agent, that all of the required improvements have been
installed in accordance with these regulations and the regulations of the appropriate
utilities; or
10.6.2 A performance guarantee, acceptable to the Town, is submitted in an amount necessary
to cover the completion of the required improvements at an amount adjusted for inflation
and prorated for the portions of the required improvements already installed.
Notice of the agreement and any conditions shall be on the final plan that is recorded at
the Registry of Deeds. Release from the agreement shall follow the procedures for
release of the performance guarantee contained in Section 10.8.
10.7 PHASING OF DEVELOPMENT
The Board may approve plans to develop a major subdivision in separate and distinct phases. This
may be accomplished by limiting final approval to those lots abutting that section of the proposed
subdivision road which is covered by a performance guarantee. When development is phased,
road construction shall commence from an existing public way. Final approval of lots in
subsequent phases shall be given only upon satisfactory completion of all requirements pertaining
to previous phases.
10.8 RELEASE OF PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE
When all required public improvements have been completed according to the standards herein,
the developer may request the Board of Selectmen release the performance guarantee. Prior to
the release of any part of the performance guarantee, the Board of Selectmen shall determine to its
satisfaction, in part upon the report of the Town Engineer and any other agencies and departments
who may be involved, that the proposed improvements meet or exceed the design and construction
requirements for the project or that portion or phase of the development for which the release is
requested. Upon favorable review by the Board of Selectmen they shall vote their approval of the
release of the performance guarantee, and issue such approval in writing to the developer.
10.9 DEFAULT
If upon inspection, the Town Engineer or other qualified individual retained by the Town finds that
any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the plans and
specifications filed as part of the application, he or she shall so report in writing to the Code
Enforcement officer, the Board of Selectmen, the Planning Board, and the applicant or builder. The
Board of Selectmen shall take any steps necessary to preserve the Town of York’s rights.
10.10 IMPROVEMENTS GUARANTEED
10.10.1 Except as provided below, performance guarantees shall be tendered for all
improvements required to meet the standards of these regulations and for the construction
of the streets, pedestrian amenities, stormwater management facilities, public sewage
collection or disposal facilities and public water systems, and erosion and sedimentation
control measures. In the event that the applicant is required by another government entity
to secure in advance the total cost of installation or completion, such improvements shall
be exempt from inclusion in the performance guarantee provided to the Town.
10.10.2 A performance guarantee shall be tendered for an amount sufficient to enable the Town to
stabilize the site at any point during construction if the developer is unable to complete the
project as planned. Stabilization of the site shall consist of any and all grading and
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 62
revegetation as may be necessary to return the site to a condition where erosion control
measures are no longer necessary and stormwater impacts on abutting properties are
eliminated. Site stabilization shall also include the capping or removal of any utility or any
partial structure which presents a public health or safety hazard.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 63
ARTICLE 11 ... INSPECTIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
11.1 PROFESSIONAL INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION OF PROJECT COMPLIANCE
The purpose of this section is to help ensure projects are built in full compliance with design plans
approved pursuant to these Regulations, and to identify non-compliance issues as a way to
enhance and simplify enforcement.
A. Inspection and Certification by the Design Professionals.
1. The Planning Board shall be authorized to require each State-licensed design
professional (limited to professional engineers, architects, and landscape
architects) responsible for design elements of an approved plan to provide a
written evaluation with regard to the finished project prior to the issuance of an
occupancy permit. This evaluation shall be based on periodic on-site
inspections by the professional(s) during the construction of the project, and
shall explicitly state whether or not the project is built in full compliance with
the approved design plans. Each design professional shall attest only to those
aspects of the plan for which they are responsible. The evaluation shall be
certified by stamp and signature of the professional.
2. The requirement to provide a written evaluation shall be imposed during the
application-approval process. If a temporary occupancy permit is requested,
the CEO shall require an interim written evaluation. The interim written
evaluation shall evaluate compliance of work performed to date, and shall list
remaining work necessary to complete the project in accordance with the
approved plans.
3. This provision shall be in addition to other inspection requirements authorized
by the Town codes. The cost of compliance with work required pursuant to
this Section shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
B. Town Inspection. In addition to the inspection and certification procedures for the
design professionals, the Board may require its own periodic inspections by a
Professional Engineer during project construction. The Professional Engineer
shall be responsible for observing all on-site and off-site construction work and site
improvements with the exception of buildings. The engineer shall have no
enforcement authority, but shall prepare periodic reports and provide same to the
Planning Board, and is hereby authorized to request that the Code Enforcement
Officer take enforcement actions as necessary to ensure compliance. This
inspection work shall be paid from the inspection fee paid pursuant to §2.3.2.
11.2 VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
11.2.1 No depicting a development which would constitute a subdivision as defined herein shall
be filed or recorded in the Registry of Deeds until a Final Plan has been approved and
signed by the Planning Board in accordance
11.2.2 No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity may convey, offer, or agree to convey
any land in an approved subdivision which has not been shown on the Final Plan as a
separate lot, approved by the Planning Board and recorded in the Registry of Deeds,
unless or until the Final Plan has been amended and that amendment approved by the
Planning Board.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 64
11.2.3 Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity who conveys, offers or agrees to convey
any land in a subdivision which has not been approved as required by these regulations
shall be punished by a fine of not less than $5,000 plus any legal expenses incurred by
the Town in enforcing these regulations for each such conveyance, offering or agreement.
The Attorney General, the municipality, or the appropriate municipal officers may institute
proceedings to enjoin the violation of these regulations.
11.2.4 No public utility, water district, sanitary district or any utility company of any kind shall
serve any Site Plan or lot in a subdivision for which a Final Plan has not been approved by
the Planning Board.
11.2.5 Development of a Site Plan or subdivision without Board approval shall be a violation of
law. Development includes clearing, grading or construction of streets, grading of land or
lots, or construction of buildings which require a final plan approved as provided in these
regulations. No development of a subdivision will be permitted until the Final Plan has
been recorded, and copies returned to the Town pursuant to Section 5.5.1.
11.2.6 Default - Any developer who 1) fails to perform any required improvements in accordance
with any timetable established at the time of final plan approval, 2) completes required
improvements in a manner which, although timely, is not acceptable to the Town, or 3)
maintains a situation that is a hazard to public health and safety shall be deemed in
default. In addition, a developer shall be deemed in default if any required improvement is
not completed in accordance with the plan and all applicable regulations before the
expiration date of any performance guarantee tendered by the developer to the Town with
respect to required improvements. The Town will not be required to initiate action to
exercise its rights under any financial performance guarantee in order to declare a
developer in default. For the purposes of interpreting this paragraph, “hazards to public
health and safety” shall include, but not be limited to, inadequate drainage, stormwater
management, or erosion and sedimentation control measure.
11.2.7 No plan shall be reviewed or approved by the Board as long as the developer is in default
or in violation of any of the provisions on a previously approved plan, as determined
through the process outlined in Section 11.2.6 and 11.2.9.
11.2.8 Before any building permits may be issued, all public improvements must be constructed
to the standards outlined in these regulations and the Final Plan approval, including the
installation of the monumentation as described in Section 7.18. Such determination will
be made through the provisions of Article 11.
11.2.9 It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provision of these
regulations, and to insure that projects are constructed in strict compliance with the Final
Plan and these regulations. The Code Enforcement Officer is responsible for bringing to
the attention of the Planning Board and Board of Selectmen any violations or lack of
compliance. If at any time during the construction of the development, construction is not
proceeding in accordance with the plan and these regulations, or a hazard to public health
and safety exists, the CEO shall notify the developer in writing of the deficiency and state
the corrective actions necessary and the time period within which corrective action must
be taken. The CEO may specify that no other construction activities shall continue until
the condition is corrected. If this is specified, the developer will be considered to be in
default until the CEO gives notice that the condition is satisfactorily corrected. For
purposes of interpretation of this paragraph, hazards to public health and safety shall
include but not be limited to lack of adequate drainage, stormwater and erosion and
sedimentation control measures.
11.2.10 Any violation of the provisions in these regulations shall be deemed a civil violation,
punishable by law with each day such violation continues constituting a separate offense.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 65
ARTICLE 12 ... WAIVERS
12.1 Where the Board makes written Findings of Fact that there are special circumstances of a
particular development, it may waive portions of these regulations, unless otherwise indicated in
the regulations, to permit a more practical and economical development, provided the public health,
safety, and welfare are protected, and provided the waivers do not have the effect of nullifying the
intent and purposes of the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning Ordinance, or these regulations, and
provided the criteria of the State Subdivision Law are met. Findings of Fact prepared under this
Section must be consistent with the requirements for Findings of Fact found in 30-A MRSA,
Sections 4401 through 4407.
12.2 In granting waivers to any of these regulations in accordance with Section 12.1, the Board shall
require such conditions as will assure the objectives of these regulations are met.
12.3 Whenever the initial approval or any subsequent amendment of a subdivision is based in part on
the granting of a waiver from any applicable subdivision regulation, that fact shall be expressly
noted on the face of the Final Plan to be recorded in the Registry of Deeds. In the case of an
amendment, if no amended plan is to be recorded, a certificate shall be prepared in recordable
form and recorded in the Registry of Deeds. This certificate shall:
a. Indicate the name of the current property owner;
b. Identify the property by reference to the last recorded deed in its chain of title; and
c. Indicate the fact that a waiver, including any conditions on the waiver, has been granted
and the date of that granting.
The waiver will not be valid until recorded as provided in this paragraph. Recording must occur
within 30 days of the final subdivision approval or approval of an amendment or the waiver will be
void.
12.4 All of the provisions of these regulations apply unless specifically waived by the Planning Board
and listed on the plan through the process outlined in Sections 12.1, 12.2, 12.3 and 12.4.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 66
ARTICLE 13 ... APPEALS
13.1 An aggrieved party may appeal the approval or denial of a plan by the Planning Board under these
regulations to the Board of Appeals, within thirty days of the vote of the decision, pursuant to
Charter §7.C.3. The Board of Appeals’ decision may be appealed to the York County Superior
Court following the procedure contained in the Zoning Ordinance.
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 67
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 68
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 69
Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations - Adopted 10/16/90
Revised January 12, 2012
Page 70

SKATE BOARD ORDINANCE
SKATE BOARDS ON PUBLIC HIGHWAYS AND SO FORTH
No person shall operate, attempt to operate or cause of suffer to be operating on or attempted
to be operated by a person for whose conduct he is legally liable, a skate board, as here and
after defined upon any public highway, upon any lawful sidewalk.
Definitions: For the purpose of this article, skate board shall mean any wheeled vehicle intended
and designed to be propelled by foot with one foot on the vehicle at the moment of initial
propulsion.
Penalty: Any person who violates this ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty of $50.00 for
the first offense, $75.00 for the second offense, and $100.00 for the third and subsequent offenses,
and may suffer in the sound discretion of the court, forfeiture of his interest in the skate board in
question to the Town of York for disposition in such a manner as the court may direct.
Waiver/Payment of Fines: Any person charged with a violation of this section, shall be allowed to
waive such violation and tender to the Town of York the fine amount if paid within 20 days of
issuance of the summons. If the waiver fine is paid, no appearance before a District Court Judge or
other judicial officer shall be required. If the offender pays the waiver fine, the matter will be closed
in the York Police Records system and listed as a subsequent offense for future violations.
If the offender chooses not to pay the waiver fine, he/she shall appear in court on the specified date
to answer for the ordinance violation. If the offender is found to have committed the offense in
court, fines, applicable court fees, attorney’s fees, and prosecution costs may apply.

Sohier Park Ordinance (Revised: May 18, 2019)
2
SOHIER PARK ORDINANCE
Section 1. Park Boundaries
The Park shall include the property acquired from William D. Sohier in 1929 (the mainland), and the
property acquired from the federal government in 1998 (the island and the lighthouse).
Section 2. Trespassing
Trespassing on the island and at the lighthouse shall be prohibited except by permission of the Town.
Section 3. Scuba and Skin Diving
A. No person within the limits of the park property, shall engage in, participate in, conduct or carry on
any so-called scuba or skin diving or snorkeling activities on Sundays and State of Maine and
National Holidays from the first Sunday in April to the last Sunday in October inclusive.
B. The number of divers may be established by the Board of Selectmen.
C. No persons, within the limits of the park property shall fill or recharge, by any means whatsoever,
any so-called air tanks, scuba or skin diving apparatus for containing or storing of air, oxygen, or
other gases, under pressure for breathing apparatuses or propulsion apparatuses at any time.
Section 4. Dogs
No dogs are allowed in the park except confined to motor vehicles or on a leash.
Section 5. Parking
A. No parking from 1:00 A.M. to 5:00 A.M., current time.
B. Parking shall only be in designated areas.
Section 6. Alcoholic Beverages
No person shall at any time, within the limits of Sohier Park, be in possession of any open container of
any alcoholic beverage. Any bottle or can or alcoholic beverage with the seal broken shall be considered
an open container for the purpose of this ordinance.
Sohier Park Ordinance (Revised: May 18, 2019)
3
Section 7. Rubbish
No rubbish shall be deposited in the park except in containers provided.
Section 8. Liability
A. The Town of York and/or Sohier Park Committee assume no liability for any personal accident
within the boundaries of the park.
B. Sohier Park is established and controlled by the York Board of Selectmen and any committee the
Board may appoint.
Section 9. Penalty
Any person who violates this ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty of $50.00 for the first offense,
$75.00 for the second offense, and $100.00 for the third and subsequent offenses.
Section 10. Waiver/Payment of Fines
Any person charged with a violation of this section, shall be allowed to waive such violation and tender to
the Town of York the fine amount if paid within 20 days of issuance of the summons. If the waiver fine
is paid, no appearance before a District Court Judge or other judicial officer shall be required. If the
offender pays the waiver fine, the matter will be closed in the York Police Records system and listed as a
subsequent offense for future violations.
If the offender chooses not to pay the waiver fine, he/she shall appear in court on the specified date to
answer for the ordinance violation. If the offender is found to have committed the offense in court, fines,
applicable court fees, attorney’s fees, and prosecution costs may apply.
Section 11. Severability
The invalidity of any section or provision of this ordinance shall not invalidate any other section or
provision thereof.

THE TOWNOFYORK ORDINANCE
REGULATINGSOLIDWASTE
COLLECTION, RECYCLING & DISPOSAL
Adopted May 17,2003
SECTION 1: PURPOSE.
1.1 REGULATE WASTE DISPOSITION. To allow the Town to regulate the disposal of
solid waste to ensure that wastes are properly and cost effectively separated, collected,
transported and disposed, to adhere to respective State and Federal environmental
regulations and statutes, and to effectively manage the Town's transfer station and compost
facility.
1.2 REQUIRE AND ENCOURAGE RECYCLING. To allow the Town to mandate and
encourage the recycling of solid waste materials, to ensure that State goals regarding
recycling are met, lessen degradation to the environment by reducing the volume of waste
placed in landfills or burned at waste-to-energy plants and to manage solid waste disposal
costs.
1.3MANAGE THE COST OFWASTE DISPOSAL. To allow the Town to exercise local
management of asmany solidwaste disposal costs as possible.
SECTION 2: AUTHORITY.
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority granted under Article Vill-A of the
Maine Constitution, 30A MRSA § 3001 and 38 MRSA § 1304B and § 1305.
· SECTION 3: APPLICABILITY.
This Ordinance shall apply to any person, firm, company or other legal entity generating,
collecting, transporting, recycling or disposing solid waste materials within or from the
Town of York, Maine.
SECTION 4: DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this Ordinance and for rules and regulations adopted by the Board of
Selectmen to implement this Ordinance, the following terms shall have the following
meanings. Terms not defined shall have the customary dictionarymeaning.
4.1 APPROVED RECYCLING CONTAINERS - Containers or bins approved by the
Town, which shall be used for the purpose of separating recyclable materials and allowing
the collection of these materials.
4.2 APPROVED REFUSE CONTAINERS - Tied plastic bags which may be placed in a
covered metal or plastic container manufactured for the purpose of storing solid waste; or
other containers approved by the Town, which shall be used for the purpose of separating
1
refuse and allowing the collection of these materials. Containers shall not have a capacity
of more than 30 gallons nor weigh, when filled, more than 60 pounds.
4.3 BOARD OF SELECTMEN - The Board of Selectmen of the Town of York, Maine.
4.4 COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT -Any and all commercial businesses, industrial
facilities and structures containing five or more dwelling units that are not defined as
"Residences" in this Ordinance.
4.5 COMMERCIAL HAULER - Any person, firm, company or other legal entity that
collects and/or transports commercial or industrial solid waste of any kind as a business or
for compensation, operatingwithin the Town ofYork,Maine.
4.6 DISPOSALFACILITY-Afacility approvedbytheBoardofSelectmen forusebythe
Town for the purpose of disposing SolidWaste, Refuse and/orRecyclableMaterials.
4.7 FERROUS METALS -Any iron containing material categorized as #1 and #2 steel,
cast iron and/orwhite goods containing light iron.
4.8 HAZARDOUS WASTE - Waste with inherent properties which make such waste
dangerous to manage by ordinary means, including, but not limited to, chemicals,
explosives, pathological wastes, radioactive wastes, toxic wastes and other wastes defined
as hazardous at any time by the State of Maine or the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act of 1976, as amended, or other Federal, State or local laws, regulations, orders, or other
actions promulgated or taken with respect thereto.
4.9 LIQUIDWASTE -All unwanted or discarded material with sufficient liquid content to
be free flowing, including by way of example and not by limitation, waste motor oil,
antifreeze, paints, motor fuels, solvents, rinsewater and septic tank sludge.
4.10 MANDATORY RECYCLABLE MATERIALS -All solid waste materials that the
Board of Selectmen have determined by regulations adopted pursuant to this Ordinance
that residences shall separate for the purposes of recycling.
4.11 MANDATORY RECYCLING - The requirement that person(s) must separate
recyclables fromtheir trash.
4.12 NON-FERROUS METALS - Any metal devoid of iron content, such as copper,
brass, aluminum or lead.
4.13 PERSON -Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, municipality,
quasi-municipal corporation, school, State agency or any other legal entity.
4.14 RECYCLABLES -Manufactured and/or non-manufactured materials, substances and
/or residues that may be re-used or reprocessed into a similar or different use.
4.15 RECYCLING-The separating, collecting and/or reprocessing of recyclables.
4.16 RESIDENCES -Any home, apartment or condominium. The term, "residence," shall
not include motels, hotels, rooming houses, tourist cottages and similar establishments;
structures containing five or more dwelling units; and any commercial or industrial
establishment.
4.17 SOLID WASTES -any acceptable discarded or unwanted solid organic or inorganic
material with insufficient liquid content (except waste oil) to be free flowing.
4.18 TOWN-TheTownofYork,YorkCounty,Maine.
4.19 TOWN HAULER - The hauler(s) contracted or designated by the Town of York to
collect and transport solidwaste and/or recyclablematerials fromresidences.
4.20 UNACCEPTABLE WASTE -Includes the followingmaterials:
2
a. Hazardous waste
b. Bulk demolition or construction debris from building and roadway project or
locations
c. Liquid wastes
d. Abandoned or junk vehicles
e. Dead animals or portions thereof, or other pathological wastes
f. Water treatment residues
g. Tree stumps
h. Automobile batteries
4.21 VOLUNTARY RECYCLABLE MATERIALS -All solid waste materials that the
Board of Selectmen determine, by regulations established pursuant to this "Ordinance,"
that the Town will encourage, but not require, residences to separate for the purpose of
recycling.
4.22 VOLUNTARY RECYCLING-The standard that requests and encourages residences
and commercial establishments tovoluntarilyseparaterecyclables fromtheir trash.
4.23 WHITE GOODS AND SCRAP METAL -All large appliances, including by example
and not be limitation, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, washing machines, clothes dryers,
dishwashers and air conditioners and all scrap metal, including by example and not by ·
limitation, wire, metal fencing, sheet metals, clean metal barrels and bar stock.
SECTION 5: COLLECTION, TRANSPORTATION, RECYCLING AND
DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTES FROM RESIDENCES.
5.1 BOARD OF SELECTMEN AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH RULES AND
REGULATIONS - The Board of Selectmen is hereby granted the authority, after a duly
noticed public hearing, to establish rules and regulations to govern the collection,
transportation, separation, recycling and disposal of solid wastes generated by or located on
the premises of residences. Rules and regulations may be enacted to implement any aspect
of solid waste requirements for residences. The rules and regulations shall be reviewed and
revised as required to satisfy the needs of the Town, changes in State and Federal laws and
regulations and costs the Town may incur to provide solid waste management services to
residences. The Board of Selectmen shall establish an effective date for rules and regulations,
which are adopted. The rules and regulations shall be on file in the Town Hall.
The Selectmen are specifically authorized to adopt rules and regulations to require
residences to perform mandatory recycling and to request and encourage participation in
Voluntary Recycling. The rules and regulations adopted to implement Mandatory Recycling
and/or Voluntary Recycling requirements shall, at a minimum, identify the solid waste
materials that shall be subject to these requirements, the containers used to separate
recyclables for collection, the frequency and method of collection, and the Town official
responsible for implementing these rules and regulations.
The Board of Selectmen is specifically authorized to adopt rules and regulations to require
refuse collected from residences to be delivered to a Town designated disposal facility.
3
5.2 PROVISION OF TOWN HAULER (S) -The Board of Selectmen shall ensure that all
residences of the Town shall be provided with curbside collection service for refuse, not
subject to mandatory recycling requirements, that is delivered to a disposal facility, by the
Town Hauler(s). The originally scheduled routes, and anymajor amendments thereto, shall
be published in a local newspaper widely circulated within the Town. The Board of
Selectmen shall be authorized to enter into any contract necessary and to prescribe rules
and regulations necessary to provide this service.
The Board of Selectmen shall be authorized to establish the method and frequency of
collection of all mandatory recyclables and voluntary recyclables for residences and to
enter into any contract necessary to provide a Town Hauler(s) involved with providing this
service. If a Town Hauler(s) is contracted to provide the collection of mandatory
recyclables and/or voluntary recyclables, the originally scheduled routes, and any major
amendments thereto, shall be publrshed in a local newspaper widely circulated within the
Town. The Board of Selectmen shall be authorized to enter into any contract necessary to
provide this service.
The Town shall be responsible for providing the service to residences located on streets or
roads not maintained by the Town or the State of Maine, only in the event that the
conditions of such streets or roads reasonably allow such collection. The Town shall use
the following criteria to determine if road conditions are acceptable for the purpose of
providing collection services: the road conforms to the road standards identified in Town
ordinances and Planning Board Subdivision Regulations; and/or the road is a minimum of
fourteen feet in width, is regularly maintained to easily allow year-round access and is less
than one-quarter mile in length. The Public Works Director shall be designated as the
Town official responsible for determining if a private road satisfies Town collection
standards.
Only refuse, mandatory recyclables and voluntary recyclables shall be collected, subject to
the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this ordinance .
. SECTION 6: COLLECTION, TRANSPORTATION, RECYCLING AND DISPOSAL
OF SOLID WASTE FROM COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS.
6.1 REQUIREMENT TO DISPOSE OF SOLID WASTE - All Commercial
Establishments are required to ensure all solid wastes, generated by or located on the
premises of their establishments, are properly collected, transported, separated, recycled
and/or disposed in accordance with the provisions of the ordinance and the laws of the
State of Maine. Effective July 1,2003 the Town shall not pay for the cost of disposing of
commercial waste.
SECTION 7: YORK TRANSFER STATION AND COMPOSTING FACILITY.
4
7.1 BOARD OF SELECTMEN AUTHORITY -The Board of Selectmen is hereby granted
authority, after a duly noticed public hearing, to establish detailed operating rules and
regulations for the York Transfer Station and Composting Facility. The rules and
regulations shall be entitled, "Rules and Regulations to Operate the York Transfer Station
and Composting Facility". The rules and regulations shall be reviewed and revised as
required to satisfy the needs of the Town, changes in State and Federal laws and regulations
and the economics of operating the Transfer Station and Composting Facility. The Board
of Selectmen shall establish the effective date for all rules and regulations enacted. The
rules and regulations shall be prominently displayed at the site and on file in the Town Hall.
The rules and regulations shall identify the following operating concerns and may address
other operating concerns identified bythe Selectmen:
a. The Town official responsible for supervising operation of the York Transfer
StationandCompostingFacility;
b. The hours of operation of the York Transfer Station and Composting Facility;
and,
c. Fees for use of the York Transfer Station and Composting Facility and method of
paying such fees.
7.2 YORK TRANSFER STATION AND COMPOSTING FACILITY USER
IDENTIFICATION REQUIREMENT - All vehicles using the York Transfer Station and
Composting Facility shall have attached in a conspicuous place a permit sticker, which
shall be available at the Town Clerk's office, Town Hall, York, Maine. The Board of
Selectmen, after a duly noticed and called public hearing, is authorized to establish the cost
of the permit sticker.
7.3 ACCEPTABLE WASTES - Only solid waste generated in the Town of York will be
accepted at the Transfer Station and Composting Facility. The following solid waste
materials will not be accepted:
a. Mandatory and Voluntary Recyclable materials from residences and commercial
establishments as defined by rules and regulations adopted pursuant to the
Ordinance.
b. Grubbing, stumps and tree butts
c. Septic sludge, pesticides and chemicals
d. Hazardous wastes
e. Excessive quantities of brush unless prior approval is obtained from the Town
official responsible for supervising the Transfer Station and Composting Facility
operations.
f. Dead animals of portions thereof or other pathological wastes.
g. Other wastes identified by the Board of Selectmen.
7.4 REMOVAL OF ITEMS - No picking of solid waste or other materials within the
Transfer Station and Composting Facility is permitted and no person shall removematerials
from the facility unless prior approval is obtained from the Town official responsible for
supervising the facility operations.
5
7.5 LOITERING PROHIBITED -Loitering in or on the Transfer Station and Composting
Facility property shall not be allowed. Use of or presence within the property without
permission of the Town official responsible for supervising the facility operations, other
than during posted hours of operation, shall be considered trespassing.
SECTION 8: PENALTIES
Any person, firm or corporation who violate any provision of the Ordinance shall be
subject to a fine of $100.00 for each violation. Each day such a violation is continued is
a separate offense.
SECTION 9: WAIVER/PAYMENT OF FINES
Any person charged with a violation of this section, shall be allowed to waive such violation
and tender to the Town of York the fine amount if paid within 20 days of issuance of the
summons. If the waiver fine is paid, no appearance before a District Court Judge or other
judicial officer shall be required. If the offender pays the waiver fine, the matter will be
closed in the York Police Records system and listed as a subsequent offense for future
violations.
If the offender chooses not to pay the waiver fine, he/she shall appear in court on the
specified date to answer for the ordinance violation. If the offender is found to have
committed the offense in court, fines, applicable court fees, attorney’s fees, and prosecution
costs may apply.
SECTION10: IMPLEMENTATION
The Board of Selectmen shall be authorized to enter into any contract necessary to
implement this Ordinance.
SECTION 11: EFFECTIVE DATE
TheOrdinance shall become effective upon its adoption by Town vote.
6

Town of York, Maine
SECTION 1: PURPOSE
The purpose of this Ordinance is to authorize the Board of Selectmen to
enact regulations that restrict special events on public property, and to
establish fees associated with such events.
SECTION 2: DEFINITIONS
Applicant – The person or organization that proposes, applies for and is
responsible for a special event.
Special Event – A temporary use or activity that occurs on any Town street,
Town park or other Town-owned property that is outside the normal use of
such, or that has impacts beyond the impacts associated with normal use. This
includes but is not limited to parades, group walks, road races, fundraising
walks, bicycle tours, motorcycle tours, block parties, swimming events,
surfing events, festivals, fireworks, and bonfires.
SECTION 3: AUTHORIZATION TO ENACT REGULATIONS
The Board of Selectmen is hereby authorized to enact regulations to limit
and control special events. Before enacting new regulations or amending
existing regulations, the Board of Selectmen shall post the proposed
language a minimum of 7 days in advance of the date of the public hearing
and shall conduct a public hearing for the purpose of receiving testimony
about the proposed action.
SECTION 4: FEES AND EXPENSES
4.1 Application Fee. Except as provided herein, the Applicant shall pay
a non-refundable fee of $25 at the time of application. When the
applicant is the Town of York, the York School Department, or a
non-profit organization with an address in York, the application fee
shall not be required.
4.2 Reimbursement for Expenses. The regulation enacted by the Board
of Selectmen may require reimbursement of expenses incurred by the
Town and/or other public service organizations in supporting an event.
This may include, but is not limited to, police, fire, and ambulance
support.
SECTION 5: EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall take effect upon the date of enactment by the voters.
Special Events Ordinance (as enacted on November 4, 2014)
Page 1 of 1

Town of York, Maine
Street Opening and Culvert Ordinance – Amended November 8, 2016
Page 1 of 10
STREET OPENING AND CULVERT ORDINANCE
SECTION 1: PURPOSE
The purpose of this Ordinance is to protect the safety of the traveling public, and to protect public
infrastructure from undue adverse impacts by ensuring all work in Town streets and rights-of-way
are properly constructed.
SECTION 2: APPLICABILITY
The provisions of this Ordinance apply to any excavation, construction, filling or culvert
installation work which occurs in a public street, sidewalk, right-of-way or drainage way, except
as follows:
A. Town Projects. Work undertaken by the Town, or by others working under the
direction of the Town, shall not be required to obtain a permit, but shall be required to
meet or exceed the general provisions and the construction specifications contained in
this Ordinance.
B. Work in Advance of Road Repaving or Reconstruction. Before a Town road is repaved
or reconstructed, it is desired that any utility repairs, improvements, extensions
or upgrades be completed in advance to minimize the future need to cut into the road
afterwards. The Town shall provide a minimum of 60 days advanced notice to all
utilities which are known to have underground infrastructure within the right-of-way.
Upon receipt of such notice, the utility shall be authorized to prepare its infrastructure
without being required to obtain a permit. All such work shall be required to meet or
exceed the construction specifications contained in this Ordinance, but paving by the
utility shall not be required.
C. Work on Utility Service Lines. Except along State roads within the Urban Compact
where State rules must be followed, utility providers may work on underground service
lines between their mains and buildings served without being required to obtain a
permit provided no such work disturbs the surface or sub-surface of a public road or
sidewalk, or impacts any Town drainage infrastructure. All work shall be required to
meet or exceed any applicable specifications contained in this Ordinance. At least 3
days prior to commencement of such work, the utility provider shall provide to the
Superintendent a completed application form as advance notification of the proposed
project. Approval of the permit shall not be required except when the Superintendent
determines there is an unusual situation that requires a permit.
Town of York, Maine
Street Opening and Culvert Ordinance – Amended November 8, 2016
Page 2 of 10
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
PUBLIC – In the context of a public street, sidewalk, right-of-way or drainage way, public
means that the facility or property which the Town of York either owns or holds an
easement for use and/or maintenance.
SUPERINTENDENT – The Superintendent of Public Works.
SECTION 4: ADMINISTRATION
The Superintendent shall administer this Ordinance.
SECTION 5: STREET OPENINGS
5.1. General Provisions.
A. Permit Required. A Street Opening Permit shall be obtained from the Superintendent
prior to creating any opening in any public street, sidewalk or right-of-way.
B. Winter Permits. No Street Opening Permit will be issued for work between December
1st in any one year andMarch 15th of the following year. The Superintendent may make
exceptions to accommodate emergencies, and to accommodate projects which are
scheduled to avoid summertime construction and traffic disruption.
C. Utility Emergencies. In the case of an emergency situation involving a utility, the
utility may excavate without a Street Opening Permit. However, the utility shall be
responsible for obtaining a Street Opening Permit as soon as possible after the
emergency and, in any case, before the excavation is permanently resurfaced.
D. Dig Safe. Compliance with 23 MRSA §3360-A shall be required.
E. Reserved.
F. Financial Security. The Superintendent shall require the applicant to post in advance
a bond, secured letter of credit, or cash for a project which will cost $50,000 or more,
or when blasting is proposed. The Town and quasi-municipal water or sewer districts
shall be exempt from this requirement. The amount of the security shall be equal to
125% of the cost of all work which would be necessary for the Town to completely
repair the infrastructure in the event the applicant fails to fulfill their responsibilities at
any point in the project. The purpose of the financial security shall be to guarantee
proper completion of all work and protection of the Town infrastructure. When posted,
the value of the security may be reduced once during the course of the project, but never
such that it is less than 125% of the cost of remaining work. The balance shall be
retained until the final inspection of all work pursuant to §5.2.B.4. The Board of
Town of York, Maine
Street Opening and Culvert Ordinance – Amended November 8, 2016
Page 3 of 10
Selectmen shall be solely responsible for reductions and releases of all financial
securities.
G. Traffic Control. All work zone traffic control applications and traffic control devices
shall conform to the latest edition adopted by the State of Maine of the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), Part 6, when used on any street or
highway open to public travel. Only traffic control devices including signs, barricades,
vertical panels, drums, warning lights, arrow boards, changeable message signs, cones
and tubular markers that meet the requirements of American Traffic Safety Services
Association (ATSSA), “Quality Standard for Work Zone Traffic Control Devices-
2006” shall be used.
H. State Laws. Actions pursuant to this Ordinance shall be consistent with provisions of
State law. In particular, the following sections of Title 23 are applicable: §3351-9, and
§3351.
5.2. Standards.
A. Responsibilities of the Applicant.
1. The applicant shall be responsible for preparing and submitting to the
Superintendent an application for the proposed street opening. This application
shall:
a. Be on a form provided by the Public Works Department;
b. State the purpose of the street opening;
c. Show the physical extent of excavation;
d. Include a $100 application fee. This fee shall not apply to public water or
public sewer providers.
e. Provide a plan and materials specifications for filling and resurfacing the
street opening to demonstrate compliance with the construction specifications
of this Ordinance;
f. Specify the timeframe for work;
g. Detail the plan for traffic control and protection of public safety during the
project;
h. Obtaining any other required permits;
i. Provide the financial security, if required (see §5.1.F); and
j. Provide other information relevant to the application.
2. The applicant shall be responsible for all completing all work in accordance with
the Street Opening Permit obtained pursuant to this Ordinance. All costs are the
responsibility of the applicant.
3. The applicant shall be responsible for maintaining the temporary surface and
keeping it safe for travel until permanent resurfacing is completed. If it is not
Town of York, Maine
Street Opening and Culvert Ordinance – Amended November 8, 2016
Page 4 of 10
possible to maintain the temporary surface in a condition safe for all modes of
travel, the applicant shall establish and maintain barriers and warning devices.
4. The applicant shall notify the Superintendent at least 2 business days prior to the
installation of the permanent pavement. The Superintendent may allow less
advance notice on a case by case basis, particularly following emergency utility
repairs.
5. The applicant shall be fully responsible to correct any deficiencies identified by
Town inspection. All costs are the responsibility of the applicant.
6. The applicant shall guarantee the quality of their work and materials for two years
following completion of the original repair work, or until the Superintendent
issues a written acceptance of the repairs, whichever occurs earlier. At any time
during this guarantee period, the applicant shall re-excavate, re-fill and/or resurface
the area as directed by the Superintendent to remedy the defects. The
applicant shall be given a reasonable amount of time to perform this work, and if
they fail then it shall be performed by the Department of Public Works. The
applicant shall be responsible for the full cost of such repair work, plus a
surcharge if completed by the Department of Public Works.
B. Responsibilities of the Superintendent.
1. The Superintendent, or his or her designee, shall be responsible for reviewing and
deciding on each Street Opening Permit application received within 10 business
days of receipt. The Superintendent shall have authority to apply engineering
expertise and judgment in determining the most appropriate standards and
conditions in order to protect the integrity of the public street. Each decision
regarding a Street Opening Permit application shall be made in writing, and shall
detail the requirements to be met by the applicant. Only written requirements
specified as part of the Permit shall be binding on the applicant.
2. The Superintendent, or his or her designee, shall be responsible for obtaining
independent expert technical assistance when he or she believes it is necessary to
protect the public interest, and for obtaining reimbursement from the applicant for
the Town’s costs in obtaining such independent expert assistance prior to issuance
of a Street Opening Permit.
3. The Superintendent, or his or her designee, shall be responsible for inspecting and
approving all work completed pursuant to a Street Opening Permit.
4. If permanent resurfacing is not completed by the applicant within 6 months of
backfilling the excavation, the Superintendent may initiate the permanent repairs
and assess the applicant for 125% of the cost of such work. Before such deadline,
however, the applicant may request a time extension for good cause.
Town of York, Maine
Street Opening and Culvert Ordinance – Amended November 8, 2016
Page 5 of 10
5. The Superintendent is responsible for ensuring the long-term acceptability of
repairs. The Superintendent may inspect the repairs at any time, and shall inspect
the repairs between one and 2 years of completion of the original repairs. The
Superintendent shall take action in accordance with the following:
a. If at any inspection the Superintendent deems the repairs inadequate, she/he
shall specify work required to fix the deficiencies and shall specify a
reasonable amount of time for the applicant to fix the deficiencies. Lacking a
sufficient response by the applicant, the Superintendent shall be authorized to
undertake the work and to bill the applicant for 125% of the full cost of such
work.
b. Between one and 2 years, the Superintendent shall inspect the repairs and
make a final determination about adequacy. If the repairs are not acceptable,
the Superintendent shall follow subsection “a” above. If the repairs are
acceptable, the Superintendent shall issue a written acceptance of the repairs.
Failure to issue this acceptance within 2 years shall constitute acceptance by
default. Acceptance by either means shall terminate the applicant’s
responsibilities for guaranteeing the repair work.
C. Construction Specifications.
The Superintendent shall ensure that construction pursuant to this Ordinance complies
with the following 3 standards plus the trench detail. Exceptions to these standards
may be allowed by the Superintendent for good cause, consistent with the need to
exercise good engineering practice and judgment.
1. Excavation. The following standards shall apply:
a. Existing pavement in Trench area to be excavated shall be neatly cut with
pavement saw before pavement is excavated.
b. Disturbed non paved shoulder areas shall be restored with ¾ inch crushed
gravel compacted to a depth of 8-inches and two feet wide with a vibratory
compactor.
c. Materials excavated from trench will be used whenever possible to back fill
trench up to 18 inches below the pavement or six inches below surface in
vegetated areas.
d. Disturbed grass areas will be restored with loam placed 6 inches deep and
compacted with 100 pound roller and seeded.
e. Disturbed roadway areas will be restored with a crushed gravel base placed 18
inches deep and compacted in two lifts with a vibratory compactor.
2. Paving. The following standards shall apply:
a. Excavated trench pavement may be patched temporarily with 4-inches of cold
patch until a permanent surface is in place.
b. Prior to paving the pavement around the excavated trench shall be cut back an
additional 12 inches on all sides. The edges of the trench shall be tack coated
prior to paving.
Town of York, Maine
Street Opening and Culvert Ordinance – Amended November 8, 2016
Page 6 of 10
c. Roadway pavement joints will not be stacked. Existing pavement surface will
be milled to a depth of 1¼ inches roughly 6 inches from the base joint and
paved with hot mix “surface” asphalt. Tack coat shall be used on all exposed
pavement edges.
d. The excavated pavement surface will be paved with a minimum of 4-inch hot
mix asphalt placed and compacted in two lifts. Tack coat shall be used on all
exposed pavement edges.
e. Removed shoulder and sidewalk pavement areas shall be paved with at least
2-inches of hot mix asphalt placed and compacted in two lifts. Tack coat shall
be used on all exposed pavement edges.
f. The applicant shall notify the Superintendent at least 2 business days, or as
soon as possible during emergency repairs, prior to the installation of the
permanent pavement. This ensures the Superintendent has the opportunity to
see the work before permanent paving begins.
3. Accounting for Existing Road Conditions. Many older public roads were not
constructed to standards now in effect or are in poor condition. Standards may be
varied on a case by case basis to account for local conditions, as when working in
a road which was built to lesser standards or which is in poor repair, or when
other unusual conditions are encountered (actual York examples include roads
with pavement thickness as thin as 2” or as thick as 20”). It is also important to
avoid aligning paving patch seams with wheel ruts, and other such factors.
Town of York, Maine
Street Opening and Culvert Ordinance – Amended November 8, 2016
Page 7 of 10
SECTION 6: CULVERTS
6.1. General Provisions.
A. Permit Required. A Culvert Installation Permit shall be obtained from the
Superintendent prior to installing a culvert in or adjacent to any public street, public
sidewalk, public right-of-way, or public drainage easement. If the culvert installation
requires excavation through a public street or sidewalk, a Street Opening Permit shall
also be required. All permits will be acted upon in accordance with the provisions of
MRSA Tile 23, Sections 2701 through 3707.
B. Failure to Provide Proper Culvert. In instances where a public street, right-of-way
or drainage ditch has been filled for the purpose of entry to private property without
the installation of a culvert, or the installation of an inadequate size culvert, the
Superintendent is hereby empowered to require a culvert of the proper specifications
to be installed by the involved property’s owner in order to accommodate proper
storm water management.
C. Inadequate Performance. Any culvert installed pursuant to a Culvert Installation
Permit which contradicts the standards, terms and conditions of the Permit shall be
removed by the property owner if so ordered by the Superintendent.
D. Culvert Size. The minimum required diameter of a culvert is 15” if under a
driveway, or 18” if under a road, but the Superintendent shall have the authority to
vary these minimums for good cause.
E. Dig Safe. Compliance with 23 MRSA §3360-A shall be required.
6.2. Standards.
A. Responsibilities of the Applicant.
1. The applicant shall be responsible for preparing and submitting to the
Superintendent an application for the proposed street opening. This application
shall:
a. Be on a form provided by the Public Works Department;
b. Specify the diameter, length, type and location of the proposed culvert;
c. Providing a drainage analysis from a Maine-licensed Professional Engineer if,
in the opinion of the Superintendent, such analysis is warranted to ensure
culvert size, placement, and installation are sufficient;
d. Specify the expected timeframe for installation;
Town of York, Maine
Street Opening and Culvert Ordinance – Amended November 8, 2016
Page 8 of 10
e. Describe the plan for traffic control and protection of public safety during
installation;
f. Obtaining any other required permits; and
g. Provide other information relevant to the application.
2. The applicant shall be responsible for all completing all work in accordance with
the Culvert Installation Permit obtained pursuant to this Ordinance. All costs are
the responsibility of the applicant.
3. The applicant shall be fully responsible to correct any damage caused to Town
property identified by Town inspection. All costs are the responsibility of the
applicant.
C. Responsibilities of the Superintendent of Public Works.
1. The Superintendent, or his or her designee, shall be responsible for reviewing and
deciding on each Culvert Installation Permit application received. The
Superintendent shall have authority to apply engineering expertise and judgment in
determining the most appropriate standards and conditions in order to protect the
integrity of the public street. Each decision regarding a Culvert Installation Permit
application shall be made in writing, and shall detail the requirements to be met by
the applicant. Only written requirements specified as part of the Permit shall be
binding on the applicant.
2. The Superintendent, or his or her designee, shall be responsible for obtaining
independent expert technical assistance when he or she believes it is necessary to
protect the public interest, and for obtaining reimbursement from the applicant for
the Town’s costs in obtaining such independent expert assistance prior to issuance
of a Street Opening Permit.
3. The Superintendent, or his or her designee, shall be responsible for inspecting all
work completed pursuant to a Culvert Installation Permit, and for identifying and
ordering correction of any damage to Town property which may have occurred as
a result of the installation.
SECTION 7: VIOLATIONS
7.1. Violations. The Superintendent shall be responsible for determining whether or not there
is a violation of this Ordinance. Any time the Superintendent determines a violation exists,
it shall be their responsibility to notify the responsible party and attempt to cooperatively
obtain corrective action. If this fails, or if the violation poses an immediate threat to public
health or safety, the Superintendent may issue a written Notice of Violation.
Town of York, Maine
Street Opening and Culvert Ordinance – Amended November 8, 2016
Page 9 of 10
7.2. Duration. Once the Notice of Violation is received by the person or firm violating the
code, hereafter the violator, each day which the violation continues to exist shall constitute
a separate offense.
7.3. Fine. Any person who violates this ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty of $100.00
for each offense.
7.4. Waiver/Payment of Fines. Any person charged with a violation of this section, shall be
allowed to waive such violation and tender to the Town of York the fine amount if paid
within 20 days of issuance of the summons. If the waiver fine is paid, no appearance before
a District Court Judge or other judicial officer shall be required. If the offender pays the
waiver fine, the matter will be closed in the York Police Records system and listed as a
subsequent offense for future violations.
If the offender chooses not to pay the waiver fine, he/she shall appear in court on the specified
date to answer for the ordinance violation. If the offender is found to have committed the
offense in court, fines, applicable court fees, attorney’s fees, and prosecution costs may
apply.
7.5. Limitation on Future Permits. Any party which has failed to comply with a Notice of
Violation, or failed to pay a fine associated with a violation of this Ordinance shall be
prohibited from obtaining any Permit pursuant to this Ordinance until compliance is obtained
and/or such fine and any interest due the Town is fully paid.
7.6. Enforcement. When a Notice of Violation has been issued and has not resulted in
compliance, the Superintendent may notify the Board of Selectmen of the problem. Upon
receipt of such notification, the Board is hereby authorized to institute any and all actions
and proceedings necessary to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance on behalf of the Town.
SECTION 8: APPEALS
Any action by the Town pursuant to this Ordinance may be appealed to the Board of Appeals.
Necessary forms, submittal requirements, and fees shall be specified by the Board of Appeals. The
application for an appeal must be submitted within 30 days, subject to the following exception:
once physical work commences pursuant to a Street Opening Permit or Culvert Installation Permit,
the applicant foregoes their right to appeal the standards, terms and conditions imposed as part of
that Permit.
SECTION 9: SAVING CLAUSE
In the event any provision of this Ordinance is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
invalid, this finding shall not affect the remainder of this Ordinance.
SECTION 10: EFFECTIVE DATE
Town of York, Maine
Street Opening and Culvert Ordinance – Amended November 8, 2016
Page 10 of 10
This Ordinance and amendments thereto, shall take effect immediately upon passage by the voters
of the Town of York.
SECTION 11: NOTE ABOUT LEGISLATIVE HISTORY
It is not clear exactly when the earlier Street Opening and Culvert Regulations were adopted [prior
to the November 2, 2010 version], and for this reason those standards were repealed and replaced
with this Ordinance. Because the prior code referred to the Superintendent of Public Works, the
code must have been adopted after the Town changed the position from an elected Road
Commissioner to an appointed Superintendent of Public Works.

Town of York, Maine
Supplemental Plumbing Ordinance – Revised November 6, 2012
Page 1
SUPPLEMENTAL PLUMBING ORDINANCE
SECTION 1: TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known as the Plumbing Ordinance and is referred to
herein as the “Ordinance”.
SECTION 2: LEGAL AUTHORITY
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to Home Rule Powers as provided for in
Article VIII-A of the Maine Constitution and Title 30-A, MRSA, Section 3001. This
Ordinance is also pursuant to the Municipalities’ Plumbing Laws (Title 30-A,
MRSA, Section 4211) which allows municipalities to enact regulations which
exceed the minimum requirement of the Maine Department of Health and Human
Services, Division of Environmental Health.
SECTION 3: PURPOSE
The Town of York finds that the Maine State Plumbing code is inadequate to
ensure the proper design, construction, operation and maintenance of large
subsurface disposal systems. This ordinance establishes guidelines and rules
that better ensure the proper design, construction, operation and maintenance of
these systems. This Ordinance also upgrades certain of the “minimum”
standards contained in the State of Maine Subsurface Waste Water Disposal
Rules, 10-144 CMR 241, relating to subsurface wastewater disposal for the
protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Any reference to “State Rules”
in this Ordinance shall mean State of Maine Subsurface Waste Water Disposal
Rules, 10-144 CMR 241. The Ordinance also establishes an amended schedule
of fees for plumbing permits.
SECTION 4: STATE RULES
This Ordinance supplements but does not replace the State Rules. The
provisions of the State Rules shall govern except where the provisions of this
Ordinance are stricter.
SECTION 5: DEFINITIONS
5.1 Any word or term not defined herein shall have the same definition as in
the State Rules.
5.2 Bedroom – The term “bedroom” shall include any and all of the following:
1) any room designed to be used as sleeping accommodations for one or
more persons, 2) any room designated as a bedroom on any application
Town of York, Maine
Supplemental Plumbing Ordinance – Revised November 6, 2012
Page 2
for any local, state, or federal building, plumbing, electrical, zoning, and/or
environmental permit 3) any room described as a bedroom in any
advertising or sales literature, and 4) any room actually used for sleeping
accommodations by one or more persons on other than an occasional
basis. For the purposes of this definition, use of a room for sleeping
accommodations shall not be deemed “occasional” if that use occurs on
more than fourteen days during any single year, or if the room is used in
exchange for compensation of any kind.
5.3 Controlled System – A non-residential subsurface wastewater disposal
system with a design flow greater than or equal to 1500 gpd or a
residential subsurface disposal system serving three (3) or more dwelling
units. The replacement of a residential subsurface disposal system is
exempt from the controlled system requirements when it complies with all
of the following:
1. It serves no more than 5 dwellings.
2. There is no increase in number of bedrooms.
3. The subsurface disposal system is owned by a single entity.
4. The subsurface disposal system being replaced was installed
prior to May 21, 1988.
5.4 Marginal System – A marginal system is defined as a septic system
having one or several problems, including but not limited to records
demonstrating excessive pumping (more than two times within any ninety
day period for residential or commercial property except for required great
trap maintenance for commercial property), the presence of visible ferric
sulfide stains, or the system is inadequate under the State Rules to
service the structure(s) or uses to which it is connected.
SECTION 6: ADMINISTRATION
6.1 No person shall construct or expand a subsurface wastewater disposal
system until a permit has been issued in accordance with the
requirements of this ordinance. No person shall erect or expand a
structure requiring a system or change the use of an existing structure to a
use which requires an expanded system until a permit for such expanded
system has been issued in accordance with these regulations.
6.1.1 Expiration of Septic Design.
A septic design more than 2 years old and not permitted must be
reviewed and updated as necessary by the Site Evaluator prior to
the issuance of a permit.
6.1.2 Design Requirements If Existing Septic System Is To Be Retained.
Upon submission of an application for a major addition, new
dwelling or a tear-down-replacement dwelling, the CEO shall
Town of York, Maine
Supplemental Plumbing Ordinance – Revised November 6, 2012
Page 3
require that the applicant submit a copy of the current septic
design. If there is no current design available, the applicant shall
hire a licensed site evaluator to make a physical inspection of the
system, including excavating a small portion of the disposal area to
determine the actual condition of the system. The site evaluator
shall provide a sketch of the system’s approximate location and its
adequacy for the proposal. The system must be determined
adequate for a Building Permit to be issued.
6.2 All applications for Controlled Systems shall include the following
documents, plans, and information:
6.2.1 An operations and maintenance manual which shall contain all
information necessary to properly operate and maintain the entire
collection, treatment and disposal system. The requirements for
this manual are specifically described in Section 9.2.
6.2.2 For a Controlled System the LPI shall review the application and
submissions required under this Ordinance and when complete,
submit them to the Town Engineer or Division of Environmental
Health for review. The Town Engineer shall review the submitted
information for compliance with the State Plumbing code, these
regulations, and good engineering practice. The written report shall
be returned to the LPI within 14 working days. The LPI shall issue
a permit for a Controlled System only after approval by the Town
Engineer or the Division of Environmental Health.
6.2.3 Fee for Permit – Upon application for a Controlled System the
applicant must submit an inspection fee as described in §8.2.
Town of York, Maine
Supplemental Plumbing Ordinance – Revised November 6, 2012
Page 4
6.3 Permit Fees for Septic Systems. Permit fees shall be as follows:
Permits for Complete
Disposal Systems
Engineered System $400.00
Non-Engineered System $200.00
Primitive System (includes one alternative toilet) $200.00
Separate laundry disposal field $70.00
Seasonal conversion permit $100.00
Variance from External Plumbing Rules $40.00
Permits for Separate
Parts of Disposal
System
Alternative toilet (only) $100.00
Disposal field (engineered system) $300.00
Disposal field (non-engineered system) $150.00
Treatment tank (non-engineered system) $100.00
Treatment tank (engineered system) $160.00
Holding tank $200.00
Other components (complete pump station, piping, other) $60.00
Variance from External Plumbing Rules $40.00
6.4 Permit Fees for Internal Plumbing. Permit fees shall be $12.00 per fixture, but
never less than a minimum fee of $48.00.
SECTION 7: SYSTEM DESIGN
7.1 Wastewater Design Flows
7.1.1 Residential design flows from State Rules Table 501.1 shall be
increased by 33.3%
7.1.2 Reduction in design flows for water conservation devices will not be
allowed.
7.1.3 When due to physical constraints of the lot a replacement septic
system cannot be designed using the design flows required in this
section, the minimum design flows from Table 501.1 of the State
Rules may be used. This provision may only be implemented when
the replacement system is replacing a failed system without any
increase in use of the system.
7.2 Stone Size and Covering
7.2.1 Stone Size – All stone used in the disposal field shall conform to
one of the following nominal stone sizes as described in State
Rules Table 800.1: 1½, 2, or 2½ inches. Stone shall be free of
organics, fines, dust, ashes, clay or other similar durable and
insoluble material.
Town of York, Maine
Supplemental Plumbing Ordinance – Revised November 6, 2012
Page 5
7.2.2 Stone Covering – The disposal field stone shall be covered with a
layer of filter fabric as described in State Rules, sections 805.3.1 or
805.3.2.
7.3 Additional Design Criteria for Controlled Systems
7.3.1 Controlled systems shall be designed by an engineer registered in
the State of Maine. All reports, contracts and design documents
submitted to the Town shall bear the engineers stamp.
7.3.2 Duplicate pumping equipment shall be provided. If only two pumps
are provided, either shall be capable of handling peak design flows.
Where three or more pumps are provided, they shall be designed to
fit actual flow conditions and must be so designed so that with any
one pump out of service the remaining pumps will have capacity to
pump peak design flows.
7. 3.3 Level Controls and Capacity. Level sensing devices shall be
located in the wet well so as not to be unduly affected by flows
entering the chamber or by the suction of the pumps. Provisions
shall be made to automatically alternate the pumps in use. An
emergency storage capacity above the working level equal to the
daily design flow shall be provided.
7.3.4 Alarms – An alarm system shall be provided for all pump stations.
The alarm on-site shall be both visual and audible. The alarm shall
be activated in any one of the following cases:
? Low water in the wet well
? High water in the wet well
? Loss of one or more phases of power supply
? Loss of the alarm transmission line, or
? Pump failure
The alarm shall signal at the pump station and at a facility that is
manned 24 hours a day. An automatic telephone dialer capable of
dialing several numbers will be accepted as an alternative to the
secondary alarm at a manned facility.
7.3.5 Emergency Storage – Pump stations shall be provided with standby
storage tanks or wet wells must be capable of storing sewage flows
for a period of at least 6 hours without overflowing or causing
backups.
7.3.6 Peat disposal areas are not allowed for controlled systems.
Town of York, Maine
Supplemental Plumbing Ordinance – Revised November 6, 2012
Page 6
7.3.7 Reserve Areas
a. A reserve area sufficient to duplicate the original leaching
area must be provided and permanently dedicated to this
purpose.
b. Any expansion of the original disposal area necessary to
support a change or increase in intensity in the land use
which discharges to the disposal system will require an
equal expansion of the reserve area.
SECTION 8: INSPECTION OF CONTROLLED SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION
8.1 Upon issuance of a permit for construction of a controlled system the LPI
or Town Engineer will inform the applicant of the inspections which will be
required. The inspections may involve any or all of the following phases of
construction:
8.1.1 When the area of the disposal field and fill extension has been
cleared of organics and scarified and before any fill is placed on the
area.
8.1.2 Review of materials to be used for fill and review of the location to
be filled.
8.1.3 Installation of the septic tank with connection to the house sewer
and manholes open.
8.1.4 Installation of the distribution box(es) with connection to the septic
tank, top open and distribution lines in place.
8.1.5 Completion of the trenches, field, chambers with stone in place, but
distribution pipes uncovered and manholes open.
8.1.6 Other inspections or tests as may be required by the LPI or Town
Engineer to ensure compliance with this ordinance and the State
Rules.
8.2 Controlled systems will be inspected by the Town Engineer at the
applicants’ expense. Upon receipt of a permit for a controlled system the
applicant shall submit an inspection fee equal to 2% of the estimated cost
of construction of the system. This money will be deposited into a special
account used solely for the purpose of obtaining inspection assistance
from the Town Engineer. Whenever the services of the Town Engineer
consume the amount of funds available, the applicant must submit an
additional fee equal to the amount of the initial deposit, or as determined
by the LPI. All additional construction must cease until the additional
Town of York, Maine
Supplemental Plumbing Ordinance – Revised November 6, 2012
Page 7
deposit has been received. This may be enforced by a Stop Work notice
by the CEO if necessary. Any balance remaining in the account after a
final inspection and approval by both the Town Engineer and the LPI shall
be returned to the applicant within 30 days. Any interest accrued shall
remain with the Town.
8.3 Final Approval
8.3.1 No occupancy permit for a building serviced by a controlled system
may be issued until the LPI has granted final approval to the
system.
8.3.2 For a controlled system the applicant shall submit “as built” plans to
the LPI prior to issuance of a final approval. Such plans shall show
field measurements of locations of all system components, water
lines, wells, finished grades and structures, etc. They must be
prepared by the owner’s engineer who shall certify their accuracy
by his seal.
SECTION 9: OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF CONTROLLED
SYSTEMS
9.1 Plans for the continued proper operation, maintenance, monitoring and
inspection must be submitted with the application for a controlled system.
These plans shall be designed to ensure that the system operates at peak
performance, that such information related to the operation and
maintenance of the system is easily available and understandable by the
users and owner of the system and to provide clear indication that the
components of the complete system are performing according to design,
to provide continued reporting to the Town that the system is operating
properly.
9.2 Operation and Maintenance Manual
9.2.1 An operation and maintenance manual shall be required for a
controlled system which must address the operation and
maintenance of the entire wastewater disposal system including the
programmed removal and disposal of sludge produced by primary
treatment process (i.e. septic tank or tanks) located ahead of the
subsurface disposal system per Section 9.3.
9.2.2 The owner of a system shall be responsible to follow the
maintenance program as an integral part of the operation of the
approved system.
9.2.3 A copy of the approved O&M Manual shall be accessible to the
owner(s), users and LPI at all times.
Town of York, Maine
Supplemental Plumbing Ordinance – Revised November 6, 2012
Page 8
9.2.4 The O&M Manual shall include the following at a minimum:
9.2.4.1 The manufacturer’s operating, maintenance and repair
instructions for all motors, pumps, valves, blowers, bearings,
drive assemblies, control panels, electrical systems, alarms,
piping, tankage, and equipment.
9.2.4.2 A summary chart which details for all equipment routine
inspections, lubrication and adjustment which must be
performed by the operator.
9.2.4.3 Copies of all permits and approvals and a detailed
description of responsibilities of the owner, operator and the
owner’s consultant engineer necessary to meet all permit
conditions.
9.2.4.4 A description of the sludge handling and disposal
requirements, including the name and telephone number of
the sludge hauler, name and telephone number of the
sludge disposal facility and record keeping requirements.
9.2.4.5 An emergency operating and response program which
details the procedures to be followed in the event of power
failures, flooding, peak loads, fire, equipment failure and
maintenance shutdowns. A description of who should be
notified, how notified, and when in emergency situations
shall be provided along with an appropriate telephone
director.
9.2.4.6 A listing and directory providing names and notification
requirements for water, electric, gas and telephone services
9.2.4.7 Cost projections for operation, maintenance, and
emergency repairs.
9.3 Maintenance and Inspection Requirements of Controlled Systems
9.3.1 A septic tank shall be pumped when the accumulated scum and
sludge solids occupy one third or more of the liquid depth, and no
less frequently than as described in §9.3.2.
9.3.2 An inspection of a controlled system is required every 2 years and
shall be submitted on or by June 30 of those years it is required.
The controlled system shall be pumped concurrently with this
inspection so that the inspector has the maximum view possible of
Town of York, Maine
Supplemental Plumbing Ordinance – Revised November 6, 2012
Page 9
the interior of tanks and other components. The written report must
be submitted to the LPI, the owner of the system and the
homeowners association.
9.3.3 The inspection must be performed by a Maine-Licensed
Professional Engineer who will issue a written report containing his
findings, the condition of the system, an evaluation of how the
system is or is not in compliance with this Ordinance and any
recommended changes to the Operation and Maintenance Manual.
9.3.4 If the inspection finds evidence of a malfunctioning or marginal
system, the LPI shall be notified immediately.
SECTION 10: HYDROLOGIC REPORT FOR CONTROLLED SYSTEMS
10.1 When either of the following conditions is encountered a Hydrologic
Report prepared by a Professional Engineer registered in the State of
Maine with a background in hydrology shall be submitted with the
application:
• Perched or apparent groundwater as observed or as estimated by soil
mottling is less than 2 feet below grade, or
• Bedrock or ledge is less than 3 feet below grade.
10.2 The report shall minimally include determination of groundwater
elevations, seasonally predominant groundwater flow direction,
groundwater flow velocities and an assessment of the hydraulic impacts
and resultant groundwater mound caused by the injection of the proposed
volume of wastewater to the ground water system. The computed
groundwater mound elevation shall be considered the limiting factor for
purposes of minimum separation.
10.3 The report shall address the qualitative effect of the proposed effluent
discharge on public and private ground and surface water, ponds,
wetlands, coastal waters and associated sensitive receptors. The LPI
may require that the report shall also present for review a groundwater
monitoring well network downgradient of the proposed discharge. The
number of monitoring wells, well installation and development techniques,
well construction details, proposed well locations and groundwater
sampling parameters and techniques shall be discussed in the report.
10.4 Any proposed system may be required to be modified or relocated to
protect a public or private well or wells, based on the potential for pollution
as determined by:
1. The sewage treatment capabilities of the proposed system and soils;
Town of York, Maine
Supplemental Plumbing Ordinance – Revised November 6, 2012
Page 10
2. The attenuation of pathogens;
3. Travel time of the effluent from the disposal system and dispersion in
the soils and groundwater; or
4. Dilution of the chemical contaminants found in the effluent.
The Planning Board, Town Engineer or LPI may request information
addressing these points to be included in the Hydrologic Report when a
private or public water supply is in the vicinity of the proposed system.
SECTION 11: RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR USERS OF CONTROLLED
SYSTEMS
11.1 No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof run-off or subsurface drainage, or
discharge from a sump pump to the septic system.
11.2 No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to the system:
1. any gasoline, kerosene, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
2. any non-latex paints, paint thinners, paint removers or strippers.
3. any organic solvent or any liquid containing any organic solvent.
4. any acid, enzyme, emulsifier or any other chemical substance not
approved for discharge to the facilities by the LPI.
11.3 Use or connection of garbage disposals is prohibited.
11.4 The owners of facilities which service multiple users shall establish and
submit a copy of rules and regulations regarding the use of common
sanitary sewers prior to the commencement of operation of the facilities.
Said rules and regulations shall be contained within the owners’
organization documents and in the case of tenant use said rules and
regulations shall be included in the lease or rental agreements. The rules
and regulations shall contain at a minimum specific reference to the above
restrictions.
SECTION 12: EXISTING CONTROLLED SYSTEMS
12.1 Systems existing as of the date of passage of this ordinance which meet
the definition of controlled systems in this ordinance shall comply with
Section 9 of this ordinance within two years of its adoption.
Town of York, Maine
Supplemental Plumbing Ordinance – Revised November 6, 2012
Page 11
SECTION 13: PUMPING OF SEPTIC TANKS
13.1 Pumping Septic Tanks
Septic tanks shall be pumped according to the guidelines under Section
13.2.
13.2 Septic tanks shall be pumped out at least once every 5 years, except as
follows:
13.2.1 Septic tanks at houses which are rented by the week during the
summer shall be pumped out at least once annually.
13.2.2 Septic tanks for homes occupied by not more that 2 people shall
be pumped out at least once every 10 years.
13.2.3 Septic tanks with advanced treatment (i.e. aerated systems
such as but not limited to White Knight) shall be pumped out at
least once every 10 years.
13.3 Beginning January 1, 2008, any person or company that pumps septic
tanks in the Town of York shall file a report each month with the Local
Plumbing Inspector. The monthly report shall indicate, for each tank
pumped during that month:
a. the name of the customer;
b. the street address where the tank is located;
c. the approximate number of gallons of septage pumped; and
d. the location where the septage was taken.
SECTION 14: SYSTEM VARIANCE
14.1 Decisions about First Time System Variances shall be made by the LPI
except where the Maine Subsurface Waste Water Disposal rules call for
the Municipal Officers to make a decision.
14.2 An application for a First Time System Variance shall meet or exceed all
of the requirements of the Maine Subsurface Waste Water Disposal
Rules, in addition to the following two local criteria:
a. The soils test, variance application data, point score and system
design have been verified by an independent site evaluator, licensed in
the State of Maine working on behalf of the Town at the expense of the
applicant.
b. A minimum point score of 75 is achieved.
Town of York, Maine
Supplemental Plumbing Ordinance – Revised November 6, 2012
Page 12
SECTION 15: HOLDING TANKS
15.1 Per the regulations of the Maine Division of Environmental Health all
applications for holding tanks within the Town of York shall be reviewed by
the York Board of Selectmen.
15.2 The Board of Selectmen may endorse a holding tank application only if it
meets all of the following criteria:
15.2.1 The holding tank will be replacing a malfunctioning septic system or
overboard discharge.
15.2.2 There are not adequate soils on the property to install a
replacement septic system. This must be documented with an
HHE-200 form signed by a licensed Site Evaluator and verified by
the Code Enforcement Officer.
15.2.3 The holding tank will be used as a temporary measure until Town
sewer becomes available. The residence must connect to the
Town sewer as soon as it becomes available.
15.2.4 The residents will install low volume toilets and flow restrictors so
that water usage is kept to a minimum.
15.2.5 The homeowner will present a contract with a license septage
hauler indicating that the holding tank will be pumped on a regular
basis.
15.2.6 Dumping stations at campgrounds existing prior to the effective
date of this ordinance may be approved by the Board of Selectmen.
SECTION16: AMENDMENTS
16.1 This Ordinance may be amended by a majority vote at a General or Special
General Referendum.
SECTION 17: EFFECTIVE DATE
17.1 The effective date of this ordinance is the date of adoption by Town vote.
SECTION 18: VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
18.1 Enforcement of this ordinance shall be the responsibility of the Code
Enforcement Officer as per the York Zoning Ordinance.
Town of York, Maine
Supplemental Plumbing Ordinance – Revised November 6, 2012
Page 13
SECTION 19: VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY
19.1 Where the terms of this Ordinance conflict with any other ordinance or
code the stricter of the two shall apply.
19.2 The provisions of this code are severable. If any provision of this
ordinance should be declared by the courts to be invalid such decision
shall not invalidate any other provision of this Ordinance.

Town of York, Maine
Supplemental Building Ordinance – Amended May 18, 2019
Page 1 of 2
Supplemental Building Ordinance
1. Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish a fee schedule for fees pursuant to
the Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code (MUBEC) as administered by the Town of
York, and to clarify certain enforcement and administrative provisions.
2. Authority. The Town has authority to enact building code provisions relating solely to local
enforcement and administration, per MRSA Title 10 §9724.
3. Application Fees. Prior to issuance of a Building Permit, the applicant shall be required to
pay a non-refundable application fee in accordance with the following:
A. Standard Fee Calculation. Application fees are to be assessed at a rate of $8.00 per
thousand dollars of projected construction cost, but the minimum application fee
charged shall be $50. The applicant shall be responsible for showing the projected cost
of construction, with sufficient detail to ensure reasonable accuracy. The tax assessor
shall establish a schedule for minimum square footage rates based on the fair market
value of proposed work. The Code Enforcement Officer shall base the fee amount on
the larger of these two amounts. In addition, the State requires payment of a surcharge
(currently projected to be $0.04 per square foot of building space) which shall be paid
at the same time the Town fee is paid.
B. Reimbursement for Out-Of-Pocket Expenses. If the Town incurs any out-of-pocket
costs for technical assistance with respect to plan review or construction inspection, the
applicant shall be responsible for reimbursing the cost of this work prior to issuance of
an Occupancy Permit.
C. After-The-Fact Fee. If work commences prior to issuance of a Building Permit, the
cost of the permit fee shall be increased by $100, although the Code Enforcement
Officer may waive this for good cause.
D. Re-Inspection Fee. If an inspection is requested and the applicant is not ready when
the Code Enforcement Officer arrives at the job site for the inspection, a re-inspection
fee of $50 may be charged. When charged, such Fee shall be paid in full prior to
scheduling the repeat inspection.
E. Use of Fee Revenues. Revenues from application fees shall be placed in an account
for use of the Community Development Department to maintain and upgrade the
Town’s Geographic Information System (GIS) and to pay for code enforcement work.
4. Code Administration. The MUBEC shall be administered within the Town of York by the
Town’s duly appointed Code Enforcement Officers. In the event the Town seeks assistance
with inspections, the Board of Selectmen may act to pursue additional inspection resources
consistent with MRSA Title 25 §2373.
5. Enforcement and Penalties. Enforcement and penalties shall be consistent with MRSA
Title 30-A §4452. The Code Enforcement Officers shall be responsible for initial efforts to
enforce the provisions of building codes, but enforcement cases shall be turned over to the
Board of Selectmen if the matter requires prosecution in court.
Town of York, Maine
Supplemental Building Ordinance – Amended May 18, 2019
Page 2 of 2
Regarding occupancy prior to issuance of an Occupancy Permit, the MUBEC does not permit
newly constructed or renovated building space to be occupied or used in any manner (ie: not
for storage, no furniture moved in, etc.) prior to issuance of the Occupancy Permit.
(Reference: IRC §110.1, IBC §111.1, IEBC §110.1, etc.) The CEO may issue prior written
approval for use of a particular room or space for storage prior to issuance of the Occupancy
Permit, provided that room or space has passed inspection by the CEO. Where a violation
of this requirement is observed, the following shall apply:
A. The CEO may terminate the inspection in process, and the inspection shall not be
rescheduled until the problem is remedied; and/or
B. A fine shall be assessed. In the case of repeat offenses, the fine shall increase with each
recurring instance of the violation.
6. Building permits are required as stated in Section R105 of the International Residential Code
(IRC) and Section 105 of the International Building Code (IBC). Building permits shall
expire for non-use as specified in Section R105.5 of the IRC and Section 105.5 of the IBC.
In all cases, building permits shall expire 3 years after the date of issuance.
7. Appeals of this Ordinance and/or MUBEC shall be heard by the Board of Appeals, as
specified in Zoning Ordinance §18.8.3.1.
8. If the State of Maine repeals MUBEC, the Town of York will adopt, administer and enforce
the 2015 IRC, 2015 IBC, 2015 IEBC, and the 2009 International Energy Conservation Code
(IECC), each with the same exceptions and modifications as adopted by the State of Maine
on January 23, 2018.
9. Saving Clause. In the event any provision of this Ordinance is found by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, this finding shall not affect the remainder of this Ordinance.
10. Effective Date. Repeal of the Town’s Building Codes and the effective date of this
Ordinance shall be December 1, 2010. Every Building Permit issued prior to this date shall
continue to be controlled by the prior Building Codes as long as the Building Permit remains
active.
Date of Original Adoption: November 2, 2010
Enactment of this Ordinance replaces the former Town of York Building Codes, which was originally adopted on
November 2, 1999, and was amended on the following dates: 11/6/2001; 11/5/2002; 11/4/2003; 11/3/2009; and
5/18/2019

Town of York, Maine
Traffic Safety Ordinance – Revised April 8, 2019
Page 1
TRAFFIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Section 1: Purpose
This Ordinance is intended to protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of York’s
Citizens by regulating the movement and parking of motor vehicles on public ways within
the corporate boundaries of the Town of York.
Section 2: Snow Removal
To facilitate the plowing and removal of snow, the Director of Public Works, the Chief of
Police or their designee, may order a no parking ban by declaring a snow emergency. When
a snow emergency has been declared, there will be a total parking ban on any and all public
ways. Once a snow emergency has been declared, the person declaring the snow emergency
shall immediately notify local media that may include but not be limited to social media,
code red, websites, radio, newspapers and television outlets advising the public of a parking
ban. The police department and all sworn officers are hereby authorized to issue a parking
ticket and have any vehicle towed that is found to be in violation. When feasible, officers
shall make reasonable efforts to contact the owner to have the vehicle moved prior to
towing. Any and all costs for the towing and or garage expense shall be paid by the owner
of the vehicle that was removed.
Section 3: Surreys and Pedicabs
Surreys, Pedicabs, and other three or four-wheel pedal driven vehicles with a capacity of
more than one person are hereby prohibited from operation on the streets and ways of the
Town and all sidewalks. (March 20, 1973)
Section 4: Tampering with Signs
No person shall maliciously tamper with, deface, alter or destroy, any traffic or parking
signs.
Section 5: Sleeping in Vehicles
It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep overnight in any vehicle or trailer parked upon
any public park, road, street or highway within the limits of the Town of York.
Section 6: Parking Permit Programs
Parking permit programs may be established by the Board of Selectmen for the purpose of
providing better access to centers of employment, retail shops, restaurants and tourist
Town of York, Maine
Traffic Safety Ordinance – Revised April 8, 2019
Page 2
attractions. Permit programs adopted by the Board shall be appended to and become a part
of this Ordinance. Copies of the amendments are available in the Town Clerks office.
Section 7: Unlawful Parking and Standing
A. No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle or self propelled machinery in
any street, way, highway, road, parking area or public place so that:
B. It blocks in any manner a public way, private driveway or pedestrian crosswalk.
C. It is double-parked, so-called, except by the verbal permission of the Chief of Police or
by his designee.
D. The vehicle’s front wheels are not aligned in the direction of the curbing or the right
side of the traveled way, except on a “one way” street, or in those areas listed in Traffic
Schedule A, “No Parking Zones”.
E. Any part of said vehicle is in, over or on the area of the sidewalk or adjoining or adjacent
marked parking space.
F. Any part of said vehicle is within 12 feet of a fire hydrant.
G. Any part of said vehicle is within 20 feet of the intersection of any Town or State Road.
H. Any such vehicle is left unattended with the key left in the ignition lock.
I. It hinders or interferes with the plowing or removal of snow.
J. This paragraph shall not apply to:
• Vehicles that are disabled to the extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving the vehicle;
• Vehicles that are employed in construction, maintenance or repair of pipes and wires
of a public utility in, on, along, over, across and under a public way; or
• Authorized Emergency Vehicles as defined in Title 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2054.
K. Authority of the York Police Department (YPD) to regulate parking for temporary
purposes.
• The Chief of Police or their designee may establish no parking areas utilizing official
YPD no parking signs. These areas may be established for, but not limited to, special
events, road construction or unforeseen activity that may pose a public safety risk.
Town of York, Maine
Traffic Safety Ordinance – Revised April 8, 2019
Page 3
• The Chief of Police or their designee may authorize temporary parking in prohibited
areas for special events, sporting events, or other activities that would need this
exemption as deemed necessary by the Police Chief or their designee.
Section 8: One-Way Streets
Certain streets may be designated on either a seasonal or year round basis for one way
traffic only. It shall be unlawful to travel against the designated flow of traffic on these
streets. Streets so designated shall be listed in Traffic Schedule B, “One Way Streets”.
Section 9: Time Limited Zones
The length of time that a vehicle may be parked in a particular area may be limited to ten
minutes, fifteen minutes, 30 minutes, one hour or two hours on either a seasonal or year
round basis. Parking spaces may also be reserved during specified times for use as loading
zones for the exclusive use of delivery vehicles. Time zones so designated shall be listed
in Schedule C, “Time Limited Zones”.
Section 10: Prohibitions against through Trucks and Buses
Through traffic by trucks and buses on Town Ways shall be prohibited on all ways
designated in Traffic Schedule D, “No through Trucks and Buses”.
Section 11: Limiting Certain Streets to Local Traffic Only and Deliveries Only
Raydon Road, the entire length, from the intersection of Route 1A in a northeasterly
direction to the intersection with US Route 1.
Section 12: Parking Meter Zones
Parking Meter Zones shall be established and except as provided in the Parking Permit
Program (see Section 6) no vehicle shall be permitted to park in a metered space during
effective metered parking hours without payment in accordance with the parking fees
schedule set forth in Traffic Schedule E, “Parking Meter Zones and Fees”. Schedule E
shall also delineate effective dates and times of metered parking for each zone. The
revenue collected from parking meters must be used:
• To purchase, maintain and police the meters;
• To construct and maintain public ways;
• To acquire, construct, maintain and operate public parking areas; and
• For no other purpose.
Section 13: Authorities to Remove Vehicles from a Public Way
Town of York, Maine
Traffic Safety Ordinance – Revised April 8, 2019
Page 4
Any vehicle stopped, standing or parked in violation of this Ordinance or State Law may,
at the expense of the registered owner, be removed by, or under the direction of, or at the
request of, the Chief of Police or one of his authorized officers to a garage or storage place
within the limits of the Town of York and impounded therein. Such police officer may use
such force as may be necessary to enter such vehicle and cause the same to be placed in a
condition to be moved, and may employ any reputable person engaged in the business of
towing and storing vehicles for such purposes. The payment of removal or storage charges
for any such vehicle does not preclude prosecution of the registered owner of said vehicle
for any violation of this Ordinance.
The Chief of Police or one of his duly authorized officers, shall make every effort to notify
the owner of any such vehicle, as promptly as possible, of its removal from the streets,
ways, or public places under the control of the Town and as soon as possible a written
notice that such vehicle has been impounded shall be sent by the Chief of Police to the
owner at his or her last known address, as may be shown by the records of the Secretary of
State or Registry of Motor Vehicles. If the owner is unknown, the Chief of Police shall
cause notice of such impound to be published in any newspaper printed in the Town of
York, giving the registration number, vehicle identification number, and the name, type
and year of said vehicle.
• Before the owner of any such vehicle or his representative may remove it from the
possession of the person towing or storing it, he or she shall:
• Furnish satisfactory evidence of his or her identity and of the ownership of said vehicle
to the Chief of Police or to the person having possession of said vehicle;
• Pay to the person having possession of said vehicle all reasonable charges for towing
and the storing of said vehicle;
• Sign a receipt for said vehicle.
The Chief of Police is authorized to, and shall establish, a schedule of charges for towing
and storage and only those persons agreeing to such schedule shall be called to remove and
store said vehicle.
Section 14: Miscellaneous Regulations
Vehicles exiting from the TD Banknorth Property, 127 Long Sands Road Map 120/Lot
119) at the intersection of York Street and Long Sands Road shall make a right turn only.
(Adopted November 17, 1975)
The Board of Selectmen may establish trolley stops for the purpose of allowing trolley
operators to pick-up and discharge passengers. All trolley operators using these stops must
maintain an Intrastate Carrier Permit issued by the State of Maine. All Trolley stops shall
be listed in Schedule F of this ordinance.
Town of York, Maine
Traffic Safety Ordinance – Revised April 8, 2019
Page 5
Certain parking spaces in the vicinity of the harbor in York River are restricted to use by
vehicles with a Harbor Usage Permit. See Schedule H, Harbor Usage Permit Parking.
Three spaces in the parking lot located at 25 Railroad Avenue (across the street from the
York Beach Fire Station), 3 spaces on the easterly side of Railroad Avenue between the
York Beach Fire Station and the intersection with Bay Street, and one space directly in
front of the York Beach Fire Station shall be reserved for exclusive use of firefighters in
the course of their duties for the York Beach Fire Department.
Parking is prohibited between 1:00 AM and 4:00 AM in all parking spaces located along
Beach Ball Field Road and Long Beach Avenue from May 15th to October 15th.
For northbound vehicles exiting County Road, left turns onto Railroad Avenue shall be
prohibited during the season when parking meters are enforced, as identified in Schedule
E, Parking Meters.
Section 15: Horse Drawn Vehicles
The Board of Selectmen shall establish rules for the regulation of Commercial Horse
Drawn Vehicles which shall be appended to and become a part of this Ordinance. (See
Schedule G)
Section 16: Violations and Penalties
Any person who violates this ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty of $100.00 for
the first offense, $150.00 for the second offense, and $250.00 for the third and subsequent
offenses. Except as provided in Section 18 violations and penalties for parking tickets
(“tag”).
Section 17: Waiver/Payment of Fines
Any person charged with a violation of this section, shall be allowed to waive such
violation and tender to the Town of York the fine amount if paid within 20 days of issuance
of the summons. If the waiver fine is paid, no appearance before a District Court Judge or
other judicial officer shall be required. If the offender pays the waiver fine, the matter will
be closed in the York Police Records system and listed as a subsequent offense for future
violations.
If the offender chooses not to pay the waiver fine, he/she shall appear in court on the
specified date to answer for the ordinance violation. If the offender is found to have
committed the offense in court, fines, applicable court fees, attorney’s fees, and prosecution
costs may apply.
Section 18: Violations and Penalties for Parking Tickets (“Tags”)
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be punished by a fine of
not less than $15 and not more than $250 for each offense to be recovered for the use of
Town of York, Maine
Traffic Safety Ordinance – Revised April 8, 2019
Page 6
the Town; provided, however, that persons receiving “tags” for illegal parking may waive
all court action and pay to the Chief of Police at the Police Station the applicable penalty
set forth herein below in full satisfaction of such violation:
• Meters - The sum of $35, if paid within 10 days of the time when such “tag” was
attached to the vehicle or the sum of $50, if paid more than 10 days after the time when
such “tag” was attached to the vehicle, but before a Court Summons is issued. (March
13, 2017)
• Overtime - The sum of $35, if paid within 10 days of the time when such “tag” was
attached to the vehicle or the sum of $50, if paid more than 10 days after the time when
such “tag” was attached to the vehicle, but before a Court Summons is issued.
• Hydrant - The sum of $50, if paid within 10 days of the time when such “tag” was
attached to the vehicle or the sum of $100, if paid more than 10 days after the time
when such “tag” was attached to the vehicle, but before a Court Summons is issued.
• Handicap - The sum of $250.
• Permit Parking - The sum of $50, if paid within 10 days of the time when such “tag”
was attached to the vehicle or the sum of $100, if paid more than 10 days after the time
when such “tag” was attached to the vehicle, but before a Court Summons is issued.
(March 13, 2017)
• Horse Drawn Vehicles - The sum of $35, if paid within 10 days of the time when notice
of violation was given or the sum of $50, if paid more than 10 days after the time when
notice of violation was received, but before a Court Summons is issued
• Other Violations - The sum of $50, if paid within 10 days of the time when such “tag”
was attached to the vehicle or the sum of $100, if paid more than 10 days after the time
when such “tag” was attached to the vehicle, but before a Court Summons is issued.
(April 8, 2019)
Violations/Penalties
Any person who fails to pay a parking ticket within 30 days of the violation will be
subject to separate penalty of FAILURE TO PAY PARKING TICKET offense and
may be used as grounds for your driver’s license to be suspended in the State of
Maine. The fine attached to this violation is dependent on the total amount owed for
unpaid parking tickets and associated late fees.
Waiver / Payment of Fines
Any person charged with a violation of this section, shall be allowed to waive such
violation and tender to the Town of York the fine amount if paid within 20 days of
Town of York, Maine
Traffic Safety Ordinance – Revised April 8, 2019
Page 7
issuance of the summons. If the waiver fine is paid, no appearance before a District
Court Judge or other judicial officer shall be required. If the offender pays the waiver
fine, the matter will be closed in the York Police Records system and listed as a
subsequent offense for future violations.
Town of York, Maine
Traffic Safety Ordinance – Revised April 8, 2019
Page 8
Schedule A - No Parking Zones
Acorn Street - either side from its intersection with Oceanside Avenue to its intersection
with Avenue A
Agamenticus Road - either side from CMP Pole #J19 westerly to Pole #J24.
Barrell Lane - northeasterly side from junction of Route 1A, a distance of approximately
2/10 (two tenths) of a mile to the former York Harbor Village Corporation line
Barrell Lane - beginning at the intersection of Route 1A and running along the westerly
side line of Barrell Lane a distance of 265’ and further beginning at NET Pole #30-3 and
ending at NET Pole #30-5 a distance of 260’. (Adopted at Selectmen’s Meeting 4/26/94)
Barrell Lane Extension - portion of roadway approximately 50 feet long situated between
Barrell Lane and Route 1A: No parking on the easterly side thereof adjacent to St.
Christopher’s Church (4 Barrell Lane Map 109/Lot 125) property.
Bath Road - easterly side from junction of Route 1A to end of right of way.
Bay Street – either side from intersection with Franklin Street to intersection with Ocean
Avenue.
Bay Haven - either side from Route 1A to the intersection of Freeman Street. (March 22,
1977)
Beach Street - northerly side from its intersection with the Beach Square and extending
northerly and northeasterly to Freeman Street. (March 22, 1977)
*Beach Street - northwesterly side from the southwesterly property line of the theater
property, so-called, easterly to the intersection of Beach Street and the street which adjoins
the Sun of a Beach property patio property (former Seabreeze Hotel property).
Beacon Street - either side from Route 1A extending westerly or northwesterly to Ridge
Road. (March 18, 1975)
Bog Road- either side from the intersection with Scituate Road to the intersection with
Route 91.
Broadway Extension - either side from Route 1A to Marietta Avenue. (March 10, 1975)
Church Street - either side from its intersection with Long Beach Avenue, westward for
100 feet; also on the southwesterly side of the street an additional 620 feet to the end of the
Town of York, Maine
Traffic Safety Ordinance – Revised April 8, 2019
Page 9
sidewalk in front of the Union Congregational Church (18 Church Street, Map 140/Lot
467).
Church Street – either side from the intersection of Long Beach Avenue to the intersection
of Ridge Road and Railroad Avenue. Parking would be allowed for church services only
on the easterly side of Church Street from NET pole #4 to NET pole #407 also located on
the easterly side of Church Street.
Civil War Monument - along any of the three sides of the monument triangle
County Road - southerly or southwesterly side of the street from the Beach Square to the
parking lot in park property along the Goldenrod property (2 Railroad Avenue, Map
140/Lot 151).
Eastern Point Road - either side. (Adopted Annual Town Meeting 3/11/78)
Freeman Street - either side from Route 1A to Beach Street. (March 22, 1977)
Gull Street - fire lane so designated at its entrance.
Harbor Beach Road- within sixty-five (65) feet in a northerly direction in front of the
access ramp to York Harbor Beach.
*Harris Island Road
• Southwesterly side leading from Route 103 to the residence of Donald D. Durrell
on Harris Island;
• No trailer parking on both sides of Harris Island Road;
• East side of Harris Island Road from CMP pole #43 to CMP pole #17;
• East side of Harris Island Road from Town Dock #1 lot to Route 103;
• Two (2) parking spaces shall be permitted for the Harbor Master on the west side
of Harris Island Road;
• Five (5) parking spaces shall be available for commercial fisherman from 5am-8pm
on the west side of Harris Island Road from Town Dock #1.
Kendall Road - either side from its intersection with Broadway and its intersection with
Ocean Avenue Extension.
*Lindsay Road - either side on the one way sections beginning near the G. Roy Lunt
residence, so-called, and running along the east side of the Old Cemetery and Wilcox
House to the Village Square and from York Street running along the west side of the Old
Cemetery to the junction near the G. Roy Lunt residence, so-called.
Town of York, Maine
Traffic Safety Ordinance – Revised April 8, 2019
Page 10
Long Beach Avenue - either side from Nubble Road northerly to its intersection with
Broadway and Broadway Extension.
Long Beach Avenue - west side from the intersection of Oceanside Avenue, 165 feet in a
northeasterly direction. (September 27, 1999)
Long Beach Avenue - westerly side from Oceanside Avenue southerly to the former York
Beach Corporation limits.
*Long Sands Road - either side from a point at and opposite CMP Pole #2 near the
northerly end of the Village Parking Lot and York OB-GYN parking lot to the Ridge Road
intersection at Bardwell’s Corner. (Adopted at Selectmen’s Meeting 5/11/81)
Marietta Avenue - either side for the entire length. (December 14, 1998)
Milbury Lane - On either side of Milbury Lane from the Norwood Farms Road
intersection.
Moulton Lane - westerly side from the intersection of Route 1A to the southerly boundary
of land of Malcolm Parsons.
Mountain Road - either side from the intersection of US Route #1 westerly along
Mountain Road to CMP Pole #2
Mountain Road- either side from the intersection with Mount A Road to the South
Berwick Town line.
Norton Avenue - either side from Ridge Road to Acorn Street Extension. (November 15,
1976)
Nubble Road - either side commencing at the intersection of Broadway and continuing
southerly, thence westerly along Nubble Road to the intersection of Route 1A. (March 18,
1975)
Ocean Avenue - southerly side from the easterly or southerly side of Hawk Street and
extending southeasterly to the northerly or northwesterly side of Marietta Avenue.
Ocean Avenue - within seventy-five (75) feet of the corner of the northeasterly and
easterly side from the intersection of Main Street or Railroad Avenue
Ocean Avenue Extension - the ocean side from Kendall Road to the intersection of
Willow Avenue
Oceanside Avenue - northerly side from its intersection with Route 1A to its intersection
with Acorn Street with the exception of one space shall be permitted for municipal vehicle
parking at least 20 feet in a westerly direction from the intersection with Route 1A.
Town of York, Maine
Traffic Safety Ordinance – Revised April 8, 2019
Page 11
Organug Road - westerly side between the northerly boundary of the York Middle School
(30 Organug Road, Map 110/Lot 259) extending across Organug Road and the southerly
boundary of the York Middle School (30 Organug Road, Map 110/Lot 259) extending
across Organug Road. (Adopted November 17, 1975)
Pine Hill Road South - either side from CMP Pole #J7 and extending in a northeasterly
direction along Pine Hill Road South to the York-Ogunquit town line, with the exception
of ten (10) diagonal parking spaces directly in front of the Sandpiper Inn.
*Ridge Road - either side by the Winebaum Building (former York Beach Post Office)
from NET Pole number 66 to NET Pole #68. (Selectmen’s Meeting 11/14/88)
Ridge Road - westerly side from the intersection of Oceanside Avenue Extension to a
point 200 feet south, or in a southerly direction from the intersection of Beacon Street
(Special Meetings November 20, 1972 and December 1973)
Ridge Road - easterly side from the intersection of Oceanside Avenue Extension to a point
200 feet south, or in a southerly direction from the intersection of Beacon Street (Special
Meeting December 4, 1973)
Ridge Road - either side in the area between NET Pole #14 and CMP Pole #56.1 on either
side of the Webber Road intersection.
Ridge Road - either side of Ridge Road for 300 feet in a southerly direction from the
intersection of Church Street and Railroad Avenue.
River Road- either side from the intersection with Route 1 to the intersection with Shore
Road except within the designated permit parking areas established in the Permit Parking
Program Ordinance.
Route 1 - on either side of Route 1 from the Kittery town line to the Ogunquit town line.
*Route 1A (Cape Neddick) - either side from the intersection of Route 1 and Route 1A in
Cape Neddick to CMP Pole #38 by the Benton Chandler residence.
Route 1A (Long Beach Avenue) - westerly side within seventy-five (75) feet of the
intersections of Oceanside Avenue.
Route 1A (Main St., YB) - northeasterly or easterly side from the southern boundary of
the York Police Station (36 Main Street, Map 145/ Lot 031)) to the northerly boundary as
it fronts on Route 1A.
Route 1A (Main St., YB) - easterly side from the intersection of Beach Street and
extending to the intersection of Freeman Street
Town of York, Maine
Traffic Safety Ordinance – Revised April 8, 2019
Page 12
*Route 1A (Main St., YB) - northerly or northwesterly side between a point on said street
which is three hundred (300) feet northerly or northeasterly of a point on said street where
the projection of the northerly or northeasterly property line of the Chases Garage premises,
so-called, would intersect with said street line and thence extending in a southerly or
southeasterly direction there from to a point on said street where the projection of the
northerly or northeasterly side of the building wall of the store building owned by Garfields
(5 Railroad Avenue, Map 140/Lot 027) would intersect said street, and which store building
is adjacent to the store premises operated by said Garfield as a news and book store.
(Special Meeting October 2, 1974)
Route 1A (South Main St./Ocean Ave., YB) - either side from Broadway intersection to
the Hawk Street intersection. (Selectmen’s Meeting 9/24/90)
Route 1A (York St., YH) - southerly side from Pole J-47 to front entrance walk to Harbor
Post Office (445 York Street, Map 108/Lot 029).
Route 1A - northerly side from Pole J-58S (by Cumings Drive) to Pole #J-56 (by Hillcroft
Drive)
Route 1A - northerly side from CMP Pole #J-31 to Pole J-34.
Route 1A - southerly side from CMP Pole #J-28 to a point opposite Pole #J-30.
Route 1A - northerly side from a point twenty (20) feet westerly of CMP Pole #J-54 to
Lines Lane.
Route 1A (York St., YH) - northerly side Sentry Hill Road West to a point twenty (20)
feet westerly of Pole J-37.
Route 1A (York St., YH) - westerly side from Orchard Lane to Sentry Hill Road East.
(Adopted at Selectmen’s Meeting 10/10/89)
*Route 1A (York St., YH) - westerly side from Sentry Hill Road west to a point directly
opposite Clark Lane (by Ropke property). (Adopted at Selectmen’s Meeting 10/10/89).
Route 1A (York St., YH) - easterly side from CMP Pole #41 (just past Harmon Park Road)
to Varrell Lane (Adopted at Selectmen’s Meeting 10/10/89)
Route 1A (York St., YH) - southerly side from junction Bath Road to CMP Pole #j-54 - 9
P.M. until 8 A.M. (May 15 through October 1).
Route 1A (York St., YH) - northerly side from junction Lines Lane to Sentry Hill Road
East (May 15 through October 1).
Route 1A (York St., YH) - southerly side “Theater Zone” - rear entrance of Lancaster
Block to Varrell Lane - 6 P.M. until midnight. (May 15 through October 1)
Town of York, Maine
Traffic Safety Ordinance – Revised April 8, 2019
Page 13
Route 1A (York St., York Village) - from a point opposite NET Pole #3/5 extending
easterly to a point opposite NET Pole #J/7 also described as from the easterly side of
Salisbury Avenue to the westerly side of the York Village Fire Station (1 Firehouse Drive,
Map 109/Lot 177) drive entrance.
Route 1A (York St., York Village) - southerly side from CMP Pole #8 northeasterly to
Route 103 intersection (Adopted at Selectmen’s Meeting 9/24/90).
Route 1A (York St., York Village) - southerly side from the junction of the easterly
sideline of Barrell Lane Extension and the southerly side of Route 1A (York Street)
extending easterly to the former Harbor Corporation line.
Route 1A (York St., York Village) - opposite the York Village Elementary School (124
York Street, Map 114/Lot 259) from the day after Labor Day through June 30th annually:
beginning on the southerly side of Route 1A at a point 100 feet westerly of the Elementary
School westerly property line and extending along Route 1A (York Street) to a point 100
feet easterly of the Elementary School easterly property line.
*Route 1A- (York St., York Village) - northerly side from the steps leading to the residence
of Charles Roberts to the intersection of Moulton Lane.
Route 1A -(York St., York Village) - in the part of the Village Square, which is within 20
feet of either side of the westerly entrance to York Hospital (15 Hospital Drive, Map 109/
Lot 183).
*Route 1A -(York St., York Village) - southwesterly side in York Village in the area in
front of the fire station bounded northwesterly by the driveway of Lester M. Bragdon and
southeasterly by the former Williams Avenue.
*Route 1A -(York St., York Village) – either side between the upper driveway to the Town
Hall and the lower driveway to the Town Hall.
Route 91 - within ten (10) feet of the pavement on either side from the intersection of
Route 1 westerly to CMP Co. Pole J3
Route 103 – Easterly side (Lilac Lane) from York Street to Barrell Lane
Route 103 – Westerly side (Lilac Lane) from York Street (Route 1A) to CMP Pole #8
South of the 103 Bridge
Shore Road – either side from the centerline of the channel of the Cape Neddick River
950 feet in a southerly direction on Shore Road. (March 16, 1976)
Town of York, Maine
Traffic Safety Ordinance – Revised April 8, 2019
Page 14
*Shore Road - either side from CMP Co. Pole #J205, by Cape Neddick Lobster Pound,
northerly across bridge to CMP Co. Pole #J210. (Adopted at Selectmen’s Meeting August
29, 1983)
Shore Road - from the easterly side of said Shore Road from the junction of Agamenticus
Avenue and Shore Road, extending in a southerly direction along Shore Road to the Cape
Neddick River Bridge. Also, on the westerly side of Shore Road, beginning at the
intersection of River Road and extending in a southerly direction for 320 feet.
Short Sands Road- either side from the intersection with Route 1 to the intersection with
Ridge Road.
Simpson Lane - easterly side from junction of Route 1A to end of Town way, westerly
side from junction of Route 1A to a point forty (40) feet from hydrant with no parking ten
(10) feet either side of hydrant. (Adopted at Selectmen’s Meeting 11/25/91)
Surf Street - either side from its intersection with Beach Street and extending northerly
and northwesterly to High Street. (March 22, 1977)
Thompson Street and Beach Street (both so-called) - northerly side from the end of the
metered parking zone and extending northerly to Freeman Street.
Varrell Lane - from junction of Route 1A to Harmon Park Road - no parking of vehicles
towing boat trailers and/or boat trailers (Adopted at Selectmen’s Meeting 9/24/90).
Varrell Lane - easterly side from junction Route 1A to end of right of way
Varrell Lane - westerly side from Harmon Park Road to end of right of way.
Webber Road - either side from the intersection of Ridge Road to the intersection of Route
1A (Long Beach Avenue).
Williams Avenue - either side from its intersection with Route 1A for the entire length to
the rear entrance to York Hospital (15 Hospital Drive, Map 109/Lot 183). (Adopted at
Selectmen’s Meeting 12/7/81)
Willow Avenue - either side for its entire length. (Selectmen’s Meeting 9/24/90)
Town of York, Maine
Traffic Safety Ordinance – Revised April 8, 2019
Page 15
Schedule B
One-Way Streets
Beach Ball Field Road, so called, traffic will be one way, entering from Church Street to
(and in the direction toward) Bay Street (April 27, 2004)
Beach Street - in a northerly direction from the square toward Freeman Street
Clark Lane - one way from westerly entrance exiting at its easterly junction with Route
1A (Adopted Annual Town Meeting 4/28/84)
*Lindsay Road - beginning near the residence of G. Roy Lunt and running along the east
side of the Old Cemetery and Wilcox House to the Village Square one way northbound
and the road beginning at York Street opposite the First Parish Congregational Church (180
York Street, Map 115/Lot 013) and running along the west side of the Old Cemetery to the
junction with Lindsay Road near the residence of G. Roy Lunt one way southbound.
York Beach Village – in the village area of York Beach there shall be year-round, oneway
circulation on the following loop of roads:
Railroad Avenue – from the intersection with Ocean Avenue, one-way to the
intersection with Church Street;
Church Street – from the intersection with Railroad Avenue, one-way to the
intersection with Long Beach Avenue;
Long Beach Avenue – from the intersection with Church Street, one-way to the
intersection with Ocean Avenue; and
Ocean Avenue – from the intersection with Long Beach Avenue, one-way to the
intersection with Railroad Avenue.
(Amended April 25, 2011)
Surf Street - in a northerly direction from Beach Street to High Street.
(March 22, 1977)
Town of York, Maine
Traffic Safety Ordinance – Revised April 8, 2019
Page 16
Schedule C
Time Limited Parking Zones
Subsection 1 - Two Hour Parking Zones May 15 through October 1
Route 1A (York Street, YH) - southerly side from junction Barrell Lane to Pole #J54
excepting restricted and No Parking Areas.
Route 1A (York Street, YH) - northerly side Sentry Hill Road east to Sentry Hill Road
west.
Route 1A (York Street, YH) - northerly side 20 feet westerly Pole #J-37 to Pole #J-34.
Route 1A (York Street, YH) - westerly side Varrell Lane from junction 1A to Harmon
Park Road.
Route 1A (York Street, YH) - southerly side from Pole #J50 to Pole #59 (9 A.M. - 6:00
P.M. only). (Adopted at Annual Town Meeting 3/11/78)
Route 1A (York Street, YH) - westerly side from Sentry Hill Road east to Sentry Hill Road
west (Adopted at Selectmen’s Meeting 10/10/89).
Route 1A (York Street, YH) - easterly side from Varrell Lane to No Parking area west of
Post Office entrance. (Adopted at Selectmen’s Meeting 10/10/89).
Subsection 2 - One-Hour Time Zones
Freeman Street - southeasterly side (ocean) from intersection of Bay Haven Road from
the first Monday of June until the second Monday of September until the second Monday
of September. (March 20, 1973).
Long Beach Avenue - westerly side from Nubble Road to 100 feet south of Oceanside
Avenue - limited to 10 minutes at any time between the hours of 9 A.M. and 9 P.M. from
the first Monday of June until the second Monday of September. (March 20, 1973 and
March 16, 1976)
Route 1A (York Street, York Village) - northerly side of the highway in York Village
between the easterly entrance to the driveway leading to the Town Hall and the junctions
of York Street and Long Sands Road for a longer period than one between the hours of 9
A.M. and 6 P.M. any day; nor for a longer period than thirty minutes between the hours of
6 P.M. and 9 P.M. any day.
Town of York, Maine
Traffic Safety Ordinance – Revised April 8, 2019
Page 17
Subsection 3 – 15 Minute Time Limit.
Harris Island Road –
• The two parking spaces immediately north of CMP pole #15 shall be posted for
15 minute temporary parking to allow for loading and unloading of small handcarried
boats using the Strawberry Island access point.
• Two (2) spaces on the east side of the road from Strawberry Island Gate to CMP
pole #14.1 for 15 minute, temporary parking for loading and unloading of small
hand carried boats using the strawberry island access point.
Ocean Avenue – on the southwesterly side of the road, 3 spaces generally in front of 9
Ocean Avenue (currently York Beach Grocery and Deli) and 2 spaces in front of 1 Ocean
Avenue (currently Kearsage House).
Oceanside Avenue – 1 space on the northern side at least 20 feet in a westerly direction
from the intersection with Route 1A.
Railroad Avenue – on the northerly side of the road, 1 space in front of 7 Railroad
Avenue (currently Sweet Josie).
Railroad Avenue – on the northerly side of the road, 1 space in front of 21 Railroad
Avenue (currently the Chamber of Commerce Visitor Information Office).
Railroad Avenue – on the southerly side of the road, 1 space in front of 16 Railroad
Avenue (currently Pizza by Paras restaurant).
Route 1A (York St.)- 1 space in front of the York Harbor Post Office (445 York Street).
Route 1A (York St., York Village) - from front steps of the York Village Crafts (211 York
Street, Map 109/ Lot 041) extending easterly towards Hospital Drive to the beginning of
the statutory no parking zone associated with the intersection of York Street and Hospital
Drive.
Route 103/ Wiggley Bridge/Steedman Woods parking area– the parking space closest
to the Route 103 bridge.
Shore Road - On the westerly side of Shore Road, beginning at the end of the no parking
zone and extending 60’ to CMP pole #212.
Subsection 4 – 30 Minute Time Limit.
Beach Street – on the southerly side of the road, the 2 parking spaces closest to the
intersection of Beach Street with Main Street.
Town of York, Maine
Traffic Safety Ordinance – Revised April 8, 2019
Page 18
Subsection 5 – Temporary Loading Zone.
County Road – on the easterly side of the road, 1 parking space in front of 3 Main
Street (currently Whispering Sands store) shall be reserved for use as a loading zone
for delivery vehicles between the hours of 6:00 AM and 2:00 PM. (NOTE: The
address for Whispering Sands is not a typo. It is still listed as 3 Main Street in the
Assessing database. The street frontage for the property is actually on County
Road.)
Railroad Avenue – on the northerly end of the Town parking lot at 25 Railroad
Avenue, 1 space in front of 21 Railroad Avenue (currently the Daily Grind coffee
shop).
Town of York, Maine
Traffic Safety Ordinance – Revised April 8, 2019
Page 19
Schedule D
No Through Trucks and Buses
Kendall Road
High Street
Harbor Beach Road:
Buses are prohibited on Harbor Beach Rd. with the following three exceptions:
1. Buses owned by the Town or Operated under the direction of the Town.
2. Buses with a seating capacity of 20 or fewer passengers that are owned by a facility
having a principal place of business in York.
3. Locally operated Trolley or Shuttle Service.
Town of York, Maine
Traffic Safety Ordinance – Revised April 8, 2019
Page 20
Schedule E
Parking Meters
A. Vehicle parking shall be controlled by single space and kiosk multi space meters in the
locations listed below. Enforcement will begin on May 15th and continue through
October 15th each calendar year, between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M.
Parking spaces controlled by kiosks shall be charged a rate of $2.00/hour. Parking
spaces controlled by coin only meters shall be charged a rate of $1.00/hour.
B. Vehicles longer than twenty feet (one (1) parking space) in length shall be
restricted from parking in all metered spaces. Vehicles may occupy one
metered space only. (April 27, 2004)
1. Available parking space at the York High School parking lot may
be utilized for vehicles longer than twenty feet, or too wide for
conventional vehicle parking spaces.
2. Additional handicap parking is also available at the York High
School parking lot.
Town of York, Maine
Traffic Safety Ordinance – Revised April 8, 2019
Page 21
Schedule F
Trolley Stops
• On the southeasterly side of Long Beach Avenue near the intersection with
Webber Road.
• On the southeasterly side of Long Beach Avenue near the intersection of Nubble
Road.
Town of York, Maine
Traffic Safety Ordinance – Revised April 8, 2019
Page 22
Schedule G
Commercial Operation of Horse Drawn Vehicles Ordinance
Added to the Traffic Safety Ordinance by Selectmen’s Vote on April 14, 2003
1. Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide for public safety and convenience, to
manage traffic and to provide for the welfare of the animal(s). The Ordinance
applies only to commercial operation as defined below.
2. Definitions
A. Operation of a Horse Drawn Vehicle: Any carriage, wagon, cart, sled or
sleigh, or other device, whose principal means of propulsion, is a single or a
two-horse hitch.
B. Commercial Operation: A business enterprise that upon payment of a fee
offers rides in a horse drawn vehicle.
C. Business Enterprise: Any individual, partnership, corporation, association or
other legal entity.
3. Regulations
A. The commercial operation of a horse drawn vehicle without a permit is
prohibited except as provided in this ordinance.
B. The Town Clerk shall issue a maximum of two carriage permits annually for
the commercial operation of horse drawn vehicles along the specific route
described below. Each permit entitles the permit holder to operate a single
carriage only. Permits will be available on the first Monday in January at the
Town Clerks office during the Clerk’s regular business hours. If there are
more qualified applicants than permits as of the close of business on that
Monday then the permits shall be issue on a first come, first served basis with
priority preference to York taxpayers; provided, however, there shall be a
right of first refusal for existing permit holders for an overall term not to
exceed five (5) years. Permits will be one hundred dollars ($100). Permits are
non-transferable, except where there is a change of ownership of the business,
in which case the permit is transferable to the new owner for the balance of
that permit period.
1. Permit Holders are restricted to operation in the following area: Ocean
Ave., to Railroad Ave., to Church Street, to Long Beach Ave., to
Broadway Ave., to Mosley Ave., to Ocean Ave. Ext., to Ocean Ave.
Town of York, Maine
Traffic Safety Ordinance – Revised April 8, 2019
Page 23
Except as otherwise provided, passenger pick up and discharge will be
done only in front of the Trolley Stop on Ocean Ave.
C. The vehicle to be used must be inspected by the Police Department before a
permit is granted. Prior to operation, the operator of the horse drawn vehicle
must certify in writing that the horses will be equipped with their leather,
rubber or borium horse shoes in order to prevent damage to the road surface.
D. The Owner must carry liability insurance in an amount not less than $500,000
general liability, combined single limit. Evidence of insurance must be
presented prior to the issuance of a permit, with the town as an additional
named insured. Thirty (30) days advance notice of cancellation shall be
required.
E. Prior to the issuance of a permit, a veterinary certificate showing that the
horse(s) is (are) capable of performing the work required, and that it is (they
are) in suitable health shall be presented.
F. Horse drawn vehicles shall not operate when the temperature is 90 degrees or
over, or in a combined temperature and humidity of 140 degrees or over, or in
weather detrimental to either the horse of the public.
G. Horses shall not be worked more than 8 hours in any continuous 24-hour
period. There shall be rest period of 15 minutes after each 2-hour working
period.
H. A manure catching device shall be use. The operator shall be responsible for
cleaning up any spillage immediately. Failure to clean up spillage will result
in revocation of the permit. Disposal of such spillage shall be in a covered
container provided by the operator. The operator shall ensure that the
container is disposed of properly.
I. The commercial operation of horse drawn vehicles for weddings, parades and
other events may be allowed in York upon review and approval of the Chief
of Police.
J. Nothing in the ordinance shall be construed as regulating recreational horse
riding.
4. Severability
The invalidity of any section or provision of this Ordinance shall not affect the
validity of any other section or provision of this Ordinance.
5. Enforcement
The Chief of Police or any of his designated officers will enforce this Ordinance.
Town of York, Maine
Traffic Safety Ordinance – Revised April 8, 2019
Page 24
6. Civil Penalty
Any person adjudicated in violation of this Ordinance shall be liable for a civil
penalty.
7. Effective Date
This Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon approval by a majority
vote of the York Board of Selectmen.
The Commercial Operation of Horse Drawn Vehicles Ordinance was re-created as a Word file by the
Community Development Department on December 20, 2010, because it was found to be missing from the
Traffic Safety Ordinance. It is identical in content and organization to the version labeled as the “3/12/03
Draft,” which was adopted by Selectmen’s vote on April 14, 2003.
Town of York, Maine
Traffic Safety Ordinance – Revised April 8, 2019
Page 25
Schedule H
Harbor Usage Permit Parking
From June 1st through September 30th each year, between 5 a.m. and 5 p.m. daily, parking
along the easterly side of Harris Island Road from CMP pole #15 to CMP pole #17 shall
be limited to vehicles with a Harbor Usage Permit from the Town. (Amended 4/25/2011)
Town of York, Maine
Traffic Safety Ordinance – Revised April 8, 2019
Page 26
SCHEDULE OF AMENDMENTS:
Parking Meter Fees: (Adopted at Selectmen’s Meeting 2/13/89)
(Amended at Selectmen’s Meeting 12/23/97)
(Amended at Selectmen’s Meeting 7/20/98)
(Amended at Selectmen’s Meeting11/16/15)
(Amended at Selectmen’s Meeting 3/13/17)
Traffic Ordinance: Adopted 9/9/97 Vote: 4-0-0
Amended 12/23/97 Vote: 3-1-0
Amended 02/24/98 Vote: 5-0-0
Amended 07/20/98 Vote: 3-2-0
Amended 12/14/98 Vote: 5-0-0
Amended 07/12/99 Vote: 5-0-0
Amended 09/27/99 Vote: 5-0-0
Amended 09/27/99 Vote: 5-0-0
Amended 06/12/00 Vote: 3-0-0
Amended 07/23/01 Vote: 3-2-0
Amended 09/17/01 Vote: 5-0-0
Amended 05/20/02 Vote: 5-0-0
Amended 04/14/03 Vote: 4-0-0
Amended 04/27/04 Vote: 5-0-0
Amended 03/26/07 Vote: 4-0-0
Amended 04/09/07 Vote: 4-0-0
Amended 07/21/08 Vote: 5-0-0
*Amended 04/27/09 Vote: 5-0-0
Amended 05/04/09 Vote: 5-0-0
Amended 06/08/09 Vote: 5-0-0
Amended 04/25/11 Vote: 4-0-0
Amended 04/22/13 Vote: 5-0-0
Amended 04/22/13 Vote: 5-0-0
Amended 04/22/13 Vote: 5-0-0
Amended 06/10/13 Vote: 4-1-0
Amended 05/11/15 Vote: 4-0-0
Amended 11/16/15 Vote: 5-0-0
Amended 12/14/15 Vote: 5-0-0
Amended 1/25/16 Vote: 5-0-0
Amended 6/27/16 Vote: 4-0-0
Amended 6/29/16 Vote: 5-0-0
Amended 10/24/16 Vote: 5-0-0
Amended 3/13/17 Vote: 5-0-0
Amended 7/24/17 Vote: 5-0-0
Amended 3/11/19 Vote: 5-0-0
Amended 4/08/19 Vote: 5-0-0
* Corrections of 7/18/2012. While considering edits to the 4/25/11 version of the Ordinance (edits
which were not enacted), 14 instances of un-approved changes were discovered in the 4/25/11 version
Town of York, Maine
Traffic Safety Ordinance – Revised April 8, 2019
Page 27
of the Traffic Safety Ordinance. Research showed the April 25, 2011 version of the Ordinance was
word processed starting with a version of the Ordinance which included amendments never approved
by the Board of Selectmen. It was also missing the revision date of April 27, 2009. This information is
based on a comparison of documents starting with the July 21, 2008 version and moving forward
through subsequent amendments, as documented in a memo from the Community Development
Director to the Town Manager dated June 27, 2012. To remedy this problem, the missing revision
date has been added to the list of revisions above, and the 14 improper changes have been removed,
restoring the text in these sections to match exactly the text as written in the 7/21/08 version of the
Ordinance. All these changes were in Schedules A and B – the descriptions of No Parking Zones and
One-Way Streets. Each section of text affected by these changes is denoted by an asterisk (“*”).

Ordinance Regulating the Use of the Cliff Path and Fisherman’s Walk – Amended November, 8, 2016
Ordinance Regulating the Use of the Cliff Path and Fisherman's Walk
Town of York
Section 1 Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the safe, responsible use of the Cliff Path
and Fisherman's Walk, hereafter referred to as the "Walk", and to protect the privacy of
citizens that own property along the Walk.
Section 2 Location
A. The section of Walk regulated under this Ordinance shall include all publicly owned
sections beginning at the Wiggley Bridge and proceeding in a northeasterly direct ion
along the shores of York Harbor and the Atlantic Ocean.
B. All users of the Walk shall keep to the traveled section of the path and respect the
privacy of property owners along the Walk. Trespassing on private property along the Walk
shall be considered a violation of this Ordinance.
Section 3 Pedestrian Use Only
The Walk is intended for pedestrian use only. Non-pedestrian uses such as but not limited
to, motorized vehicles, bicycles, skateboards, in line and roller skates are prohibited from
using the Walk. The only exception is bicycles and motorized vehicles, which may be
utilized, by the Town or other authorized personnel for maintenance, law enforcement and
public safety activities.
Section 4 Domestic Animals
Domestic Animals are not permitted on the Walk except when on a leash. The animal's
owner is responsible for cleaning up any waste left by the pet. Except for service animals as
defined by the Americans With Disabilities Act, domestic animals are prohibited on the Cliff
Walk, from Harbor Beach Road northerly.
Section 5 Hours of Operation
The section of the Walk beyond Harbor Beach in a northeasterly direction will be open·
for public use in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. Following a public
hearing, the Board of Selectmen shall adopt, and may amend, a schedule which limits the hours
of public use. These hours shall never begin earlier than sunrise nor extend later than sunset,
and may be more restrictive. The hours may vary by day of the week, season of the year, or
other relevant factors. The schedule shall be posted at the sign on the Harbor Beach end of the
Walk. Any portion of the Walk may be closed when in the opinion of Town personnel
hazardous conditions necessitate or repairs are required.
Ordinance Regulating the Use of the Cliff Path and Fisherman’s Walk – Amended November, 8, 2016
Section 5-AProhibition of Municipal Signs
The Town shall not post any signs directing the public to the Walk that are not on or
immediately adjacent to the Walk, and shall remove any such signs that exist prior to enactment
of the amendment of the Ordinance.
Section 6 Littering and Use of Alcohol
No littering or disposal of garbage of any kind shall be permitted. Use of Alcohol anywhere
on the path is prohibited.
Section 7 Noise Restrictions
No radios, boom boxes or similar electronic devices that emit music or other sound are
permitted on the Walk except that devices with head phones designed to be heard by the
user only shall be permitted.
Section 8 Authority of Selectmen to Amend
The Board of Selectmen shall have the authority to amend this ordinance after holding a
duly advertised public hearing.
Section 9 Penalties
Any person who violates this ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty of $300.00 for the
first offense, $350.00 for the second offense, and $400.00 for the third and subsequent offenses.
Section 10 Waiver/Payment of Fines
Any person charged with a violation of this section, shall be allowed to waive such violation
and tender to the Town of York the fine amount if paid within 20 days of issuance of the
summons. If the waiver fine is paid, no appearance before a District Court Judge or other
judicial officer shall be required. If the offender pays the waiver fine, the matter will be closed
in the York Police Records system and listed as a subsequent offense for future violations.
If the offender chooses not to pay the waiver fine, he/she shall appear in court on the specified
date to answer for the ordinance violation. If the offender is found to have committed the
offense in court, fines, applicable court fees, attorney’s fees, and prosecution costs may apply.
Fines recovered will be utilized for maintenance of the Walk.

SOLID WASTE COLLECTION, RECYCLING AND DISPOSAL ORDINANCE
RULES AND REGULATIONS, AS AMENDED, TO GOVERN THE
USE OF THE YORK LANDFILL
(Closure Regulations)
Intent: The intent of these rules and regulations is to provide for the closure of the town
landfill. The State Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) has required the town to
cease all disposal operations at its landfill effective March 1 1994. The Selectmen have decided
to comply with this DEP requirement and to use other methods for bulky waste, demolition
debris, collection and disposal.
Section 1. Landfill Closure
The Town landfill, effective March 1, 1994 shall be closed. No person may use the landfill
for the disposal of the following wastes: construction/demolition debris, solid waste, refuse,
rubbish, trash, hazardous waste, unacceptable waste, recoverable waste, wet waste, liquid waste,
white goods and scrap metal, or any other class of wastes. No wastes of any class shall be
accepted at the town landfill after the closure date.
Section 2. Violations and Penalties
Any person, firm or corporation who violate any provision of the Ordinance shall be subject
to a fine of $100.00 for each violation. Each day such a violation is continued is a separate
offense.
Section 3. Waiver/Payment of Fines
Any person charged with a violation of this section, shall be allowed to waive such violation and
tender to the Town of York the fine amount if paid within 20 days of issuance of the summons. If
the waiver fine is paid, no appearance before a District Court Judge or other judicial officer shall
be required. If the offender pays the waiver fine, the matter will be closed in the York Police
Records system and listed as a subsequent offense for future violations.
If the offender chooses not to pay the waiver fine, he/she shall appear in court on the specified date
to answer for the ordinance violation. If the offender is found to have committed the offense in
court, fines, applicable court fees, attorney’s fees, and prosecution costs may apply.
Adopted at Selectmen's Meeting, March 9, 1993
Amendment #1, S e l e c t m e n ’ s Me e t i n g , Ma r c h 11, 1 9 9 3 (Section 2.C.
"3/4 ton" changed to 1 ton)
Amendment #2, Selectmen's Meeting, March 22, 1994 (former sections 1, 2, 3 and 4
eliminated new sections 1 and 2 added)
Amendment #3, Selectmen's Meeting, May 11, 2015 (amended section 2 and added
section 3)
TOWN OF YORK WELL ORDINANCE
ADOPTED 03/18/92
ARTICLE 1 – FINDINGS
The Town of York finds that:
1.1 It is preferable that property located within a reasonable distance of the public water supply be
connected to the public water supply as opposed to drilling private wells.
1.2 The York Water District has existing service covering most of zoning districts BUS-3, RES-5,
RES-6 and RES-7.
1.3 The installation of wells in neighborhoods currently served only by summer water or without
public water inhibits the likelihood of year-round public water being extended to the
neighborhood in the future.
1.4 The land area represented by the BUS-3, RES-5, RES-6 and RES-7 zoning districts is largely
comprised of small (3500 – 8000 sf) individual lots.
1.5 While the York Sewer District services a large portion of the area represented by the BUS-3,
RES-5, RES-6 and RES-7 zoning districts there are still a large number of septic systems in use
on parcels which do not meet the current state minimum lot size requirement of 20,000 sf for
installation of on-site sewage disposal.
1.6 The existence of septic systems on marginal lots provides a potential for groundwater
contamination and therefore a potential health threat.
1.7 The State Plumbing Code establishes a setback requirement for septic systems from wells. In a
neighborhood where lots are very small, the potential exists for the placement of a well to limit
or prohibit the installation of either a new septic system or a replacement system thus inhibiting
use of abutting property.
1.8 Commercial operations, including home occupations are generally heavier users of water and are
less appropriate for locations not served by Town water.
ARTICLE 2 – WELLS PROHIBITED
2.1 It shall be a violation of this ordinance for anyone to drill, dig, or otherwise install a well for the
supply of water within the confines of zoning districts BUS-3, RES-5, RES-6 and RES-7, except
a specified in Sections 2.5 and 2.6 below.
2.2 Existing wells within the confines of zoning districts BUS-3, RES-5, RES-6 and RES-7 shall not
be used to service any additional dwellings or parcels of land except as specified in Section 2.5
and 2.6 below.
Town of York Well Ordinance
Adopted 03/18/92 – Amended 04/10/93
Page 1 of 3
2.3 Existing wells within the confines of zoning districts BUS-3, RES-5, RES-6 and RES-7 shall not
be used as a water supply for the conversion of the property from residential use to any nonresidential
use nor for the conversion of an existing non-residential use to any use which requires
a greater use of water than the existing use except as specified in Section 2.5 below.
2.4 Existing wells within the confines of zoning districts BUS-3, RES-5, RES-6 and RES-7 which
are associated with residential uses shall not be used as a water supply for the addition of any
home occupation which would require a greater use of water than the existing residential use
except as specified in Section 2.5 below.
2.5 The Code Enforcement Officer may approve a special exception from the terms of paragraphs
2.1, 2.2, 2.3 and 2.4 if he/she finds that all of the following conditions are met.
2.5.1 The property on which the well is to be placed must be connected to the public sewer
system.
2.5.2 All abutting property which has been built upon must be connected to the public sewer
system.
2.5.3 The year-round public water supply must be extended greater than 400 feet to service the
property.
Such special exception shall be in force for a period of 5 years at which time it must be reviewed
by the Code Enforcement Officer for compliance with the above criteria. Properties which upon
review no longer comply with the three criteria above shall be required to discontinue use of the
well within a time period specified by the Code Enforcement Officer.
2.6 The Code Enforcement Officer may grant a special exception to the terms of Articles 2.1 and
2.2 when such an exception is necessary to provide a water source as a replacement to a well
existing as of March 18, 1992. This exception shall be granted only if the public water supply
must be extended greater than 400 feet to service the property containing the failed well. All
special exceptions granted pursuant to this section shall expire within one (1) year of the date
which the public water supply passes the property at which time the property must be connected
to the public water supply and use of the well discontinued.
ARTICLE 3 – ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY
3.1 The Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for the enforcement of this ordinance. All
enforcement actions will be pursuant to Article 19 of the Town of York Zoning Ordinance.
ARTICLE 4 – APPEALS
4.1 Parties aggrieved by the provisions of this ordinance or by any decision of the Code
Enforcement Officer under this ordinance may appeal to the Board of Appeals following the
procedures and criteria of Article 18.8 of the Town of York Zoning Ordinance.
Town of York Well Ordinance
Adopted 03/18/92 – Amended 04/10/93
Page 2 of 3
4.2 The Board of Appeals may not vary the terms of this ordinance for the purpose of allowing any
commercial activity nor for any home occupation which would require a greater use of water
than a single-family dwelling nor for any duplex or multi-family dwelling.
4.3 The Board of Appeals may not vary the terms of this ordinance for the purpose of allowing a
seasonal dwelling to convert to a year-round dwelling.
4.4 Parties aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Appeals pursuant to this ordinance may appeal
to Superior Court in accordance with the terms of State Statute.
ARTICLE 5 – DEFINITIONS
5.1 Public water shall refer to the York Water District.
5.2 Public sewer shall refer to the York Sewer District.
ARTICLE 6 – SEVERABILITY AND CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCE
6.1 This ordinance shall not nullify the more restrictive provisions of covenants, agreements, other
ordinances or laws, but shall prevail notwithstanding such provisions which are less restrictive.
6.2 Should any section or part thereof of this ordinance be held by the courts to be invalid the same
shall not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so
declared to be invalid.
ARTICLE 7 – ENFORCEMENT AND VIOLATIONS
7.1 It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this ordinance
following the provisions of Article 10 of the Town of York Zoning Ordinance.
ARTICLE 8 – EFFECTIVE DATE
8.1 This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its adoption by the voters of the Town
of York at a Town Meeting.
Town of York Well Ordinance
Adopted 03/18/92 – Amended 04/10/93
Page 3 of 3

WHEELER WILDLI FE REFUGE ORDINANCE
Section On e . Land Area
Area described as being bounded northwesterly by U.S. Route 103, southwesterly by the
dike running from said U.S. Route 103 to Harris Island and easterly and westerly by
Harris Island, Bragdon’s Island, and the roadway connecting said Harris Island and
Bragdon Island, and the westerly sideline of the town way leading from U.S. Route 103
over Bragdon’s Island being the entire area acquired by inhabitants of the Town of York
in 1961 for dredging spoil, including all Town land held in trust as a wildlife refuge, is
hereby declared to the “Wheeler Wildlife Refuge.”
Section Two. Prohibitions
Within the limits of the area described in Section 1, it shall be unlawful to operate motor
vehicles, deposit fill, erect structures, or remove wildlife or botanical specimens.
Section Three. Violations/Penalties
Any person who violates this ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty of $100.00 for the
first offense, $150.00 for the second offense, and $250.00 for the third and subsequent
offenses.
Section Four. Waiver / Payment of Fines
Any person charged with a violation of this section, shall be allowed to waive such violation
and tender to the Town of York the fine amount if paid within 20 days of issuance of the
summons. If the waiver fine is paid, no appearance before a District Court Judge or other
judicial officer shall be required. If the offender pays the waiver fine, the matter will be
closed in the York Police Records system and listed as a subsequent offense for future
violations.
If the offender chooses not to pay the waiver fine, he/she shall appear in court on the
specified date to answer for the ordinance violation. If the offender is found to have
committed the offense in court, fines, applicable court fees, attorney’s fees, and prosecution
costs may apply.

Town of York, Maine
Wireless Communications Facilities Ordinance – Amended November 8, 2016
1
Table of Contents
1.1 Title and Effective Date pg 2
1.2 Authority pg 2
1.3 Purpose pg 2
1.4 Applicability pg 2
1.5 Approval Authority pg 3
1.6 Technical Assistance pg 3
1.7 Locations for WCFs pg 3
1.8 Approval Process pg 4
1.9 Standards of Review pg 7
1.10 Amendment to an Approved Application pg 11
1.11 Abandonment pg 11
1.12 Appeals pg 12
1.13 Administration and Enforcement pg 12
1.14 Penalties pg 12
1.15 Conflict and Severability pg 12
1.16 Definitions pg 12
Town of York, Maine
Wireless Communications Facilities Ordinance – Amended November 8, 2016
2
Wireless Communications Facilities Ordinance
1.1 Title and Effective Date
This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the “Wireless Communications Facility Ordinance” of York,
Maine (hereinafter “the Ordinance”). This Ordinance becomes effective as of November 5, 2002.
1.2 Authority
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the enabling provisions of Article VIII, Part 2, Section 1 of the
Maine Constitution, the provisions of Title 30-A M.R.S. A. Section 3001 (Home Rule), and the
provisions of the Planning and Land Use Regulation Act, Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 4312 et seq.
1.3 Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide a process and to set standards for the construction, Expansion
and Modification of wireless communications facilities (WCF), to protect the historical, scenic and visual
character of the Town of York, to comply with federal laws and regulations regarding wireless
communications facilities and to provide for Reasonable Access.
1.4 Applicability
This Ordinance applies to all construction, Expansion, Modification, maintenance, and operation of
wireless communications facilities except:
A. Emergency WCF - Temporary wireless communications facilities for emergency
communications by public officials.
B. Maintenance or repair - Maintenance or repair of a WCF and related equipment provided that there
is no change in the height or any other dimension of the facility.
C. Temporary wireless communications facility - Temporary WCF, in operation for a maximum period
of seven (7) days.
D. Antenna as Accessory Uses - An antenna, other than parabolic dish antenna greater than five (5) feet
in diameter, that receives only and is accessory to a permitted use, that is, related to such use but
clearly incidental and subordinate.
E. Utility District Facilities – A Yagi or omni antenna utilized solely by a utility district which provides
water or sewer services within the Town, and which complies with the following standards:
1. The antenna dimensions are less than 4’ in every dimension; and
2. The maximum height of the antenna either:
a. Complies with the structure height limit for the base zoning district in which it is located,
regardless of that to which the antenna is mounted; or
b. Exceeds the structure height limit for the base zoning district in which it is located,
provided the antenna is mounted on an un-guyed wooden utility pole of any height. The
antenna may be mounted directly on the pole, or on a mast attached to the pole. The
antenna mounting height shall be the minimum height necessary to provide the required
function, as demonstrated to the CEO by a path study.
Town of York, Maine
Wireless Communications Facilities Ordinance – Amended November 8, 2016
3
F. Municipal WCF – any Town-owned wireless communications facility to be used for conduct of
operations by the Town of York, provided such facility is not located in or within 500 feet of an
historic district. Collocation by users other than the Town shall be allowed but is subject to the
standard permitting process.
1.5 Approval Authority
No person or agency shall construct or expand a WCF without approval of the Code Enforcement Officer
(CEO) or the Planning Board as follows:
A. Approval by the CEO is required for:
1. A WCF no greater than 65 feet in height used for licensed amateur (“Ham”) radio, which is not
additionally licensed or used for any commercial purpose, other than by the licensed amateur
radio operator, but only if there is no other WCF on the parcel on which the WCF is to be located.
2. Collocation on an existing Monopole WCF or other existing WCF, and which does not increase
the height of the Support Structure.
3. A Disguised WCF no greater than 35 feet in height.
4. A Hidden WCF.
The CEO may, at his discretion, elect to have the Planning Board, rather than the CEO, review any such
application for a WCF for approval.
B. Approval by the Planning Board is required for any other WCF permitted under this
Ordinance.
1.6 Technical Assistance
The CEO or Planning Board may obtain services of professional engineers and other consultants to review
and inspect the applicant’s proposal or any portion thereof. Such services are permitted to include but are
not limited to engineering and technical review, planning review, environmental assessment review, soils
review, mechanical and structural engineering review, and the investigation of possible alternative WCFs
described in the lists of preferences herein. Such costs shall be borne by the applicant.
1.7 Locations for WCFs
A. Prohibited WCFs
New WCFs with either guy wires or latticed towers are prohibited.
B. Monopole WCFs
Ground Mounted WCFs greater than 85 feet in height are deemed to be Monopole WCFs, for the
purposes of this ordinance. WCFs with Monopole Support Structures (that is, a single pole set into the
ground or concrete pad) are permitted only in the Monopole WCF Overlay Districts, but not in the
Shoreland Overlay Zone. The Monopole WCF Overlay Districts are as designated on the Zoning Map
of York, and initially they are these two areas: the area between Route 1 and the Maine Turnpike, and
the east-west corridor which is 2500 feet wide and bounded on the southwest by Route 91, on the
southeast by New Boston Road and Boulter Pond and its outlet, and on the northwest by the York town
line.
C. Other WCFs
Disguised WCFs, roof mounted WCFs, structure mounted WCFs, ground mounted WCFs, micro cell
WCFs, Mast WCFs, Whip antenna WCFs and other short and small WCFs are permitted in any area
of the Town of York, other than Historic Districts or attached to Historic Buildings. Hidden WCFs
are permitted in any area of the Town of York.
Town of York, Maine
Wireless Communications Facilities Ordinance – Amended November 8, 2016
4
D. Priority List for WCFs
New WCF must be located according to this list of preference or priority, listed from most preferred
to least preferred:
1. Hidden WCFs.
2. Collocation on an existing Support Structure.
3. Disguised WCFs.
4. Location on existing structures, including but not limited to buildings, water towers, utility poles
and towers, light poles or light stanchions, provided that such installation preserves the character
and integrity of those structures.
5. Ground Mounted WCFs.
6. Location on a new Monopole WCF in the Monopole WCF Overlay Districts.
1.8 Approval Process
In accordance with Section 1.5 above, the CEO or Planning Board shall review applications for WCFs.
The Planning Board shall follow the procedure for site plan approval in the Zoning Ordinance, and all of
the substantive as well as procedural requirements for site plan approval shall apply. The CEO shall
follow the procedure for building permits in the Zoning Ordinance, and other pertinent York Ordinances.
A. Pre-Application Conference
Applicants seeking approval of either the CEO or the Planning Board under this ordinance shall meet
with the Town Planner or his or her designee prior to filing an application according to this ordinance.
At this meeting, the Planner or the designee shall explain the ordinance provisions as well as
application forms and fees required under this ordinance.
B. Public Notice
For WCFs requiring approval of the Planning Board, the applicant shall give public notice as provided
for site plan applications, except that for notice purposes the term “abutter” shall mean an owner of
property within 2500 feet of the property on which a Monopole WCF is proposed and such notice shall
be mailed 14 days prior to the Public Hearing. For WCFs which the CEO is reviewing, the applicant
shall give public notice as provided for site plan applications, except that for notice purposes the term
“abutter” shall mean an owner of property immediately adjacent to the property on which a WCF is
proposed.
When a Monopole WCF is proposed, a sign giving notice of the application shall be posted on a public
way at or near the proposed site, and must contain the words “Tower Proposed” in large enough format
to be readable from a motor vehicle driving by at 35 mph. The CEO shall review and approve the sign
design and location before it is posted, the sign must contain the same information required in the public
notice required for site plan applications, and the sign must be in place at least 21 days and before any
balloon or crane visual testing, giving the date and time for such testing, and any alternate dates for
such testing.
C. Fees
Fees associated with permits and reviews required under this Ordinance shall be in
accordance with the fee schedule as adopted by the Board of Selectmen. Planning Board applications
shall also be subject to any fees as outlined in Town of York Site Plan Regulations. In addition to the
application fee, the applicant shall reimburse the Town for costs of professional engineers and other
consultants hired by the Town to review and inspect the applicant’s proposal when the Town is unable
to do so with its existing staffing resources. Such services include but are not limited to engineering
Town of York, Maine
Wireless Communications Facilities Ordinance – Amended November 8, 2016
5
and technical review, legal review, planning review, environmental review, soils review, and
mechanical and structural engineering review. In the event that a project requires professional services
beyond that which is included in the base fee, the applicant shall reimburse the Town at the cost rate for
those professional services. The Town is permitted to require that the applicant deposit an amount with
the Town to cover anticipated costs of retaining services or consultants. The Town shall return to the
applicant any unused funds within thirty (30) days of the decision by the CEO or Planning Board on an
application.
D. Applications
Persons seeking approval of the CEO or of the Planning Board under this Ordinance shall submit an
application which shall include all of the information and materials required for site plan approval, and
in addition the following:
1. Qualification as an Applicant and Statement of Compliance with FCC Regulations
A copy of the FCC license for the facility, or license to operate within an assigned
geographic area including the Town of York, and a signed statement from the owner or operator of
the facility attesting that the facility complies with and will comply with FCC regulations. So long
as such a licensee joins the application as a co-applicant, another party may seek the approval
described herein.
2. Identification of Existing Facilities - A USGS 7.5 minute topographical map showing the location
of all WCFs within a three (3) mile radius of the proposed facility.
3. Visual impacts of the proposed facility:
a. Elevation drawings of the proposed facility, and any other proposed structures, showing
height above ground level;
b. Computer generated photographic simulations of the proposed facility at full
capacity, showing the facility from all public rights of way and from representative nearby
properties from which the facility will be visible. Each photograph must be labeled with the
line of sight, elevation, and the date taken imprinted on the photograph. The photographs
must show the color of the facility and the method of screening, if any screening is required.
4. A written description of the need for the particular facility in the particular location. It should also
describe reasonably anticipated Expansion of the proposed facilities on the proposed site and
related facilities in the region, and on reasonably anticipated changes of technology and their
effect on Expansions of the proposed facility. This submission requirement does not require
disclosure of confidential business information, but failure to cite reasonably anticipated
expansions in this application will be a matter of public record that can be an issue to be
considered in later applications for Expansion.
5. Evidence demonstrating that no existing building, site, or structure can accommodate the
applicant’s proposed facility, the evidence for which shall comprise one or more of the following:
a. Evidence that no existing facilities are located within the area targeted to be served by a
proposed WCF which meet the applicant’s engineering requirements;
b Evidence that existing facilities do not have sufficient height or cannot be increased in height
at a reasonable cost to meet the applicant’s engineering requirements;
c. Evidence that existing facilities do not have sufficient structural strength to support
applicant’s proposed antenna and related equipment, specifically:
Town of York, Maine
Wireless Communications Facilities Ordinance – Amended November 8, 2016
6
(1) Planned, necessary equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing
facility, considering the existing and planned use of those facilities, and these
existing facilities cannot be reinforced to accommodate the new equipment;
(2) The applicant’s proposed antenna or equipment would cause electromagnetic
interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna or
equipment on the existing facility would cause interference with the applicant’s
proposed antenna; and
(3) Existing or approved facilities do not have space on which planned equipment can
be placed so it can function effectively.
d. For WCFs existing prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, the fees, costs, or
contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share or modify an existing facility
are considered to be unreasonable. Costs exceeding the pro rata share of a new facility
development are presumed to be unreasonable. This evidence shall also be satisfactory for a
Support Structure built after the passage of the Ordinance.
e. Evidence that the applicant has made diligent good faith efforts to negotiate
collocation on an existing facility, building, or structure, and has been denied access.
f. Evidence that the applicant has analyzed the feasibility of using repeaters or micro cells in
conjunction with existing or proposed WCFs to provide coverage to the intended service area.
6. A signed, acknowledged statement to be recorded in the York County Registry of Deeds stating
that the owner of the WCF and his or her successors and assigns agree to:
a. Respond in a timely and comprehensive manner to a request for information from a potential
collocation applicant, in exchange for a reasonable fee not in excess of the actual cost of
preparing a response;
b Negotiate in good faith for shared use of the WCF by third parties, including those that can
reasonably be deemed commercial competitors;
c. Allow shared use of the WCF if an applicant agrees in writing to pay reasonable charges for
collocation;
d. Require no more than a reasonable charge for shared use, based on regional rates and
generally accepted accounting principles. This charge is permitted to include but is not
limited to a pro rata share of the cost of site selection, planning project administration, land
costs site design, construction, financing, return on equity, depreciation, and all of the costs
of adapting the Support Structure or equipment to accommodate a shared user without
causing electromagnetic interference. The amortization of the above costs by the facility
owner shall be accomplished at a reasonable rate, over the useful life span of the facility.
E. Waiver of Submission Requirements
1. The applicant is permitted to apply for a waiver of any of the listed submission
requirements for the application in lieu of fulfilling the listed submission requirement. The
applicant shall bring the application for permit before the CEO or the Planning Board, as
required for the particular application, with an attached application for waiver of every
submission requirement not complete. The CEO or the Planning Board, as appropriate to the
application, is permitted to waive any of the submission requirements only if the CEO or
Planning Board finds in writing, that due to special circumstances of the application, the
specific information for which waiver is requested is not required to determine compliance with
the standards of this Ordinance. If any request for waiver is rejected, the application shall be
Town of York, Maine
Wireless Communications Facilities Ordinance – Amended November 8, 2016
7
immediately rejected as incomplete and the application for permit shall not be further
considered. The applicant shall be permitted to resubmit the application when all submission
requirements are fulfilled.
2. It is expected that an application for a WCF serving a Ham Radio may include a number of
requests for waiver. While such waiver requests may well be granted, the CEO or Planning
Board in such cases shall, at a minimum, require evidence concerning the structural integrity
and strength of the WCF in all weather conditions (e.g., heavy winds and ice loading), and the
visual impact of the WCF.
F. Permit Conditions and Limitations
Construction of a WCF shall commence within one (1) year from the date of the Town’s approval, with
the opportunity for a six-month extension at the discretion of the CEO. If construction is not begun
within one year, or within the six-month extension when granted by the CEO, the permit shall become
null and void.
After approval by the CEO or Planning Board and prior to receiving a building permit, the applicant
shall post a performance guarantee with the Town prior to obtaining a permit, such guarantee to include
an Irrevocable Letter of Credit or a bond satisfactory in form to the Town’s counsel or funds delivered
to the Town of York to be held in escrow equal to one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the cost of
removing the WCF.
1.9 Standards of Review
To obtain approval from the CEO or the Planning Board, an application must comply with the standards in
this section, and the CEO or Planning Board shall make written findings with respect to each of these
standards.
A. Qualification of Applicant and Right to Build - The application shall be complete and the
notification of abutters as required by this Ordinance and the York Site Plan and Subdivision
Regulations shall have occurred before the Planning Board reviews the application. The applicant
shall meet the requirements to apply for construction, Expansion or Modification of a WCF in
accordance with this Ordinance. The applicant shall demonstrate the right, title, or interest in the
property on which the construction is proposed. The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with all
relevant FCC regulations.
B. Priority for WCF Location - New WCFs must be located according to the priorities in Section 1.7
above. The applicant shall demonstrate that a facility of a higher priority cannot reasonably
accommodate the applicant’s proposed facility.
C. Placement on Municipal Property - If an applicant proposes to locate a new WCF on municipal
property or on a public right of way, the applicant must show the following:
1. The proposed location complies with applicable municipal policies and ordinances.
2. The proposed facility will not interfere with the intended purpose of the property or right of
way.
3. The applicant has adequate liability insurance.
4. The applicant has a lease agreement with the Town that has been approved by the Board of
Selectmen and that includes reasonable compensation for the use of the property and other
provisions to safeguard the public rights and interest of the property.
Town of York, Maine
Wireless Communications Facilities Ordinance – Amended November 8, 2016
8
D. Design for Collocation - A new WCF and related equipment must be designed and constructed to
accommodate collocation of additional WCFs or providers when technically feasible and when not in
conflict with the height limitations set forth in this Ordinance.
E. Height - A WCF shall comply with following requirements specific to the type of facility:
1. Height, Monopole WCF Overlay Districts - Where the Town establishes Monopole WCF
Overlay Districts (as designated in the Town zoning map), a Monopole WCF shall not
exceed one hundred twenty (120) feet in height.
2. Height of Hidden WCF - The WCF shall not be constrained by height limitations except to the
extent that Town zoning ordinances restrict the height of the structure in which the facility is
concealed or hidden.
3. Height, Ground-Mounted Facilities - In areas other than the Monopole WCF Overlay District,
a ground mounted WCF shall not project higher than twenty (20) feet above the average
height of buildings within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed facility or, if there are no
buildings within three hundred (300) feet, such facilities shall not project higher than twenty
(20) feet above the average tree canopy height, measured from ground level. The height of
the ground-mounted facility, having neither buildings nor tree canopy within three hundred
(300) feet, shall not exceed the height limit of the zoning district within which the facility is
located. If there are no buildings or trees within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed site
of the facility, all ground mounted WCFs shall be surrounded by a buffer of tree growth, as
required by this Ordinance, sufficiently dense to screen views of the base of the facility from
abutting properties and all public roads and ways.
4. Height, Side- and Roof-Mounted Facilities - Side- and roof-mounted WCFs shall not project
more than the lesser of ten (10) feet above the height of an existing building or ten (10) feet
above the height limit of the zoning district within which the facility is located and does not
result in Unreasonable Adverse Visual Impact.
5. Height, Existing Utility Structures - Expansions located on any of the following existing
structures shall be exempt from the height restrictions of this ordinance provided that there no
more than a ten (10) foot increase in height of the existing structure as a result of the
installation of the WCF: electric transmission and distribution towers, telephone poles and
similar existing utility structures, and water towers.
6. Height, Disguised Structures - The foregoing height limits not withstanding, WCFs that are
constructed as disguised structures, such as flagpoles or steeples, shall not exceed the height
that is permitted or reasonably attributable to such structures not as disguised WCFs for the
zoning district in which the facility is to be located.
F. Setbacks - The setback shall be the separation of the corresponding border of the footprint of the
base area of the WCF, as defined by the required fencing, from the property lines, buildings, or
other feature from which the setback is defined. It shall not refer to the center point of the WCF.
1. A new Monopole WCF must be set back from Route 1 and Route 91 at least one hundred
fifty (150) feet.
2. A new or expanded Monopole or Ground Mounted WCF must comply with the setback
requirements for the zoning district in which it is located, or be set back one hundred twenty
five percent (125%) of its height from all property lines, whichever is greater. The Planning
Board is permitted to reduce this 125% set back upon a showing that the support structure is
reliably designed to collapse upon itself in an area shorter than its height. The Planning
Board is permitted to accept setbacks obtained by including areas outside of the property
Town of York, Maine
Wireless Communications Facilities Ordinance – Amended November 8, 2016
9
boundaries if secured by an easement from the owners of the affected properties. This
easement shall be specifically noted on the plan and permit, and shall be recorded in the York
County Registry of Deeds and indexed under the name(s) of the owners of the affected
abutting property.
3. All structures accessory to a WCF and all peripheral supports used to support a WCF
structure shall be located in accord with the setback requirements for the underlying zone.
4. All WCFs shall be located a minimum of sixty-five (65) feet from any residential structure
located on any abutting property at the time the structure is initially constructed, unless the
affected abutting property owner waives this requirement, and Monopole WCFs shall be
located five hundred (500) feet from any residence located on any abutting property at the
time the structure is initially constructed, unless the affected abutting property owner waives
this requirement. This requirement shall not be waived with respect to the Fall Zone of any
Monopole WCF. Any waiver shall be specifically noted on the plan and permit, and shall be
recorded in the York County Registry of Deeds and indexed under the name(s) of the owners
of the affected abutting property.
5. WCF is permitted to be located on a property on which another principal or accessory use is
located, subject to concurrence of all parties that have an interest in the parcel at the time the
structure is initially constructed. There shall be no minimum setback requirements from
other structures located on the same property as the WCF.
6. The following exceptions apply:
(a) The Planning Board is permitted to reduce the required setback for a WCF to be
constructed on public property or on public right of ways provided that there is a showing
by the applicant that the facility is designed to collapse in a manner that will not harm
other property.
(b) An antenna attached to a WCF shall be exempt from the setback requirement if it extends
no more than three (3) feet horizontally from the edge of the structure to which it is
attached, and it does not encroach upon an abutting property.
G. Visual Impact - A WCF that fully meets the definition of Hidden WCF shall not be subject to the
requirements of this section except to the extent that the existing structure in which the WCF is
concealed is required to meet the zoning requirements of the Town of York.
1. Visual impact by certain larger WCFs - New Monopole WCFs and new Ground Mounted
WCFs, including its related equipment and required fence, must be substantially screened
from view from abutting properties. The screening must be evergreen trees when such
screening is to be newly planted in construction of the WCF. All such WCFs shall maintain a
buffer, except for an access road, beginning at a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from
the fence at the base of the WCF and extending toward the WCF, on all sides of the parcel
on which the WCF is located. The Planning Board is permitted to accept buffer obtained by
including areas outside of the property boundaries if secured by an easement recorded for the
deed of that property, requiring maintenance of the buffer. The Planning Board is
permitted to reduce the buffer adjacent to I-95 to no less than a distance equal to one hundred
(100) percent of the total height of the WCF, consistent with the goal that a buffer shall
consist of mature trees having a height at least as high as the required fencing and having a
density sufficient to substantially screen the base of the WCF from observation when viewed
from a distance greater than 100 feet from the fence at the base of the WCF.
When the WCF is placed in an area that is wooded prior to construction of the WCF,
existing plants and natural landforms on the site shall also be preserved to the maximum
extent practicable.
Town of York, Maine
Wireless Communications Facilities Ordinance – Amended November 8, 2016
10
The Planning Board is permitted to require additional plantings in the buffer area, particularly
when the construction area is not of the character of a wooded buffer, to enhance the quality
and effectiveness of the buffer area as a visual screen, including requiring the planting of
trees that will achieve effective screening within three (3) years after construction. Inside the
buffer area, existing plants and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the
maximum extent practicable while achieving the safe construction of the Support Structure,
accessory structures, and required fencing.
Monopole WCFs and new WCFs to be placed (e.g., collocated) on existing Monopole or other
Support Structures shall be designed to minimize their visual, perceived bulk or mass,
including, but not limited to, avoiding the use of any platform, if possible, and minimizing
the distance the antenna array extends out from the Support Structure, which distance may
not exceed 10 feet without explicit approval of the Planning Board. The
Planning Board is permitted to require the applicant to present evidence of compliance with
this requirement to minimize bulk.
2. Visual impact by Certain Smaller WCFs - A new WCFs which is of the types roof-mounted,
structure-mounted, mast, whip or micro cell, including its related equipment, must be
camouflaged from view from abutting properties, to the maximum extent practicable,
including but not limited to: use of compatible building materials and colors, screening,
landscaping and placement within trees. When a WCF is mounted on an existing structure,
every effort shall be made to conceal the facility within or behind existing architectural
features to limit its visibility from public ways, including but not limited to the stepping back
of the WCF from the front facade in order to limit their impact on the structure’s silhouette
and the blending with the existing structure’s architecture by painting or by shielding with
material which is consistent with the design features and materials of the building.
3. Disguised WCFs - A disguised WCF, made to appear as an unrelated object such as a tree,
church steeple, or flagpole, shall be sufficiently realistic in size and proportion to adjacent
features as to be reasonably perceived as the intended image. The disguise must encompass
the entirety of the WCF including its base facilities or, alternatively, such base facilities are
permitted to be isolated from the disguised support structure, for example by underground
cable connections to a separate building not closely associated with the Support Structure.
For the purposes of determining compliance with zoning requirements, the disguised device
shall be treated as the object as which it is intended to be recognized. For example, a WCF
disguised as a flagpole shall comply with all requirements that would be applicable to a
flagpole that is not a disguised WCF if proposed for construction in that location.
4. Lighting - A new WCF must be illuminated only as necessary to comply with FAA or other
applicable state and federal requirements.
5. Color and Materials - A new WCF must be constructed with materials and colors that match
or blend with the surrounding natural or built environment, to the maximum extent
practicable. Unless otherwise required, muted colors, earth tones, and subdued hues, or
metals having dull, non-reflecting finishes shall be used. For disguised WCF, the colors
and materials shall be typical of the object simulated by the disguise.
H. Fencing - A WCF must be fenced to discourage trespass on the facility and climbing on the structure
by trespassers, except as further provided below for cases of use of disguised construction. A fence
of not less than eight (8) feet in height from the finished grade shall be constructed around a WCF.
The fence shall include barbed wire around the top. Access through the fence shall be through a
locked gate. The fence shall not be located in the required buffer area. In the absence of a buffer, the
fence shall be screened from view through use of appropriate landscaping and planting. A disguised
Town of York, Maine
Wireless Communications Facilities Ordinance – Amended November 8, 2016
11
WCF shall provide for security of the supporting structure and its separate base equipment facilities
against trespass and damage in a manner appropriate to the object simulated by the disguise, but shall
not be required to have fencing if fencing is not typically associated with the disguised object. If a
disguised WCF does have fencing, such fencing being compatible with the object simulated by the
disguise, the WCF and fencing shall have a buffer as described. Security for a hidden WCF or WCF
serving a Ham radio shall be provided in a reasonable manner, but need not be fencing. This fencing
requirement may be waived or modified by the Planning Board or CEO in the course of their review
and approval of WCFs, except in the case of a Monopole WCF.
I. Structural Standards - A new WCF must comply with all applicable standards of the American
National Standards Institute, including ANSI EIA/TIA Standard 222 entitled “Structural Standards
for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures,” current revisions or versions as of the
time of the application for the WCF.
J. Certifications from Applicant - Agreement by the applicant to provide the CEO with a signed
statement stating whether the WCF complies with all FCC regulations, including radio frequency
emission regulations, at these times: (i) within six (6) months after the construction of a new WCF;
(ii) annually after construction is complete, within 30 days after the anniversary date of the
commencement of operation, and (iii) after each Expansion of an existing WCF. If upon review of
the statement the CEO finds that WCF does not comply with FCC regulations, the CEO, after the
applicant has been given a reasonable time based on the nature of the problem to comply with the
federal regulations, is permitted to revoke or modify
the permit. If the permit is revoked, then the WCF shall be removed in accordance with Section 1.12
Abandonment.
K. Interference with Other Signals - Certification by the applicant that the operation of the proposed
facility will not interfere with other adjacent or neighboring transmission or reception functions,
including but not limited to other WCFs and reception of television and radio broadcasts. If on
review the CEO finds that there is significant interference, the CEO is permitted to revoke or modify
the permit. The applicant shall be given a reasonable time, based on the nature of the problem, but at
least 2 days and no more than 30 days, to comply with the federal license requirements or other
federal standards. Providing devices designed to effectively eliminate the interference, to another
party with whose signal there is interference, may be an acceptable resolution. If the permit is
revoked, then the facility shall
be removed in accordance with Section 1.12 Abandonment.
1.10 Amendment to an Approved Application
All substantive changes (e.g., changes to the appearance, nature, size, shape, color, bulk of a WCF) to a
previously approved or pre-approved application must be resubmitted to the Planning Board, or in the case
of a WCF which CEO may approve, the CEO.
1.11 Abandonment
A. A WCF that is inactive for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months shall be considered abandoned.
The CEO shall notify the owner of an abandoned facility in writing and order removal of the facility
within ninety (90) days of receipt of the written notice. The owner of the facility shall have thirty
(30) days from the receipt of the notice to demonstrate to the CEO that the facility has not been
abandoned.
B. If the owner fails to show that the facility is in active operation, the owner shall have sixty (60) days
to remove the facility. All above ground structures, equipment, foundations, utilities and access
roads or driveways specifically constructed to service a WCF shall be removed, and the land returned
to a condition as near to the original pre-construction condition as possible. If the facility is not
removed within this time period, the Town is permitted to remove the facility at the owner’s expense.
The owner of the facility shall pay all site reclamation costs deemed necessary and reasonable to
return the site to its pre-construction condition, including removal of roads and re-establishment of
Town of York, Maine
Wireless Communications Facilities Ordinance – Amended November 8, 2016
12
vegetation.
C. If a surety has been given to the Town for removal of the WCF, the owner of the WCF is permitted to
apply to the Board of Selectmen for release of the surety when the WCF and related equipment are
removed to the satisfaction of the Planning Board.
1.12 Appeals
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the CEO or the Planning Board under this Ordinance is permitted to
appeal the decision to the Board of Appeals, as provided in Town of York Charter, Zoning Ordinances and
Regulations. Written notice of appeal must be filed with the Board of Appeals within thirty (30) days of the
decision. The notice of appeal shall clearly state the reasons for the appeal.
1.13 Administration and Enforcement
The procedure and substance for the administration and enforcement of this Ordinance shall be as provided
in the Town of York Zoning Ordinance for the administration and enforcement of those Ordinances.
1.14 Penalties
Any person who owns or controls any building or property that violates this Ordinance shall be fined in
accordance with Title 30-A M.R. S. A. §4452. Each day such violation continues after notification by the
CEO shall constitute a separate offense.
1.15 Conflict and Severability
A. Conflicts with Other Ordinances – Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is
inconsistent with another provision of this Ordinance or of any other ordinance, regulation, or
statute, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
B. Severability – The invalidity of any part of this Ordinance shall not invalidate any other part of this
Ordinance.
1.16 Definitions
The terms used in this ordinance shall have the meanings here listed. Definitions for the listed terms from
other sources shall not take precedence over the definitions here listed for the interpretation and
implementation of this Ordinance. Applications and correspondence relating to applications shall use
terminology consistent with these listed definitions.
Active Operation - The continuous transmitting or receiving of radio frequency signals.
Antenna - Any system of poles, panels, and rods, reflecting discs or similar devices used for the
transmission or reception of radio or electromagnetic frequency signals.
Antenna Height - the vertical distance measured from the base of the antenna support structure at grade to
the highest point of the structure, even if said highest point is an antenna. Measure of Support Structure
height shall include antenna, base pad, and other appurtenances and shall be measured from the finished
grade of the facility site. If the Support Structure is on a sloped grade, then the average between the
highest and lowest grades shall be used in calculating antenna height.
Antenna, Parabolic - (also known as a satellite dish antenna) - An antenna that is bowl-shaped, designed
for the reception and/or transmission of radio frequency communication signals in a specific directional
pattern.
Antenna, Whip- An antenna characterized by its “whip” shape and size, and its ability (an “omni
directional antenna”) to transmit and/or receive signals in a three hundred sixty (360) degree pattern.
Town of York, Maine
Wireless Communications Facilities Ordinance – Amended November 8, 2016
13
Average Tree Canopy Height - The average height of all trees greater than twenty (20) feet in height
located within three hundred (300) feet of the footprint of the facility as determined by the required fencing
in Section 1.9.B.8, provided that all such trees shall remain in place subsequent to construction and
provided that the number of such trees within three hundred (300) feet of the fence shall exceed fifty (50)
trees, and provided that the distribution of such trees shall satisfy the requirements for a buffer of tree
growth as required in Section 1.9.B.7, Visual Impact.
Collocation - The use of a support structure or an alternative support structure by more than one wireless
communication provider.
Disguised WCF - a WCF made and designed to appear to be an object recognized as other than a WCF.
Expansion - The addition of antennas or other devices to an existing structure.
FAA - The Federal Aviation Administration, or its lawful successor.
Fall Zone - The area on the ground within a radius from the base of a WCF equal to the total height of the
WCF. The Fall Zone is the area within which there is a potential hazard from falling debris (such as ice) or
collapsing material.
FCC - The Federal Communications Commission, or its lawful successor.
Functionally Equivalent Services - Functionally Equivalent Services are Cellular, Personal
Communication Services (PCS), Enhanced Special Mobile Radio, Specialized Mobile Radio and Paging.
The Communications Act of 1996 requires local government treat these five services equally.
Ground Mounted WCF - A WCF which is mounted on the ground, and which is mast or similar structure
and not a lattice tower or guy tower, and is less than 85 feet in height.
Height - The vertical measurement from a point on the ground at the mean finish grade adjoining the
foundation as calculated by averaging the highest and lowest finished grade around the building or
structure. The highest point shall exclude farm building components, flagpoles, chimneys, ventilators,
skylights, domes, water towers, bell towers, church spires, processing towers, tanks, bulkheads, or other
building accessory features usually erected at a height greater than the main roofs of buildings.
Hidden WCF – A WCF fully hidden from view. A WCF is hidden when it is contained within an existing
structure unrelated to a WCF, such as a building, wall or roof.
Historic District – An area designated as an historic district or area by the Town of York or one of its
municipal committees or bodies, or any State or Federal Agency.
Historic Building – A building which is designated as historic by Town of York or one of its municipal
committees or bodies, or any State or Federal Agency.
Line of Sight - The direct view of the object from a point or location. To avoid confusion, the applicant
to describe issues of coverage should not use the phrase “line of sight”.
Micro Cell WCF - A low power radio service WCF used to provide increased capacity in high call
demand areas or to improve coverage in areas of weak coverage.
Modification - The changing of any portion of a WCF from its description in a previously approved
permit, including but not limited to changes in design.
Monopole WCF – A WCF with a monopole Support Structure.
Town of York, Maine
Wireless Communications Facilities Ordinance – Amended November 8, 2016
14
Reasonable Access - The opportunity for a licensed carrier to provide one or more Functionally Equivalent
Services to the extent that all or most of the Town of York may be reasonably served.
Repeater - A small receiver/relay transmitter of not more than twenty (20) watts output designed to
provide service to areas that are not able to receive adequate coverage from the primary sending and
receiving site in a wireless communications network.
Support Structure - Any built structure, including guy wires and anchors if used, to which antennas and
associated hardware are mounted. Support structures include but are not limited to:
1. Lattice tower - A support structure that consists of a network of crossed metal braces,
forming a tower, which is usually triangular or square in cross section, not normally requiring
guy wires and anchors.
2. Guy tower - A support structure such as a pole or narrow metal framework that is held erect
by use of guy wires and anchors.
3. Monopole - A support structure that consists of a single pole sunk into the ground and/or
attached to a concrete pad or other foundation.
4. Mast - A type of mount that is thinner and shorter than a monopole.
5. Existing nonresidential structure - An existing structure, having an original principal use
other than a WCF, to which wireless facility components may be attached under certain
conditions.
Unreasonable Adverse Visual Impact - End results of a proposed project that: (1) would be excessively
out-of-character with existing buildings, structures, and features; or (2) would significantly diminish the
scenic value in an Historic District or Historic Building.
Wireless Communications Facility (or Facility) (WCF) – Any facility, building, pole, tower, or structure
used to provide wireless telecommunication services, which may consist of antennae, equipment, storage
and other accessory structures used to provide wireless telecommunication services. The definition of WCF
includes personal wireless service facilities as that term may be defined in Title 47, United States Code,
Section 332 (c)(7)(C), as may be amended.
Town of York, Maine
Wireless Communications Facilities Ordinance – Amended November 8, 2016
15
Wireless Communications Facilities
Ordinance Overlay Zone.

Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
1
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS_____________________________________ Page 6
1.1 SHORT TITLE
1.2 APPLICABILITY
1.3 PURPOSE
1.4 EFFECTIVE DATE
1.5 SCHEDULE OF FEES
ARTICLE 2, DEFINITIONS ________________________________________________ Page 13
ARTICLE 3, ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS _____________________ Page 33
3.1 LOTS DIVIDED BY DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
3.2 CONFLICTS OF DISTRICTS
3.3 MAPS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
3.4 MAP OF BASE ZONING DISTRICTS
3.5 DISTRICT BOUNDARY LINES
3.6 RESERVED
3.7 RESERVED
3.8 SHORELAND OVERLAY DISTRICT
3.9 WATERSHED PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT
3.10 RESERVED
3.11 RESERVED
3.12 WETLANDS PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT
3.13 YORK VILLAGE HOSPITAL OVERLAY DISTRICT
3.14 YORK VILLAGE AFFORDABLE ELDERLY HOUSING OVERLAY DISTRICT
3.15 RESERVED
3.16 WORKFORCE AFFORDABLE HOUSING OVERLAY DISTRICT
3.17 FARM ENTERPRISE OVERLAY DISTRICT
ARTICLE 4, USE REGULATIONS __________________________________________ Page 39
4.1 BASE ZONE REQUIREMENTS
4.2 PROHIBITED USES
4.3 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
ARTICLE 5, DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS ________________________________ Page 91
5.1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
5.2 SCHEDULE OF DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
5.3 MINIMUM FLOOR AREA
5.4 DENSITY
5.5 RIGHT-OF-WAY STANDARDS
5.6 AMATEUR RADIO ANTENNAS
ARTICLE 6, SUPPLEMENTAL USE REQUIREMENTS ______________________ Page 103
6.1 NON-RESIDENTIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS (APPLICABLE TO RES-1, RES-2, RES-3,
YBVC, YVC-1, YVC-2, GEN-1, GEN-2 & GEN-3 DISTRICTS)
6.2 COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS (APPLICABLE TO RES-1, RES-2, RES-3,
YBVC, YVC-1, YVC-2, GEN-1, GEN-2 & GEN-3 DISTRICTS)
6.3 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL NON-RESIDENTIAL AND MULTIFAMILY
USES IN THE ROUTE ONE DISTRICTS
6.4 ADDITIONAL PERFORMANCE STANDARD APPLICABLE TO YBVC
6.5 PERFORMANCE STANDARD TO CONTROL EROSION
6.6 PROHIBITION OF DUMPING INTO WATERBODIES, WETLANDS AND MAN-MADE
DRAINAGE FACILITIES
6.7 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR MAINTENANCE OF STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
FACILITIES
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
2
ARTICLE 7, SPECIAL PROVISIONS _______________________________________ Page 118
7.1 TEMPORARY USE OF MANUFACTURED HOUSING UNIT
7.1-A TEMPORARY USE OF RECREATION VEHICLE
7.2 CAMPGROUNDS
7.3 OPEN WINTER STORAGE OF VACANT CAMPER/TRAILER VEHICLES
7.4 HOME OCCUPATIONS
7.5 CONVERSION OF HISTORIC BUILDINGS
7.6 OPEN SPACE CONSERVATION HOUSING SUBDIVISION APPLICATION (Formerly known as the
Cluster Housing Subdivision Application)
7.7 BED AND BREAKFAST OPERATIONS
7.8 ELDERLY HOUSING STANDARDS
7.9 ACCESSORY RESIDENTIAL UNIT
7.10 RESTAURANT ACCESSORY TO RETAIL USE
7.11 OVERBOARD DISCHARGE SYSTEMS
7.12 PROPANE TANKS
7.13 CONVERSION OF BUILDINGS TO AFFORDABLE APARTMENTS
7.14 OCCUPANCY OF SEASONAL DWELLINGS
7.15 CULTURAL FACILITIES STANDARDS
7.16 COMMERCIAL FUNCTIONS ON RESIDENTIAL LOTS ACCESSORY TO RESIDENTIAL USE
7.17 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS
7.18 MEDICAL MARIJUANA
ARTICLE 8, SHORELAND OVERLAY DISTRICT ___________________________ Page 142
8.1 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR LOTS
8.2 LAND USES PERMITTED IN THE SHORELAND OVERLAY DISTRICT
8.3 LAND USE STANDARDS
ARTICLE 9, SUSTAINABLE ENERGY EFFICIENT BUILDINGS ______________ Page 172
9.1 PURPOSE
9.2 STANDARDS FOR NEW MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS
9.3 STANDARDS FOR PRIVATE BUILDINGS
ARTICLE 9-A, SMALL WINDMILLS_________________________________________ Page 173
9-B.1 PURPOSE
9-B.2 APPLICABILITY
9-B.3 PERMITTING
9-B.4 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
9-B.5 STANDARDS FOR BUILDING INTEGRATED, BUILDING-MOUNTED PHOTOVOLTAIC,
ROOF-MOUNTED AND SMALL-SCALE GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
9-B.6 STANDARDS FOR MEDIUM AND LARGE-SCALE GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY
SYSTEMS
ARTICLE 9-B, SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS____________________________________ Page 176
9-A.1 PURPOSE
9-A.2 CAPACITY
9-A.3 LOCATION AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
9-A.4 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
9-A.5 ABANDONMENT OF USE
ARTICLE 10, WATERSHED PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT ____________ Page 179
10.1 WATERSHED PROTECTION DISTRICT
10.2 LAND USES
10.3 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
10.4 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
10.5 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
10.6 SUBMISSIONS
10.7 NONCONFORMITIES
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
3
ARTICLE 10-A, ELDERLY CONGREGATE HOUSING STANDARDS ___________ Page 184
10-A.1 APPLICABILITY
10-A.2 GENERAL STANDARDS
10-A.3 DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
10-A.4 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
ARTICLE 10-B, YORK VILLAGE HOSPITAL OVERLAY DISTRICT ____________ Page 187
10-B.1 PURPOSE
10-B.2 DESIGN STANDARDS
ARTICLE 10-C, YORK VILLAGE AFFORD. ELDERLY HOUSING OVERLAY ___ Page 188
10-C.1 PURPOSE
10-C.2 STANDARDS
10-C.3 CONFLICT
ARTICLE 10-D, YORK RIVER WATERSHED OVERLAY DISTRICT ___________ Page 189
ARTICLE 10-E, YORK VILLAGE CENTER OVERLAY DISTRICT _____________ Page 190
10-E.1 PURPOSE
10-E.2 LOT COVERAGE LIMITS
10-E.3 MUNICIPAL BUILDING HEIGHT
ARTICLE 10-F, WORKFORCE AFFORD. HOUSING OVERLAY DIST. __________ Page 191
10-F.1 WORKFORCE AFFORDABLE HOUSING OVERLAY DISTRICT
10-F.2 LAND USES
10-F.3 DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
10-F.4 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
10-F.5 PERMIT AUTHORITY
10-F.6 GOVERNANCE
10-F.7 SELECTION PRIORITIES
ARTICLE 10-G, FARM ENTERPRISE OVERLAY DISTRICT____________________ Page 196
10-G.1 PURPOSE
10-G.2.a ALLOWED AGRICULTURE-RELATED USES
10-G.2.b PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL USES
10-G.2.c SPECIAL EVENTS
10-G.3 ADMINISTRATION
10-G.4 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
10-G.5 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
ARTICLE 11, WETLAND PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT _______________ Page 198
11.1 PURPOSE
11.2 WETLAND PERMIT
11.3 PERMITTED USES
11.4 CONDITIONS
11.5 BUILDING PERMITS
ARTICLE 12, HISTORIC AND ARCHEOLOGICAL RESOURCES ______________ Page 200
12.1 DEFINITIONS
12.2 CREATION AND ORGANIZATION OF HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
4
12.3 DUTIES, FUNCTIONS, AND POWERS OF THE COMMISSION
12.4 QUALIFICATIONS
12.5 ESTABLISHMENT OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS, HISTORIC SITES, OR HISTORIC LANDMARKS
12.6 HISTORIC DISTRICTS, SITES, AND LANDMARKS DESIGNATED
12.7 APPLICATION OF ZONING ORDINANCES
12.8 IMPROVEMENTS NOT REQUIRING HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION REVIEW
12.9 IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRING HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION REVIEW
12.10 APPLICATIONS FOR CERTIFICATES OR APPROPRIATENESS OR DEMOLITION
12.11 APPLICATION PROCEDURE
12.12 APPLICATION CONTENTS
12.13 MEETINGS, HEARINGS, AND APPLICATION REVIEW
12.14 STANDARDS OF REVIEW
12.15 VISUAL COMPATIBILITY FACTORS
12.16 PROPERTY TAX REFUND POLICY
12.17 DEMOLITION DELAY
ARTICLE 13, MODULAR HOMES, MANUFACTURED HOUSING AND
MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARKS _____________________________________ Page 218
13.1 MODULAR HOMES
13.2 MANUFACTURED HOUSING
13.3 MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARKS
13.4 DOCUMENTATION OF TAX PAYMENT
13.5 STATE PREEMPTION
ARTICLE 14, CONVERSION OF SEASONAL DWELLINGS ___________________ Page 221
14.1 RESTRICTIONS
14.2 ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE 15, PARKING ___________________________________________________ Page 222
15.1 PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL DISTRICTS
15.2 ALTERNATIVE PARKING STANDARDS IN THE YBVC ZONING DISTRICT
15.3 PARKING PERFORMANCE STANDARDS IN THE YVC-1 & YVC-2 ZONING DISTRICTS
ARTICLE 15-A, TRAFFIC SAFETY _________________________________________ Page 227
15-A.1 PURPOSE
15-A.2 OVERVIEW OF PROCESS
15-A.3 INITIAL ASSESSMENT
15-A.4 FULL TRAFFIC STUDY
15-A.5 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
ARTICLE 16, SIGN STANDARDS __________________________________________ Page 229
16.1 PURPOSE
16.2 SIGN TYPES
16.3 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
16.4 ILLUMINATION OF SIGNS
16.5 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
16.6 TEMPORARY SIGNS
16.7 EXEMPTIONS
16.8 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS
16.9 PROHIBITED SIGNS AND DISPLAYS
SUMMARY TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
SUMMARY TABLE OF PERMITTING AUTHORITY BY SIGN TYPE
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
5
ARTICLE 17, NON-CONFORMING SITUATIONS ___________________________ Page 239
17.1 NON-CONFORMING USES
17.2 NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES
17.3 NON-CONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD
17.4 NON-CONFORMING DESIGN
ARTICLE 18, ADMINISTRATION _________________________________________ Page 245
18.1 ROUTE ONE USE PERMITS
18.2 SHORELAND PERMITS
18.3 DELEGATION OF SMALL WINDMILL REVIEW AUTHORITY
18.4 WATERSHED PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT PERMITS
18.5 WETLAND PERMITS
18.6 HISTORIC OVERLAY DISTRICT
18.7 CONVERSION OF SEASONAL DWELLINGS
18.8 APPEALS AND BOARD OF APPEALS
18.9 SITE DESIGN REVIEW/BOARD OF DESIGN REVIEW
18.10 YORK BEACH VILLAGE CENTER DESIGN STANDARDS
18.11 WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
18.12 COMMUNITY FACILITIES IMPACT FEE PROGRAM
18.13 SHORELAND AND WETLAND MITIGATION POLICY
18.14 RESERVED
18.15 DELEGATION OF SITE PLAN REVIEW AUTHORITY
18.16 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION
18.17 PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATION OF PROJECT COMPLIANCE
18.18 PLANNED GROWTH ORDINANCE
ARTICLE 18-A, APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURES _____________________ Page 261
18-A.1 DEFINITIONS
18-A.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS
18-A.3 APPLICATION FEES
18-A.4 APPLICATION PROCESS FOR PERMIT ISSUES BY THE CEO
18-A.5 APPLICATION PROCESS FOR BOARD APPROVAL
ARTICLE 19, ENFORCEMENT AND VIOLATIONS _________________________ Page 267
ARTICLE 20, AMENDMENTS _____________________________________________ Page 268
ARTICLE 21, SEVERABILITY AND CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES _ Page 269
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
6
ARTICLE ONE
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.1 Short Title
This ordinance shall be known as the “ZONING ORDINANCE” of the Town of York, Maine.
1.2 Applicability
This Ordinance shall apply to all of the land area within the Town of York, including land in the former York Harbor
Village Corporation area and land in the former York Beach Village Corporation.
1.3 Purposes
1.3.1 General
In the broadest sense, the Zoning Ordinance helps protect public health, safety and welfare by encouraging appropriate
use of land and protection of resources by following policy directions of the Comprehensive Plan and State Statutes.
The remainder of this section describes what citizens of York seek to achieve with zoning.
York has a large land area with a diversity of landscapes: seashore, tidewater, forested hills, open fields, and picturesque
villages. Intensity of development ranges from large, wild undeveloped tracts of land around Mt. Agamenticus to rural
farms and forests to suburban-style neighborhoods to densely developed villages. From its historical beginnings, the
landscape has influenced settlement patterns, and to this day the Mountain, Cape Neddick, the Village, the Harbor, the
Beach and other areas of Town have retained much of their distinctive personalities.
A large influx of seasonal residents and tourists swells the population several fold in the summer. There is a trend
toward the seasonal influx starting earlier and ending later. Conversion of homes from seasonal to year-round use is
contributing to the growing year-round population.
Sitting astride Interstate 95 and served by the last exit south of the tollbooth, York is highly susceptible to regional
influences. York is within commuting distance of three major metropolitan areas--Portsmouth, Portland and Boston.
Good highway infrastructure and the impending arrival of the Boston-Portland passenger rail service put York at great
risk of increased use as a bedroom community. While regional influences can bring diversity and enrichment to the
Town, they also stress the unique community character which citizens highly value. The balance between regional and
local control should favor the local community whenever such decisions are possible.
Among the oldest towns in Maine, York’s historic and archeological resources are important. These resources are
varied and scattered throughout town, though there are some concentrations. Protection of historic resources is more
complex than only preserving colonial buildings. Land features have historic significance. Archeological sites may be
obliterated by development. Some buildings are important representations of more recent eras, such as the old Chevy
dealership in the Village and the row of summer houses along Long Sands Beach.
York’s natural resource base is highly varied and fragile, and contributes greatly to the Town’s quality of life. The
Atlantic Ocean dominates the eastern edge of Town with its rocky coast, the beaches, and the harbor. Inland, the land
rises to Mount Agamenticus and nearby hills. Slopes are generally moderate, but soils are generally poor. Wetlands
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
7
and shorelands abound and need careful protection. The tidal York and Cape Neddick rivers lie almost entirely within
York, and the York River is the dominant landscape feature on the southwestern side of York. The Town wants to
enhance sustainable resource-based activities including farming, forestry, fishing, recreation and hunting.
An extensive, undeveloped block of forested open space surrounds Mount Agamenticus and the watersheds of the
York and Kittery water supplies. Protection of these surface water supplies is of paramount importance. This area is
also where the Northern forest blends into the Southern forest, presenting a rich diversity of plant communities.
Further fragmentation of this area by development and new roads should be discouraged. This area, and other large,
unbroken tracts of land are important wildlife habitat, and in general have high recreation, existence and aesthetic
values.
The visual character of York is exceptional, and is an important factor contributing to quality of life and the economy.
The natural and historic resources contribute significantly, as does protecting open space, encouraging compatible
design of development, retaining narrow, winding tree-lined roads, and maintaining the strong contrasts between
different areas in the community. Scenic vistas abound, many of which are public views across well-managed private
land.
Access to and responsible use of natural resources is important. Townspeople continue to seek access to natural
resources, open space, and the ocean. However, there are concerns associated with access. Rights of ownership,
overuse of resources, and vandalism are a few of the concerns that must be addressed. Ideally access can continue to
be accommodated and expanded through cooperative arrangements with private property owners.
Tourism makes a significant contribution to York’s economy. The tourism industry and seasonal housing provide
income for residents. Seasonal housing generates net property tax revenues. Seasonal businesses and housing should
be maintained. Tourists and seasonal residents are drawn to York, in large part, because of its beaches, its waterfront,
its scenic beauty, and its historic small town character.
Other than tourism, there is a growing year-round business sector in the community. Several large-scale businesses
have been established in York in recent years. While there are questions about scale and character of the big, new
development, there is support for continued development of small, locally owned businesses. Home-based businesses,
traditional resource-based businesses (especially farming, forestry, and fishing), and other businesses which can meet
stringent performance standards are desired.
Housing in York is problematic. There is a deficit of elderly and affordable housing despite the housing construction
boom. Large, expensive homes are being built throughout Town, often out of scale with the surrounding
neighborhoods. An adequate supply of seasonal housing should be maintained. Incentives are needed to help provide
elderly and affordable housing to serve community needs.
Roads range from narrow, winding, tree-lined roads to the six lanes of I-95. The network of arterial and collector roads
is congested with seasonal traffic, and congestion is becoming a year-round issue. Development along Route One is
congesting the road, requiring added traffic signals, and is changing the character of the highway corridor. Historic
rural and neighborhood roads contribute significantly to the Town’s character. Neighborhood roads should be
designed to control traffic flow, reduce speeds, and reduce conflicts with pedestrians and bicyclists. The Town should
seek to keep rural gravel roads unpaved. New and re-constructed roads should be designed to have effective shareduse
design for multiple modes. Traffic calming and access management should be promoted to prevent congestion,
increase safety and reduce air pollution. Automobile access to the beaches is indirect and adds to circulation problems
in York Village and the Harbor. Pedestrian circulation is often difficult and dangerous in the villages, which should be
safe and pleasant. There are few provisions for bicycle circulation anywhere in York. Parking should be redesigned in
York Village and at the beach. Zoning which controls commercial trucking in residential neighborhoods should be
encouraged.
The component communities within the Town of York from the outset of settlement expected to serve a variety of
functions such as farming, fishing, forestry, commerce, shipping, and governance. They are defined both economically
and politically. They have evolved until the present, still distinctive in character, but integral to the whole community.
While York is not strictly speaking a small town, its people take pride in York’s small town character. Attributes of the
Town of York which exemplify small town character are: a small town’s heritage; few traffic lights; low population
density when calculated over the entire land mass; unique and distinguishable village, residential and rural areas;
interaction of people in town; high regard among people in different parts of town; volunteer fire department; a sense
of safety; knowing the people with whom one does business; and a local labor force. Enhancing the ability of York’s
citizens to afford homes in their community and to create and sustain low impact businesses in York is vital to the
character of the community.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
8
In general the villages have: higher population density; compromised pedestrian and bicyclist circulation; local, owneroperated
businesses; public services and infrastructure; acquaintances among business people and residents; and a mix
of small scale residential, commercial, historic and civic land uses. Each village has its unique combination of these
attributes. Zoning should allow continuation and enhancement of these characteristics. Existing villages should
continue to serve both residents and tourists.
The attributes of rural lands in York are mixed land use which includes home occupations and traditional rural uses
such as: farming, forestry, and fishing; narrow, tree-lined roads, open space between homes (which is different from
spacing in the village centers); separation of built areas by natural features such as forests, water or fields; open spaces
between villages; abundance of natural resources; large unbroken tracts of land and water; scenic vistas; public lands;
lack of infrastructure; recreational lands; low overall density; and appropriately scaled buildings. Businesses in the rural
area should “look good”, mitigate adverse impacts and be an asset to the community. In between the rural areas and
village centers are a range of lower density, primarily residential areas on the east of Route One, and commercial
activities along the Route One corridor.
It is important for the Town to recognize that many property owners practice responsible and sustainable resource
management. In matters ranging from preservation of historic buildings to keeping open land undeveloped to engaging
in sustainable forestry practices, many property owners do a great job and deserve the Town’s thanks. Still, individuals
make decisions that cause change. Development can inalterably change the community. Through this Ordinance, the
Town must strike a balance between rights of development and the public interest.
Zoning should allow the capability of building in harmony with natural and historic resources, require the preservation
of unique characteristics of the surrounding properties, and maintain traditions of established land uses. The design
of new development should be compatible in scale, mass, height, roof line, rhythm, transparency, setback, and other
such elements with the design of surrounding properties and landscape. Development must not compromise the
unique characteristics of York and its neighborhoods with standardized, uniform or franchise designs.
1.3.2.1 General
a. To protect and promote public and traffic safety;
b. To manage development patterns to meet the needs of York’s year-round and seasonal residents and its
tourism oriented economy;
c. To encourage the most appropriate use of land along various sections of Route One, based upon its location,
existing development patterns and desired future growth patterns;
d. To conserve and promote York’s scenic beauty and attractiveness as a residential town and tourist center;
e. To establish fair and reasonable standards for evaluating each development proposal on its own merits, and
to effectively manage project impacts; and;
f. To protect property values.
1.3.2.2 To this end, property along Route One has been divided into six separate zoning districts with the following
specific purposes:
a: Route One-1 Zone (River Protection)
To establish an area that:
1. Protects the aesthetic and environmental quality of the York River;
2. Serves as an attractive gateway to the Town of York; and
3. Allows only a limited number of compatible uses: residential, public, educational and small scale
professional offices.
It is perceived by citizens that a sense of the character of those components or segments of the community is being
lost to newcomers, neutralized by homogenous architecture, and paved over with development. There is deep concern
that the rich heritage of a complex community is about to be lost. In conclusion, York is wonderful and unique and
its citizens want to protect it. Change should be slow, planned, sustainable, in harmony with nature, aesthetically
pleasing, financially sound, and of minimal impact to existing properties. A strong zoning ordinance that protects and
enhances the community is required. - AMENDED 11/07/2000
1.3.2 Concerning the Rt. One-1, Rt. One-2, Rt. One-3, Rt. One-4, Rt. One-5 and Rt. One-6 Zones
- AMENDED 11/05/1996
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
9
b. Route One-2 Zone (Small Makes Sense)
To establish an area where:
1. Small scale commercial, office and service business uses can prosper; and
2. Residential use can co-exist with commercial use.
c. Route One-3 Zone (Big Makes Sense)
To establish an area where:
1. Large scale business, including industry, commercial, service business, professional offices, restaurants
and hotels/motels can prosper;
2. Adequate public services can be delivered to this centrally located area to support the size and number
of businesses; and
3. To provide for a sufficiently wide range of goods, services and attractions, in keeping with the essential
needs of York’s residents and tourists.
d. Route One-4 (Tourism/Recreation)
To establish an area where:
1. Uses that complement York’s prime economy as a family-oriented tourism area are encouraged; and
2. Uses that promote the extension of public sewer to this section of Route One are allowed.
e. Route One-5 Zone (Cape Neddick Village)
To establish an area where:
1. The existing appearance and village character of the Cape Neddick area is promoted and which future
development must satisfy; and
2. Residential, small-scale commercial, office and restaurant uses can occur to create a village atmosphere.
f. Route One-6 Zone (Rural Mixed Use)
To establish an area where:
1. The existing rural character of this area is protected by requiring most uses to retain existing trees as
protective aesthetic buffers; and
2. A large variety of uses are permitted, provided each use satisfies applicable standards. - AMENDED
11/05/1996
1.3.3 Concerning the Shoreland Overlay District
The purposes of the Shoreland Overlay District are: to further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions; to
prevent and control water pollution; to protect fish spawning grounds, aquatic life, bird and other wildlife habitat;
to protect buildings and lands from flooding and accelerated erosion; to protect archaeological and historic resources;
to protect commercial fishing and maritime industries; to protect freshwater and coastal wetlands; to control building
sites, placement of structures and land uses; to conserve shore cover, and visual as well as actual points of access to
inland and coastal waters; to conserve natural beauty and open space; and to anticipate and respond to the impacts
of development in shoreland areas. - AMENDED 05/09/1992
1.3.4 See §11.1. - AMENDED 11/07/2000
1.3.5 Concerning the Watershed Protection Overlay District
1.3.5.1 To protect and maintain the present quality and quantity of potable water supplied to residents of York and
Kittery from Chases Pond, Folly Pond, Middle Pond, Boulter Pond and Bell Marsh Pond;
1.3.5.2 To prevent and control pollution of surface water and groundwater in the watersheds of Chases Pond, Folly Pond,
Middle Pond, Boulter Pond and Bell Marsh Pond;
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
10
1.3.5.3 To maintain safe and healthful environmental conditions in the watersheds of Chases Pond, Folly Pond, Boulter
Pond, Middle Pond, and Bell Marsh Pond;
1.3.5.4 To restrict or control uses involving hazardous materials or other contaminants which, if introduced to the ground
or groundwater, cannot be rendered harmless by dilution or by the attenuative capacity of the soil before reaching
the public water supply; and
1.3.5.5 To minimize disturbance within the watersheds in order to maintain good water quality.
1.3.6 Reserved
1.3.7 Concerning Manufactured Housing
1.3.7.1 To establish minimum standards for the placement of manufactured housing in accordance with the provisions
of Title 30-A M.S.R.A., Section 4358;
1.3.7.2 To require that manufactured housing be compatible with site built homes; and
1.3.7.3 To provide opportunities for the location of affordable and safe housing within the community.
1.3.8 Concerning Non-Conforming Situations
1.3.8.1 To establish realistic standards by which vacant non-conforming lots of record can be reasonably developed;
1.3.8.2 To establish realistic standards so that existing non-conforming structures can be properly maintained and
repaired; and
1.3.8.3 To establish realistic standards by which non-conforming uses can continue, or be changed to other less nonconforming
uses or to conforming uses.
1.3.9 Concerning Non-Residential Development
1.3.9.1 To establish minimum performance standards for non-residential uses in order to mitigate adverse impacts upon
adjacent residential uses;
1.3.9.2 To establish performance standards which serve public health, safety and welfare objectives by regulating the sight
distances from accesses to non-residential properties, the storage and disposal of waste, explosive or toxic
substances, surface run-off and by visually buffering non-residential uses and off-street parking from adjacent
resident uses; and
1.3.9.3 To achieve the above objectives while at the same time allowing for the general purpose uses of rural land as
called for in the ordinance.
1.3.10 Concerning Conversion of Seasonal Dwellings
1.3.10.1 To regulate the conversion of structures presently used as motels, hotels, private cottages, and tourist or guest
cottages into dwellings for which year-round use is designed or anticipated;
1.3.10.2 To recognize that seasonal dwellings, as originally designed or constructed, generally do not meet the standards
ordinarily applicable to residential dwellings;
1.3.10.3 To recognize that while such non-conformance may be tolerable in dwellings that are used only periodically or
by transient visitors, the public health, safety and welfare requires that such dwellings be upgraded if they are to
be used on a year-round basis; and
1.3.10.4 Consequently, it is the intent of this ordinance that no seasonal dwelling be converted to a year-round dwelling
unless the dwelling will conform to all land use regulations that would be applicable to that dwelling if it were
being newly-constructed as a year-round dwelling.
1.3.11 Concerning Historic Buildings and Sites
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
11
1.3.11.1 To provide a legal framework within which the residents of the Town of York can protect the historic,
architectural, and cultural heritage of its historically significant areas, landmarks, and sites in the community, while
accepting as appropriate, compatible new construction;
1.3.11.2 To prevent the loss of architectural history which serves to give beauty and pleasure to residents, attract visitors
and new residents, give the Town a particular character, and educate the community about its past;
1.3.11.3 To protect the outward appearance and architectural features of designated sites or landmarks and structures
within designated districts;
1.3.11.4 To prevent the demolition or removal of designated sites or landmarks and significant historic structures within
designated districts;
1.3.11.5 To preserve the essential character of designated districts by protecting relationships of groups of buildings and
structures; and
1.3.11.6 To accept new buildings and structures in designated districts, which are designed and built in a manner which is
in compliance with the character of the district.
1.3.12 Concerning Open Space Conservation Subdivisions
As an alternative to conventional residential subdivision design, the purpose of open space conservation subdivision
design is to protect important components of the natural and cultural environment while encouraging quality
residential neighborhood design. The primary mechanism to accomplish this purpose is the reduction of individual
lot sizes and dimensional standards, with the balance of land set aside into a common open space. There is an
economic incentive to pursue open space conservation development by developers—reduced cost of infrastructure
construction, and improved quality of development product—but this is of secondary importance compared to the
public purposes of protection of natural and cultural resources.
The purpose of the open space may vary, but shall include one or more of the following public purposes:
A. Protection of open space, particularly those un-fragmented blocks of land that are 550 acres or more in size
as identified in the Existing Land Use Chapter of the Comprehensive Plan Inventory and Analysis. These
areas are important for wildlife habitat (biodiversity), recreation, scenic values, and contributions to small
town character.
B. Provision of undeveloped corridor connections between adjacent un-fragmented blocks of land, particularly
between those of 550 acres or more in size as this will magnify the open space value for biodiversity and for
recreation.
C. Protection of land for farming or forestry.
D. Protection of historic and archaeological resources.
E. Protection of cemeteries and burial grounds.
F. Maintenance of existing public access to shoreland areas, or provision of new public access to shoreland
areas.
G. Preservation of scenic vistas from public ways or public lands.
H. Protection of other unique natural or cultural features on a property, as may be determined to be of public
benefit by the Planning Board. The Board may base such decisions on the Town’s Comprehensive Plan,
other local, regional and state policies, best available science, private studies, and other such references found
to be credible by the Board. - AMENDED 11/02/1993, 11/08/2005, 11/06/2018
1.3.13 Concerning Village Zones
The Comprehensive Plan recognizes the unique conditions in four village centers in Town, including York Village,
York Harbor, York Beach, and Cape Neddick. Within each of these areas, standards relating to use, dimensions, density
and design should be treated differently than in other areas of the community.
A. Goal for the York Beach Village Area. Promote an attractive, inviting, safe, pedestrian-focused, familyoriented
environment; safeguard the historic flavor, character and diversity; safeguard clean healthy beaches;
and help support coordinated improvements to businesses, residences and public places through a
predictable and timely process. - AMENDED 11/04/2008
B. Goal for the York Village Center Districts. Promote an attractive, inviting, safe, pedestrian-focused, familyoriented,
four season environment; safeguard the historic architecture, character and diversity; and help
support coordinated improvements to businesses, residences and public places through a predictable and
timely process. - AMENDED 05/21/2016
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
12
1.4 Effective Date
This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force immediately upon its adoption.
1.5 Schedule of Fees
Fees shall be charged for all permits and approvals required pursuant to this Ordinance.
A. The Board of Selectmen shall adopt a schedule of fees for applications. The Board of Selectmen may amend
the schedule as necessary. A public hearing shall be required prior to adoption or amendment.
B. Fees shall reflect the costs associated with the Town’s cost of processing and administering applications,
including but not limited to secretarial time, postage, copying, supplies, recording of meeting minutes, inhouse
staff reviews, and archiving of records, but not including outsourced professional reviews because
those costs are addressed separately (see §1.6).
C. The fees collected may be utilized as user-fees by the department or board that administers the application
process if expressly authorized by the Board of Selectmen in their adopted Schedule of Fees.
D. The fees collected pursuant to this Ordinance shall be in addition to those fees required pursuant to other
Town ordinances and regulations, and shall be in addition to required reimbursement for outsourced
assistance. - AMENDED 11/08/2005
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
13
ARTICLE TWO
DEFINITIONS
Words and terms used in this ordinance shall be defined as follows. Any word or term not defined herein shall take on its
common dictionary definition.
ABUTTER: For purposes of notification, an abutter is the owner of any property, excluding street rights-of-way, within 200
feet of the applicant’s property. Determination of the names and addresses shall be based on the Town’s property tax records as
available to the public not more than 7 days prior to the mailing. For purposes of testimony, an abutter shall also include any
person or entity able to show they might possibly be affected by an application. (NOTE: a water district may be considered an
abutter for certain types of applications – see §10.5.1.) - AMENDED 11/03/2009
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT: A small apartment which is part of an existing single family owner-occupied home, in the
same building as the principal dwelling unit or in a building accessory to the principal dwelling unit, and which is clearly secondary
to the single-family home. The ADU shall have living, sleeping, sanitary and kitchen facilities for the exclusive use of the unit
occupants. The ADU may be rented so that the owner-occupant may benefit from the additional income. The owner may also
elect to occupy the accessory dwelling unit and rent the principal dwelling unit. - AMENDED 11/02/2004, 05/18/2013
ACCESSORY RESIDENTIAL UNIT: A separate residence that has been temporarily created, by Special Exception, within
or added to a single-family residence, or in a structure accessory to a single-family residence, in order to provide a place of
residence for members of the principal resident’s family. The principal use shall continue to be classified as a single-family
dwelling, not as a duplex. - AMENDED 11/02/2004
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR BUILDING: A structure detached from a principal building located on the same lot and
customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal structure or the primary use. - AMENDED 11/04/1997
ACCESSORY USE: A use customarily related to, but clearly incidental and subordinate to, the permitted principal use of the
premises, which can take place within the principal structure or building on a single lot or parcel of land, or in an accessory
structure or building, including but not limited to a home occupation on a lot containing a single-family dwelling, or a subordinate
use on a non-residential lot. The principal use shall not be subordinated by an accessory use, or accessory uses in their aggregate.
- AMENDED 11/04/1997
ADDITION: As applied to a building or structure, means any construction which increases the area or the height of any portion
of the building or structure.
ADJACENT GRADE: The natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
AFFORDABLE APARTMENT: A dwelling unit of affordable housing, rented for year-round occupancy by a household with
low income. - AMENDED 11/03/2009
AFFORDABLE HOUSING: Affordable housing for purchasers shall mean that the annual cost of principal, interest, taxes,
and insurance shall not exceed 30% of the combined annual gross income of all members of a household. Affordable housing
for renters shall mean that the annual cost for rent and utilities shall not exceed 30% of the combined annual gross income of all
members of a household. There is no single amount which is ‘affordable.’ The term is not synonymous with low-income housing.
Households in lower- through middle-income ranges can have affordability problems in high-cost communities. - AMENDED
11/04/2008
AGGRIEVED PERSON OR PARTY: A person whose land is directly or indirectly affected by the granting or denial of a
permit or variance under this ordinance, a person whose land abuts land for which a permit or variance has been granted, or a
group of five or more citizens of the municipality who represent an interest adverse to the granting or denial of such permit or
variance.
AGRICULTURAL COMPOSTING OPERATION: Composting that takes place on a farm. Agricultural composting
operation does not include an operation that involves nonorganic municipal solid waste or that composts municipal sludge,
septage, industrial solid waste or industrial sludge. Agricultural composting operation does not include an operation that composts
materials with a moderate or high risk of contamination from heavy metals, volatile and semivolatile organic compounds,
polychlorinated biphenyls or dioxin. - AMENDED 11/02/2010
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
14
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS: Those plants and animals and their products that are useful to humans and includes, but is
not limited to, forages and sod crops, grains and feed crops, dairy and dairy products, poultry and poultry products, bees and
bees' products, livestock and livestock products and fruits, berries, vegetables, flowers, seeds, grasses and other similar products,
or any other plant, animal or plant or animal products that supply humans with food, feed, fiber or fur. - AMENDED
11/02/2010
AGRICULTURAL TOURISM: The practice of visiting an agricultural operation for the purpose of recreation, education, or
active involvement in the operation, other than as a contractor or employee of the operation. - AMENDED 11/02/2010
AGRICULTURE: The production, keeping or maintenance for sale or lease, of plants and/or animals, including but not limited
to: forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products; poultry and poultry products; livestock; fruits
and vegetables; and ornamental and green-house products. Within the Shoreland Overlay District, forest management and timber
harvesting activities accessory to agriculture shall be regulated under separate standards. - AMENDED 11/04/2008
AGRICULTURE-RELATED USE: A commercial enterprise at a working farm that may also generate additional farm income
through: sale of farm products, educational/or outdoor recreation programs, farm tours, and similar activities associated with a
principal agricultural use. - AMENDED 11/02/2010, 05/21/2011
ALTERATION: Any change or rearrangement in the supporting members of an existing building, such as bearing walls,
columns, beams, girders or interior partitions, as well as any change in exterior doors or windows, or any enlargement to or
diminution of a building or structure, whether horizontally or vertically, or the moving of a building or structure from one location
to another.
ANIMAL BREEDING: The husbandry of small domestic animals only, such as dogs, cats, rabbits, hamsters, birds, tropical
fish, etc.
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY: The keeping of more than 5 animal units (1 animal unit represents 1,000 pounds of live animal
weight).
APPROVED: Approved by the Code Enforcement Officer in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, or by other
authority designated by law to give approval in the matter in question.
APPURTENANCE, BUILDING: Any visible, functional, or ornamental objects accessory to and part of a building such as,
but not limited to, heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) mechanicals, lightning rods, chimneys, solar panels, or
ornamental objects such as weathervanes or cupolas. - AMENDED 11/06/2018, 11/05/2019
ARCADE: Any establishment having three or more coin operated amusement devices located upon its premises for use of the
general public.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain having a one percent or greater chance of flooding in
any given year, as specifically identified in the "Flood Insurance Study -Town of York, Maine, York County", dated September
15, 1983 with accompanying "Flood Insurance Rate Map" and "Flood Boundary and Floodway Map".
ARTISINAL FOOD AND/OR BEVERAGE FACILITY: A facility wherein food/beverage products are produced and sold
directly to the consumer. Products may be retailed for consumption on or off the premises; and the facility may additionally
engage in small-scale wholesale distribution of products produced on-site. Examples include, but are not limited to: a facility
engaged in small-batch baking; small-scale cheese production; a small brewery/winery/distillery (producing under 50,000
gallons/year) small-batch vegetable pickling; or small-scale meat or fish curing. An Artisanal Food and/or Beverage Facility shall
be allowed to offer guided tours of the facility and tasting rooms. - AMENDED 05/16/2015
ARTIST STUDIO: An accessory use to a Cultural Facility that includes a workshop or collection of rooms for the creation of
fine art and/or crafts such as painting, sculpting, photography or other hand-made art. The space may include an area or room
for residential use for periods of more than 30 consecutive days but less than 365 consecutive days. If included, a food preparation
area shall conform to the definition of “Cooking Facilities for a Hotel or Motel” as defined in this ordinance. - AMENDED
05/22/2010
AS-BUILT PLAN: A construction or engineering plan prepared after the completion of construction, by a Maine-Licensed
Professional Engineer or Land Surveyor, in such a manner as to accurately identify and depict the location of on-site
improvements. - AMENDED 11/05/2019
ASSOCIATED MARKET-RATE APARTMENT: A housing unit which is not restricted in terms of the income of its
inhabitants or the maximum rent which can be charged, and which is created when a building is converted to one or more
Affordable Apartments. - AMENDED 11/03/2009
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
15
AWNING: A roof-like structure composed of fabric stretched over a fixed or mechanical frame.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, commonly called the
100-year flood.
BASEMENT: Any portion of a structure with a floor-to-ceiling height of 6 feet or more and having more than 50% of its
volume below the existing ground level. - AMENDED 11/03/1998
BED & BREAKFAST: A residential use conducted by the resident owner within her/his own single-family dwelling offering
overnight accommodations to the general public on a transient basis, and providing a full or continental breakfast to overnight
guests only. The operation is secondary to the primary residential function, and is not intended to have impacts significantly in
excess of those of any other single-family dwelling. This definition shall preclude this use from being classified as a Home
Occupation. - AMENDED 11/07/1995, 11/08/2005, 11/07/2006, 05/19/2012
BILLBOARD: A sign, structure or surface larger than thirty-two (32) square feet, which is available for advertising purposes
for goods, services, or attractions, but excluding signs advertising groups of businesses located within the same building, mall, or
plaza provided they meet the dimensional standards of Article 16.
BOARD: A general term used to reference any board, commission or committee which has administrative responsibilities
pursuant to this Ordinance. - AMENDED 11/03/2009
BOARDING HOUSE: A residential use conducted by the resident owner within her/his own single-family dwelling where 3
or more rooms are rented to people not part of the household on a month-to-month or longer duration, provided the rented
rooms individually or collectively, do not constitute separate dwelling units. A boarding house is distinguished from a tourist
home in that the former is designed to be occupied by longer term residents, at least month-to-month, as opposed to overnight
or weekly guests. - AMENDED 12/29/1993, 05/19/2012
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of
any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind or nature.
BUILDING FOOTPRINT: The exterior outline of a building where it meets the ground surface, measured on a horizontal
plane. - AMENDED 05/21/2016
BUILDING HEIGHT: Building height shall be measured as follows:
a. The vertical distance between the highest point of the roof and the average pre-development grade of the ground
adjoining the building in areas located within 500 feet of the normal high water mark of the Atlantic Ocean, the York
River, and the section of the Cape Neddick River located east of Route One.
b. The vertical distance from the average pre-development grade of the ground adjoining the building to the top of the
highest point of the roof on a flat or shed roof, the deck level on a mansard roof, and the average distance between
the eaves and ridge level for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs, in all areas of Town not identified in a., above, of this
definition.
c. Average pre-development grade is the average grade, existing on April 13, 2016, of the ground adjoining the building
or a proposed building, in its natural condition prior to any site alteration or construction activity. Site alteration or
construction activity includes, but is not limited to, the addition of material (fill) to a site or property.
Notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S. § 302, this ordinance amendment shall apply retroactively to any and all applications
accepted by the Planning Board or Code Enforcement Officer on or after April 13, 2016, which is the date when the first public
hearing was posted for the amendment. - AMENDED 12/29/1993, 11/08/2016
BULK FUEL AND CHEMICAL STORAGE: Storage tank(s) used for commercial storage of inflammable liquids or
chemicals located partially or wholly above ground. This is not intended to include bottled gas used for home or business
consumption.
BULK STORAGE COLLECTION BIN: A collection bin or dumpster which is used for either of the following two purposes:
a. To collect solid wastes and recyclable materials at individual or clusters of residences or at institutional, commercial,
recreational, or industrial establishments; provided that any such collection bin or dumpster must service exclusively
the above-listed establishments; or
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
16
b. To collect solid wastes and recyclable materials generated in York at a location identified by the Town and which is
under Town operation or control. - AMENDED 04/10/1993
CAMPGROUND: A parcel of land upon which two or more campsites are located, established or maintained for occupancy of
the general public as temporary living quarters for recreation, education or vacation purposes. Such campsites are meant to include
an area for parking recreational vehicles, erection of tent(s), tables and cooking facilities.
CASINO: One or more rooms in which legal gambling is conducted, excluding accessory charitable events. - AMENDED
11/04/2003
CEMETERY: Land used for the burial of human remains. A cemetery may be an accessory use when associated with a Religious
Use. - AMENDED 11/06/2012
CEO: An abbreviation for Code Enforcement Officer. - AMENDED 05/18/2013
CERTIFIED EXCAVATION CONTRACTOR: An individual or firm, certified by the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection, engaged in a business that causes the disturbance in the shoreland area of soil, including grading, filling and removal,
or in a business in which the disturbance of soil results from an activity that the individual or firm is retained to perform.
- AMENDED 05/20/2017
CHANNEL (as pertains to the York River and Cape Neddick River): That portion of the river where water always flows,
even at low tide.
CIVIC USE: Land area and/or structures, publicly or privately owned, that are intended for the use, enjoyment, and/or benefit
of the community. Examples include but are not limited to libraries, museums, post offices, community centers, parks,
playgrounds, and streets. This shall exclude any use determined to be a Cultural Facility, Municipal Use, Utility District, or School.
- AMENDED 11/06/2012
CLUSTER/OPEN SPACE CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT: Subdivisions in which buildings are allowed to be
located in a flexible manner provided that the overall housing density is not increased above the amount allowed in a conventional
subdivision with lots of the minimum size as required in the zoning district. - AMENDED 11/06/2018
CLUSTER/OPEN SPACE CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION OPEN SPACE: The area within a cluster open space
conservation subdivision exclusive of building lots, road right-of-ways, and other areas dedicated to development of
infrastructure, and that is consistent with the general definition of “open space” in this Article. - AMENDED 11/08/2005,
11/06/2018
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: Any of the individuals appointed by the Board of Selectmen to fulfill duties of code
enforcement within the Town. The Code Enforcement Officer is the only decision-making authority with respect to this
Ordinance other than a board. The person or people in this position shall possess certification by the State as a CEO/Shoreland
Zoning Officer and/or CEO/Land Use Officer, as applicable to the issue at hand, within one year of appointment.
- AMENDED 11/03/2009
COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE: A coin operated amusement device shall include all of those machines
whether mechanical or electronic which upon insertion of a coin, slug, token plate or disc may be operated by the public generally
at a public premises for use as a game, entertainment or amusement but not limited solely to musical entertainment, whether or
not registering the score and which are operated for amusement only and do not dispense any form of payoff, prize or reward
except free replays.
COMMERCIAL FISHING: Commercial fishing, in terms of the land use controls of this Ordinance, shall include the activities
associated with preparation of boats for any type of fishing conducted for business purposes. This shall include, but not be
limited to, loading, storage of supplies, docking, maintenance, off-loading, transfer and storage of catch, but shall not include
post-harvest processing of catch (including but not limited to canneries or processing factories). Fishing shall be interpreted
broadly to include all types of fishing, lobstering, and charter fishing services. - AMENDED 11/02/2004
COMMERCIAL FUNCTION: An event for which a property owner receives compensation for the use of the property and
at which 50 or more people are present. For clarification: “compensation for the use of the property” is intended to be broadly
interpreted, meaning for instance that someone staying at a bed and breakfast or renting a house for a week-long stay has paid
for their stay and therefore the owner has received compensation, even if there is nothing in the rental agreement specific to
hosting an event at the property; and “event” includes any sort of large gathering such as, but not limited to weddings, receptions,
reunions and parties. - AMENDED 05/21/2011
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
17
COMMERCIAL PARKING: A principal use where parking spaces in a lot or garage are offered to the public for a fee.
- AMENDED 11/04/2008
CONDITIONAL USE: A use permitted in a particular zoning district only after review and approval by the Planning Board
upon a finding that such use in the specified location will comply with all the conditions and standards for the location or
operation of such use as specified in this ordinance and as authorized by the Planning Board. Such uses may be permitted only if
specific provision for such use is made in the ordinance.
CONDITION PRECEDENT: A condition imposed on a conditional approval that must be satisfied by the applicant prior
to receipt of final approval. See also: “Condition Subsequent.” - AMENDED 11/03/2009
CONDITION SUBSEQUENT: A condition imposed at the time of issuance of an approval or permit, with which the
applicant shall comply after the approval is granted. See also: “Condition Precedent.” - AMENDED 11/03/2009
CONFLICT OF INTEREST: Direct or indirect pecuniary benefit to any person or member of the person's immediate family
(grandfather, father, wife, son, grandson, i.e.) or to his employer or the employer of any member of the person's immediate family;
or interest sufficient to tempt the member to serve his own personal interest to the prejudice of the interests of those for whom
the law authorized and required him to act.
CONFORMING USE: A use of buildings, structures or land which complies with all currently applicable provisions of this
Ordinance.
CONSTRUCTED: Includes built, erected, altered, reconstructed, moved upon or any physical operations on the premises
which are required for construction. Excavation, fill, drainage, and the like, shall be considered a part of construction.
CONTIGUOUS LOTS: Lots under the same ownership which share one or more common boundary lines.
CONTIGUOUS WETLANDS: Contiguous wetlands are those wetlands, whether coastal or inland, that are grouped together
for purposes of calculating area, which is necessary for determining the scope and effect of the Shoreland Overlay District. As
used in this ordinance, this shall include “contiguous acres” and other similar phrases used in the context of Shoreland zoning.
The following standards shall apply in determining which wetlands are contiguous:
1. Wetlands that are connected by a narrow strip of natural wetland that does not exceed 6 feet in width (measured at the
upland edge) for a distance of greater than 24 feet shall not be considered contiguous.
2. Wetlands that are connected by any naturally occurring, flowing waterbody with a non-vegetated bottom that does not
exceed 6 feet in width (measured at normal high water) for a distance of greater than 24 feet shall not be considered
contiguous.
3. Grassed waterways as defined by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service and built to their specifications shall not be
considered to make otherwise non-contiguous wetlands contiguous.
4. Wetlands divided by man-made barriers constructed after November 2, 2004, including but not limited to roads and
driveways, shall be considered contiguous. - AMENDED 11/02/2004
CONVERSION (with regard to the Conversion of Seasonal Dwellings): The making of any physical change to a structure
or to the land on which it is situated (including, but not limited to, the addition of any cooking device, whether stove, oven,
microwave or other apparatus), which, either individually or in conjunction with other such changes, would permit a structure to
be used as a year-round dwelling.
CORPORATION: Corporations in which two (2) or more directors are the same individual (or their spouses) are to be treated
as the same corporation for the purposes of this ordinance.
COUNTRY CLUB: A land area and buildings containing recreational facilities, clubhouses and usual accessory uses, open only
to members and their guests for a membership fee. To be considered a country club, the facility must include a large amount of
acreage which is devoted to recreational use, normally a golf course. A country club may lease its facility to non-members for
singular uses which are not ongoing in nature, such as banquets, weddings, etc. - AMENDED 04/10/1993
CULTURAL FACILITY: Non-profit establishment created for artistic, educational, historic, or cultural purposes. Such
establishments can include areas for display of exhibits, teaching areas for small groups, residential space used for housing of
facility staff, artist studios, and other accessory uses associated with educational, historic, arts or cultural facilities. -
AMENDED 05/22/2010
DAY CARE CENTER: An establishment not located in a dwelling unit which provides care for persons, which charges for
their care and which holds all legally required licenses and approvals. - AMENDED 11/08/1994
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
18
DAY CARE HOME: A private home providing day care for up to twelve persons, which charges for their care and which
holds all legally required licenses and approvals. A day care home must be operated as a home occupation. - AMENDED
11/08/1994
DEVELOPMENT: A change in land use involving alteration of the land, water or vegetation, or the addition or alteration of
structures or other construction not naturally occurring. - AMENDED 11/04/2008
DISPOSAL: The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, incineration, or placing in or on any land or waters of
any materials in any quantity that will cause a violation of current public health drinking water standards.
DRIVEWAY: A route that provides vehicular access to a lot or parking area from either a public or private right-of-way. For the
purpose of this definition a driveway shall not consist of an access way around a building designed for emergency use, vehicular
drive-through(s) as part of a particular development design, or parking area perimeter access ways used for on-site traffic
circulation. - AMENDED 11/07/2017, 11/05/2019
DUMP: A plot of land used for the dumping of garbage, trash and other refuse.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A single building containing one dwelling unit, with or without an accessory dwelling unit
or accessory residential unit. - AMENDED 05/19/2012
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A single building containing two dwelling units, neither of which is an accessory dwelling unit
or accessory residential unit. May also be referred to as a “Duplex.” - AMENDED 05/19/2012
DWELLING UNIT: A dwelling unit is one or more rooms within a building for the use of one person or multiple people
living as a family (as defined in Article 2), and contains living, sleeping, sanitary and kitchen facilities for the exclusive use of the
unit occupants. A dwelling unit excludes: a building or space used for an artist studio within a Cultural Facility; or a building or
space used for transient occupancy rental accommodations including a motel, hotel, inn, or similar facility unless otherwise
specified in the zoning ordinance. (See also §8.1.4.A regarding a variation of this definition within the Shoreland Overlay District.)
- AMENDED 11/03/1998, 05/19/2012, 11/07/2017
ELDERLY CONGREGATE HOUSING: A residential facility occupied exclusively by elderly persons that provides shared
community space and shared dining facilities and normally also provides its residents with housekeeping services, personal care
and assistance, transportation assistance, recreational activities, and/or specialized shared services such as medical support
services and physical therapy. For the purposes of determining who is served by Elderly Congregate housing, "elderly" means a
person 55 years or older, or a couple that constitutes a household and at least one of whom is 55 years or older at the time of
entry into the facility, or an adult head of household that requires the features of an accessible unit. By "shared community space"
is meant space designed to be used in common for the enjoyment and leisure of residents of the facility such as, by way of example
only, reading rooms, sitting rooms, recreational rooms, rooms for entertaining guests, and exercise rooms. By "shared dining
facilities" is meant a room or rooms designed for the serving of meals to residents sitting together, plus the kitchen and ancillary
facilities required to prepare the meals. An elderly congregate housing development may include either or both of the following
types of residential units:
o dwelling units as defined by this Ordinance, that is, single housekeeping units with living, sanitary, sleeping and
permanent cooking facilities; and
o residential care units, which contain less than 500 gross square feet of space within the unit and may have a portable
or compact kitchen, but not permanent kitchen facilities.
Additionally, the term elderly congregate housing includes specialized facilities that provide long-term residential care, such as
those designed specifically for persons with Alzheimer’s Disease or other afflictions of the elderly for which specialized care
outside of a nursing home may be appropriate. Elderly congregate housing is distinct from a nursing home, which is defined
separately. - AMENDED 04/10/1993, 11/02/2010
ELDERLY HOUSING:
a. Housing units intended for and solely occupied by persons 62 years of age or older or, an elderly family whose head or
spouse is 62 years of age or older; or,
b. In the case of housing units financed wholly or partially with federal funds, housing units occupied by elderly persons
or handicapped persons as defined in the funding program, provided the number of units available for occupancy by
handicapped persons who are not elderly shall be the minimum needed to establish eligibility for the federal or state
program and that the program has received the approval of the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development as one designed and operated to assist elderly persons. - AMENDED 11/07/1995
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
19
ESSENTIAL SERVICES: Gas, electrical, communications facilities, steam, fuel or water and sewer supply, transmission, or
distribution systems. This shall not include antennas, satellite dishes and telecommunication structures, which are administered through
the Wireless Communications Facilities Ordinance. Water and Sewer District uses are addressed in Utility Districts . - AMENDED
11/06/2012
EXPANSION: In relation to a building, expansion shall mean: enlargement of ground floor area or, enlargement of building
enclosure, but shall not include remodeling or renovation. In relation to use, the use of more floor area or ground area; or, the
addition of activities or uses not previously conducted on the site.
FAMILY: One or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group
occupying a boarding house, lodging house, or hotel. Such unit shall not exceed five persons not related by blood or marriage.
FARMERS MARKET: An open air market where farmers sell produce and food they raise or create to the general public. -
AMENDED 11/02/2010
FAST FOOD RESTAURANT: A restaurant with drive-up window service, or that otherwise receives payment and/or
dispenses products to patrons while in their vehicles (such as a drive-in restaurant). - AMENDED 11/02/1993, 05/22/2004
FILLING: Depositing or dumping any matter on or into the ground or water.
FINDINGS OF FACT: A written description of a decision, including any conditions, and including the basis for that decision.
Findings of fact include information about the circumstances pertaining to the application (such as owner, address, map/lot,
zone, etc.), the jurisdiction under which the application review is conducted and permit or approval is decided, intermediate
decisions made during the review process (such as votes to accept an application or grant waivers), and the compliance (or lack
thereof) of the application with respect to all relevant standards. - AMENDED 11/03/2009
FIRE ESCAPE: An outside stairway attached to a building, used solely as an emergency exit.
FLEA MARKET: The sale of goods by individuals who rent tables and/or display space, but not including garage sales.
FLOAT: A platform that floats and is associated with a single pier in such a way that pedestrian movement is afforded between
a pier and float.
FLOOD OR FLOODING:
a. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
2. The unusual and rapid accumulation or run-off of surface waters from any source.
b. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining
caused by waves or current of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by unusually high water
level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash
flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as
defined in paragraph a.1. of this definition.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the Administrator of the Federal
Insurance Administration has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOODPLAIN: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of FLOOD or
FLOODING).
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing
flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management
regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health
regulations, special purpose ordinance (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance, and erosion control ordinance) and
other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide
standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
20
FLOOR AREA, GROSS: The total floor area, in square feet, of a building as measured from the exterior faces of the outside
walls. In the Shoreland Zone, floor area shall include the horizontal area of any unenclosed portions of a structure such as
porches and decks. - AMENDED 11/08/1994
FOOTPRINT: The entire area of ground covered by the structure(s) on a lot, including but not limited to cantilevered or similar
overhanging extensions, as well as unenclosed structures, such as patios and decks. - AMENDED 05/20/2017
FOREST MANAGEMENT: Timber cruising and other forest resources evaluation activities, management planning activities,
insect and disease control, timber stand improvement, pruning, timber harvesting and other forest harvesting, regeneration of
forest stands, and other similar associated activities, but not the construction or creation of roads.
FORMULA RESTAURANT: Formula Restaurant shall mean a restaurant that stands alone or with other use(s), and which
prepares food and beverage on site for sale to the public, and which is required by contractual or other arrangement to offer any
of the following: standardized menu, employee uniforms, interior and/or exterior color scheme(s), architectural design, signage
or similar standardized features, or which adopts a name or food presentation format which causes it to be substantially identical
to another restaurant regardless of ownership or location. - AMENDED 05/22/2004
FOUNDATION: The supporting substructure of a building or other structure, excluding wooden sills and post supports, but
including basements, slabs, frostwalls, or other base consisting of concrete, block, brick or similar materials. - AMENDED
11/04/2008
FRONTAGE, STREET: The street frontage of a lot shall be the lot line between a lot and a public or private street right-ofway
over which the property has a right of access. The street frontage may be contiguous, or may be broken into separate pieces,
but all are considered part of the street frontage. The right of access provision in the first sentence means that land abutting
limited access roads such as Spur Road or Interstate-95 are not considered to have street frontage along such right-of-ways.
- AMENDED 11/07/2006
FUNCTIONALLY WATER DEPENDENT USE: Those uses that require, for their primary purpose, location on
submerged lands or that require direct access to, or location in, coastal or inland waters and which cannot be located away from
these waters. These uses include commercial and recreational fishing and boating facilities, fin fish and shell fish processing, fish
storage and retail and wholesale marketing facilities, waterfront dock and port facilities, shipyards and boat building facilities,
marinas, navigation aids, basins and channels, industrial uses dependent upon water-borne transportation or requiring large
volumes of cooling or processing water that cannot reasonably be located or operated at an inland site and uses which primarily
provide general public access to marine or tidal coastal or inland waters. These uses do not include accessory uses that do not
require direct access to or location in coastal or inland waters such as boathouse, storage or parking facilities. - AMENDED
11/03/1998
GARAGE: An accessory building, joined or attached or entirely separate from the dwelling or main building it serves, designed
and equipped for the housing of motor vehicles, but not for the commercial repair, storage or rental of motor vehicles.
GARAGE SALE: Sale of goods at a residence, provided that no more than two such sales are held in a calendar year. Such sales
occurring on more than two weekends per year shall be considered to be commercial business.
GRAVEL PIT: A plot of land from which the subsoil is removed for resale.
GREAT POND: Any inland body of water which in a natural state has a surface area in excess of ten acres, and any inland
body of water artificially formed or increased which has a surface area in excess of thirty (30) acres except, for the purposes of
this Ordinance, where the artificially formed or increased inland body of water is completely surrounded by land held by a single
owner. - AMENDED 05/09/1992
GROCERY STORE: A commercial use which devotes a minimum of eighty percent of the floor space to the display and sale
of food products. - AMENDED 11/05/1996
HAZARD TREE: A tree with a structural defect, combination of defects, or disease resulting in a structural defect that under
the normal range of environmental conditions at the site exhibits a high probability of failure and loss of a major structural
component of the tree in a manner that will strike a target. A normal range of environmental conditions does not include
meteorological anomalies, such as, but not limited to: hurricanes; hurricane-force winds; tornados; microbursts; or significant ice
storm events. Hazard trees also include those trees that pose a serious and imminent risk to bank stability. A target is the area
where personal injury or property damage could occur if the tree or a portion of the tree fails. Targets include roads, driveways,
parking areas, structures, campsites, and any other developed area where people frequently gather and linger. - AMENDED
05/20/2017
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
21
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL: Any gaseous, liquid, or solid materials or substances designated as hazardous by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency and/or the Maine Department of Environmental Protection.
HEAD SHOP: A commercial enterprise that offers for sale and use any drug paraphernalia as defined by State Law in Title l7-
A M.R.S.A., Section 1111-A.
HIGHEST ANNUAL TIDE (HAT): an approximation of the landward extent of inundation occurring during the highest
predicted tide of the year as identified in tide tables published by the National Ocean Service. - AMENDED 11/06/2018
HISTORIC: (adj) - Important in or contributes to history.
HISTORIC DISTRICT(S): The district(s) established in Section 12.6 or as amended in accordance with the procedures detailed
in Section 12.5 and one or more of the qualifications outlined in Section 12.4.
HISTORIC LANDMARK: Any improvement, building or structure of unique historic or architectural significance to the Town
of York, relating to its heritage, cultural, social, economic, or political history, or which exemplify historic personages or important
events in local, state, or national history as may be designated in accordance with the Local Historic District Regulations.
HISTORIC SITE: Any parcel of land of special significance in the history of the Town of York and its inhabitants, including
archaeological site(s) containing important prehistoric or historic artifacts and/or structural remains, or upon which an historic
event has occurred, and which has been designated as such in accordance with the Local Historic District Regulations.
HISTORY: (n) - A record of events, as of the life or development of a people, country, institution, etc.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any business or occupation undertaken within a residential unit, by one or more occupants of that
unit, that is incidental and secondary to the use as a dwelling. This shall not be interpreted to include telecommuting.
[Telecommuting shall mean an arrangement in which a worker works at home rather than the primary place of work, and
communicates with the workplace and conducts work via wireless or telephone lines or cable, using modems, fax machines or
other electronic devices in conjunction with computers. This shall also include sporadic office-type work that was not completed
at the primary workplace (bringing work home from the office).] - AMENDED 11/08/2005
HOSPICE CARE: A coordinated program of in-home care, with palliative and medical and other health services designed to
meet the physical, psychological, social, and spiritual needs of terminally ill patients and that person's family. Hospice care
administered as in-patient care in hospitals or nursing homes shall be considered part of the range of care offered by either
institution and not considered a separate use. In-home care shall not be regulated as a principal use by the Zoning Ordinance. -
AMENDED 11/06/2012
HOSPITAL: An institution that provides health care services and that consists primarily of in-patient medical or surgical care
for sick or injured people. This use may include related facilities such as but not limited to laboratories, out-patient departments,
training facilities, medical offices, and administrative offices. See also Medical Facility. - AMENDED 11/06/2012
HOTEL/MOTEL: A building or buildings designed for occupancy primarily as transient rental accommodations for a person
or persons in which building:
a. There are 15 or more transient rental accommodations;
b. There may be club rooms and meeting facilities;
c. There may be common dining facilities;
d. There may be facilities for guests such as swimming pools, tennis courts, volleyball courts, and courtyards/plazas;
e. Incidental business may be conducted; and
f. There may be a maximum of one dwelling to be used exclusively by the owner, operator or
caretaker of the hotel/motel.
Each rental accommodation in a hotel/motel shall include sanitary and sleeping facilities and each accommodation shall be rented
or leased for compensation. An accommodation may include cooking facilities, provided such area used for cooking or
preparation of food is 12 square feet or less in size, including appliances. Any of the following shall constitute cooking facilities:
plumbing facilities, including a dishwasher, designed specifically for use in a food preparation area; stove tops or ranges for use
in preparation of food; a refrigerator larger than 3.75 cubic feet in size; or counter top space designed specifically for use in a
food preparation area. The 12 square feet limit on size of the cooking facility area shall be calculated as the amount of floor
footprint of the cooking area. The maximum permitted length of the cooking facility area shall be 6 feet, and the minimum depth
of the footprint measurement shall be 2 feet. - AMENDED 11/07/1995, 11/03/2015
ICE CREAM STAND: A special category of restaurant which devotes a minimum of seventy-five percent of its gross sales
and seventy-five percent of its gross floor space to the sale of ice cream and similar frozen confectioneries. An ice cream stand
may use any number of food stations, except that drive-through windows are prohibited. - AMENDED 11/04/1997
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
22
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Any surface that has been compacted or covered with a material that substantially reduces or
prevents the infiltration of stormwater. Covered surfaces include all buildings, all structures (including decks), parking areas,
driveways, roads, sidewalks, and any areas of concrete or asphalt. A raised deck (no roof) constructed above an earthen surface
shall be considered to reduce or prevent the infiltration of stormwater at a ratio of twenty percent (every five square foot of deck
shall be considered one square foot of impervious surface in determining impervious surface ratio). Gravel driveways and parking
areas shall be considered to reduce or prevent the infiltration of stormwater at a ratio of seventy-five percent (every four square
foot of gravel driveway or parking area shall be considered three square foot of impervious surface in determining impervious
surface ratio). - AMENDED 11/05/1996
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO: A measure of the intensity of land use which is determined by dividing the total area of
all impervious surfaces on a site by the total amount of acreage for a residential use in all zoning districts, by the total amount of
acreage for a non-residential use in all zoning districts except the six Route One Zoning Districts, or by the net buildable site area
for a non-residential use in the six Route One Zoning Districts. A raised deck (no roof) shall be considered twenty percent
impervious surface, and gravel driveways and parking area shall be considered seventy-five percent impervious surface.
- AMENDED 11/05/1996
INN: See "LODGING HOME/TOURIST HOME/INN".
JUNKYARD: A yard, field, or other area used as a place of commercial storage for: discarded, worn-out or junked plumbing,
heating supplies, household appliances and furniture; discarded, scrap and junk lumber; old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags,
batteries, paper trash, rubber or plastic debris, waste and all scrap iron steel and other scrap ferrous or non-ferrous material; three
or more unserviceable, discarded, worn out or junked motor vehicles; and, garbage dumps, waste dumps, and sanitary landfills.
KITCHEN: Space, 100.1 cubic feet or more in size, used for cooking or preparation of food. A kitchen shall not be located in
any transient rental accommodation. - AMENDED 11/07/1995
LAGOONING: An artificial enlargement of a waterbody, primarily by means of dredging and excavation.
LANDING: Any area to which logs or any other forest product are taken for transfer to trucks and removal from the site.
LODGING HOME/TOURIST HOME/INN: A dwelling in which sleeping accommodations are provided to transient
guests for compensation and which dwelling contains less than 15 rooms regularly maintained and offered to the public for such
use and which have no cooking facilities. Transient guests can stay for a maximum of 32 consecutive days. - AMENDED
11/08/1994
LOT: A parcel of land described on a deed, plot, or similar legal document.
LOT AREA: The total horizontal area within the lot lines.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. - AMENDED 11/08/1994
LOT COVERAGE: (Used to calculate the lot coverage percentage) The maximum projected horizontal area of all buildings or
structures on a lot at or above ground level. No land located below the normal high water mark of a body of water located below
sea level shall be used in the calculation of lot coverage. - AMENDED 11/08/1994
LOT LINE: A line which forms a boundary of a property dividing one lot from another, or from a street or waterbody or other
public space.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The front lot line shall be determined in accordance with the following provisions, which are based on
the number of streets on which the lot has street frontage:
• For lots with no street frontage, the front lot line shall be the side on which the right of access intersects the lot.
• For lots with street frontage on one street, the front lot line shall be the street frontage.
• For lots with street frontage on two or more streets, the owner shall select which street frontage shall constitute the front
lot line.
- AMENDED 11/07/2006
LOT LINE, REAR: A rear lot line shall be a lot line not otherwise defined as a front or side lot line. In some circumstances,
a lot may not have a rear lot line. - AMENDED 11/07/2006
LOT LINE, SIDE: A side lot line shall be a lot line that intersects the front lot line, and continues to either:
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
23
• an angle point at which the property boundary changes direction by 90 degrees or more; or
• the point at which it intersects a front lot line or another side lot line.
- AMENDED 11/07/2006
LOT OF RECORD: A parcel of land, a legal description of which, or the dimensions of which, are recorded in a document or
subdivision plan on file at the York County Registry of Deeds.
LOW INCOME: Household income which is not more than 80% of the median family income for the York-Kittery-South
Berwick HUD Metropolitan Finance Area. This area includes the towns of York, Kittery, Eliot, South Berwick and Berwick.
Income shall include household financial assets converted to income equivalents, using the federal model, which determines
eligibility for affordable housing. - AMENDED 11/03/2009
MANUFACTURED HOUSING: A structural unit or units designed to become a dwelling unit, constructed on a permanent
chassis in a manufacturing facility and transported by the use of its own chassis to a building site. (In common language, this is
what people commonly refer to as “trailers” and “mobile homes,” though these terms are not used in this context in this
Ordinance.) This includes but is not limited to those units which the manufacturer certifies were constructed after June 15, 1976
in compliance with HUD standards. The manufactured housing unit is constructed with its utilities integral to the unit, and is
designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities at the site. This definition is
intended not to include Recreational Vehicles (RVs) as defined in this ordinance. - AMENDED 05/19/2012
MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARK: A parcel of land under unified ownership and management, approved by the Town
for the placement of 3 or more units of manufactured housing. - AMENDED 05/19/2012
MARIJUANA: As defined in State Administrative Rules (10-144 CMR Chapter 122), §1, “Marijuana.” - AMENDED
11/04/2014, 11/05/2019
MARIJUANA CONCENTRATE: The resin extracted from any part of a marijuana plant and every compound, manufacture,
salt, derivative, mixture or preparation from such resin, including, but not limited to, hashish.
MARIJUANA EXTRACTION: The process of extracting marijuana concentrate from marijuana using water, lipids, gases,
solvents or other chemicals or chemical processes. - AMENDED 11/05/2019
MARINA: An area for the mooring and storage of boats with frontage on a navigable body of water, with or without sale of
supplies and services for watercraft and their equipment and accessories.
MARSH: A periodically wet or continually flooded land area with the surface not deeply submerged, covered dominantly with
sedges, cattails, rushes, and other hydrophytic plants.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD)
of 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD), or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. - AMENDED 11/03/1998
MEDICAL FACILITY: A facility that provides outpatient health services. This use may include but is not limited to medical
and dental offices and laboratories, diagnostic facilities, and outpatient surgical services. Medical facilities may be freestanding or
may be part of a larger hospital complex. For doctor and dentist offices operated on lots where the primary use is residential, see
Zoning 7.4, Home Occupations. - AMENDED 11/06/2012
MEDICAL MARIJUANA CAREGIVER: A person or an assistant of that person that provides care for a qualifying patient
in accordance with Title 22, Chapter 558-C: Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act, section 2423-A, subsection 2. - AMENDED
11/04/2014, 11/05/2019
MEDICAL MARIJUANA LAND USES: Any of 5 types of land uses, defined below, that cover the full range of options for
lawful cultivating, processing, storing and distributing medical marijuana.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA HOME PRODUCTION: Cultivating, processing and/or storing of medical marijuana
by a qualifying patient at their own residence or a medical marijuana caregiver at their own primary year-round residence
for use by a qualifying patient. This use shall be considered an accessory use.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA MANUFACTURING FACILITY: A facility used for cultivating, processing, and/or
storing medical marijuana by a medical marijuana caregiver at a location which is not the medical marijuana caregiver’s
primary year-round residence or their patient’s primary year-round residence; the facility can also be used for the
production, blending, infusing, compounding or other preparation of marijuana concentrate and marijuana products,
including, but not limited to, marijuana extraction or preparation by means of chemical synthesis. A Medical Marijuana
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
24
Manufacturing Facility shall be either a registered tier 1 or tier 2 manufacturing facility that may contain a person(s)
authorized to engage in marijuana extraction as specified under section 2423-F of Title 22, Chapter 558-C: Maine
Medical Use of Marijuana Act.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA REGISTERED CAREGIVER RETAIL STORE: A retail store operating pursuant to
MRS Title 22, Chapter 558-C: Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act section 2423-A, subsection 2, paragraph P.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA REGISTERED DISPENSARY: An entity registered under MRS Title 22, Chapter 558-
C: Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act section 2425-A that acquires, possesses, cultivates, manufactures, delivers,
transfers, transports, sells, supplies or dispenses marijuana or related supplies and educational materials to qualifying
patients and the caregivers of those patients.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY: A public or private laboratory that:
A. Is authorized in accordance with section 2423-A, subsection 10 to analyze contaminants in and the potency
and cannabinoid profile of samples; and
B. Is accredited pursuant to standard ISO/IEC 17025 of the International Organization for Standardization
by a 3rd-party accrediting body or is certified, registered or accredited by an organization approved by the
department.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA PRODUCT: A product composed of harvested marijuana and other ingredients that is intended
for medical use. "Marijuana product" includes, but is not limited to, an edible marijuana product, a marijuana ointment and a
marijuana tincture. Medical Marijuana Product" does not include Marijuana Concentrate. - AMENDED 11/04/2014,
11/05/2019
MEMBERSHIP ORGANIZATION: A building or portion thereof used by a group of people to pursue common goals,
interests, or activities and usually characterized by certain membership qualifications, payment of fees and dues, regular meetings,
and a constitution and bylaws. - AMENDED 11/06/2012
MINERAL EXTRACTION: Any operation within any twelve (12) month period which removes more than one hundred
(100) cubic yards of soil, topsoil, loam, sand, gravel, clay, rock, peat, or other like material from its natural location and to transport
the product removed, away from the extraction site. - AMENDED 05/09/1992
MINOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR BUILDING: An Accessory Structure or Building which has a gross floor area
of 150 square feet or less, which has no walls taller than 10 feet, and which has no essential service connections. - AMENDED
05/19/2012
MITIGATION, WETLAND: Methods used to alleviate or lessen the impact of development on wetlands, including but not
limited to the following:
a. Minimizing the impact by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementations;
b. Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected environment;
c. Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action;
d. Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the action;
and
e. Compensating for the impact by replacing or providing substitute resources or environments. Compensation may
include but shall not be limited to: the purchase and/or permanent protection of property that has wetland resources
of equal or greater value than the wetland impacted; restoration of an existing or former wetland from a disturbed or
altered condition with lesser acreage or functions to a previous condition with greater wetland acreage, functions or
functional value; and creation of new wetlands by bringing a wetland into existence at sites at which such wetlands did
not formerly exist. All forms of compensation may include providing an amount of funds to the Town equivalent to
the cost of the compensation required and the Town using these funds to perform appropriate compensation.
- AMENDED 11/05/1996
MIXED-USE BUILDING: A building that contains a non-residential use on the 1st floor or higher, and a residential use on
the 2nd floor or higher. - AMENDED 11/04/2008
MODERATE INCOME: Household income which is between 50% and 120% of median family income for the York-Kittery-
South Berwick HUD Metropolitan Finance Area. This area includes the towns of York, Kittery, Eliot, South Berwick and
Berwick. Income limits shall include household financial assets converted to income equivalents, using the federal model, which
determines eligibility for affordable housing. - AMENDED 11/04/2008
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
25
MODULAR HOME: A structural unit or units designed to become a dwelling unit, constructed in a manufacturing facility and
transported by an independent chassis to a building site. This includes only those units which the manufacturer certifies are
constructed in compliance with State laws and rules, including but not limited to M.R.S. Title 10, Chapter 951, and rules adopted
under that chapter. The modular home is constructed with its utilities integral to the units, and is designed to be placed on a
foundation and connected to required utilities at the site. - AMENDED 05/19/2012
MOORED FLOAT: A platform, not attached or associated with a pier, wharf, or the shore in any way, that floats and is
anchored, moored or secured and is used as a berth or other purpose. - AMENDED 11/02/2010
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING: Any building containing three or more dwelling units.
MUNICIPAL USE: Any land, building, structure or facility owned or controlled by the Town of York, including the Town of
York School Department. See also School. - AMENDED 11/06/2012
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of
floodplain management regulations adopted by a community (09-25-1974).
NON-CONFORMING DESIGN: A characteristic of a building, lot, use or site that was lawfully established but that does
not currently comply with the requirements of this Ordinance, but exclusive of requirements that cause a lot to be a nonconforming
lot of record, that cause a structure to be a non-conforming structure, or that cause a use to be a non-conforming
use. Examples may include but are not limited to:
• too few parking spaces;
• improperly sized parking spaces;
• inadequate sight distance;
• insufficient buffering;
• excessive lot coverage;
• building design that is not consistent with required design standards; or
• unscreened dumpsters.
- AMENDED 11/07/2006
NON-CONFORMING LOT OF RECORD: A single lot of record which does not meet the area, street frontage, shore
frontage, width, and/or depth requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, but which did meet such requirements
when the lot was created.
NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE: The portion of a lawfully constructed structure that does not meet all applicable
dimensional requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. - AMENDED 11/07/2006
NON-CONFORMING USE: Use of property, land, or a structure that is not permitted or does not conform to the use
limitations of Article 4, Use Regulations, in the base zoning district in which it is located, or that is not permitted or does not
conform to the use limitations of any overlay district in which it is located, but which was permitted at the time the use was
established. Under no circumstances shall any non-conforming use be construed as a "permitted use". - AMENDED
05/17/2003
NON-NATIVE INVASIVE SPECIES OF VEGETATION: Species of vegetation listed by the Maine Department of
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry as being invasive in Maine ecosystems and not native to Maine ecosystems. -
AMENDED 11/06/2018
NON-RESIDENTIAL USE: Any land use activity, excepting a structure which is designed solely to contain dwelling units.
- AMENDED 11/08/1994
NORMAL HIGH WATER MARK OF COASTAL WATERS: Defined as the “upland edge of a coastal wetland.”
- AMENDED 11/03/1998, 11/04/2008
NORMAL HIGH WATER MARK OF INLAND WATERS: That line which is apparent from visible markings, changes in
the character of soils due to prolonged action of the water or changes in vegetation, and which distinguishes between
predominantly aquatic and predominantly terrestrial land. Wetland areas contiguous with great ponds that are at the same or
lower elevation as the water level of the great pond during the period of normal high-water are considered part of the great pond.
- AMENDED 11/04/2008
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
26
NURSING HOME: A facility with beds licensed by the Maine Department of Human Services and in which nursing care and
medical services are performed under the general direction of persons licensed to practice medicine in the State of Maine for the
accommodation of convalescent or other persons who are not in need of hospital care, but who do require licensed nursing
supervision and related medical services. Although an "elderly congregate housing facility" may include a "nursing home," a use
which individually fails to meet all the criteria of an "elderly congregate care housing facility" shall be classified as a "nursing
home" rather than as an "elderly congregate care housing" facility. - AMENDED 04/10/1993
OBSCENE EXHIBITIONS: Any aural, visual, or tactile performance, dramatization, show or display which includes any
amount of human, animal, production, sound recording, audio visual cassette or tape, silhouette depiction or by any other means,
which:
a. To the average individual applying contemporary community standards, considered as a whole, appeals to the purient
interest;
b. Presents in a patently offensive manner actual or simulated ultimate sexual acts, sodomy, beastiality, excretory
functions, masturbation, direct physical stimulation of the unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in context of
ultimate sexual acts, lewd exhibition of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or the female breast
below the top of the nipple; and
c. Considered as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
OCCUPIED: As applied to a building, shall be construed as though followed by the words "or intended, arranged or designed
to be occupied."
ON-SITE MANUFACTURING: An accessory use to a permitted commercial use which involves the production of goods
that must be offered for sale on the same premises (may also be offered for sale off-premise). - AMENDED 11/05/1996
OPEN SPACE: Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for
public or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners, occupants, and their guests of land adjoining or
neighboring such open space. - AMENDED 11/08/1994
OUTLET STREAM: Any perennial or intermittent stream, as shown on the most recent highest resolution version of the
national hydrography dataset available from the United States Geological Survey on the website of the United States Geological
Survey or the national map, that flows from a freshwater wetland. - AMENDED 11/06/2018
OVERBOARD DISCHARGE SYSTEM: A sewage collection, treatment, and disposal system that discharges effluent directly
into a waterbody or watercourse. This definition shall exclude municipal sewage facilities. - AMENDED 11/06/2001
PERGOLA: An arbor or passageway without walls and with a roof of trelliswork on which climbing plants are grown.
- AMENDED 05/19/2012
PERSON: An individual, trustee, executor, other fiduciary, corporation, firm, partnership, association, society, organization, or
other entity acting as a unit.
PETROLEUM: Oil, gasoline, petroleum products and their by-products, and any hydrocarbons which are liquid under normal
atmospheric conditions.
PIER: A structure extending into the water for use as a landing place by water craft. - AMENDED 11/02/2010
PIERS, DOCKS, WHARVES, BREAKWATERS, CAUSEWAYS, MARINAS, BRIDGES OVER 20 FEET IN
LENGTH, AND USES PROJECTING INTO WATER BODIES): NOTE: This definition is intended to describe the
difference between "permanent" and "temporary".
a. PERMANENT: Structures which remain in the water for seven months or more in any period of twelve consecutive
months.
b. TEMPORARY: Structures which remain in the water for less than seven months in any period of twelve consecutive
months.
POND: Any inland body of water. See also "great pond".
PUBLIC HEARING: A designated portion of a public meeting at which the conducting board receives input from the public.
See also: “Public Meeting.” - AMENDED 11/03/2009
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
27
PUBLIC MEETING: Any meeting of a board. See also: “Public Hearing.” - AMENDED 11/03/2009
PRINCIPAL BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any building or structure in which the principal use of the lot is conducted.
PRINCIPAL USE: The primary use to which the premises, i.e., the land, buildings, and other structures on a single lot or parcel
of land, are devoted and the main purpose for which the premises exist.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: Chases Pond, Folly Pond, Middle Pond, Boulter Pond, and the Bell Marsh reservoir.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle or vehicular attachment designed for temporary sleeping or living quarters for one
or more persons, which is not a dwelling and which may include a pickup camper, travel trailer, tent trailer, or motor home.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY: (i) The channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot, and
(ii) in Zone A is considered to be the channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas to a distance of onehalf
the width of the floodplain, as measured from the normal high water mark to the upland limit of the floodplain.
RELIGIOUS USE: A structure or place in which worship, ceremonies, rituals, or education pertaining to a particular system
of beliefs are held. - AMENDED 11/06/2012
REPAIR: The replacement of existing work with equivalent materials for the purpose of its maintenance; but not including any
addition, permanent fixtures or equipment.
RESIDENTIAL CARE UNIT: A type of dwelling unit which can occur only in a congregate housing facility, and which has
less than 500 square feet of floor space. This is a single housekeeping unit with living, sanitary and
sleeping facilities, but with no permanent cooking facilities. The unit, however, may have a portable or compact kitchen. The
residents of these units routinely eat all meals at the dining facilities provided in the congregate housing facility. The residents
also often require some nursing and medical services which are provided at the congregate housing facility. - AMENDED
04/10/1993
RIVER: Any free-flowing body of water from that point at which it provides drainage for a watershed of 25 square miles to its
mouth. - AMENDED 05/09/1992
ROAD: See "STREET".
SAPLING: A tree species that is less than two (2) inches in diameter at four and one half (4.5) feet above ground level. -
AMENDED 11/06/2018
SCHOOL: A public, parochial, or private institution that provides primary and/or secondary instruction. Also, an institution for
post-secondary instruction for higher learning that grants associate, bachelor, or graduate degrees. A school under this definition
must satisfy either of the following requirements: the school is not operated for a profit or qualifies for tax exempt status under
existing tax codes; or the school teaches courses of study which are sufficient to qualify attendance in compliance with state
compulsory education requirements. For educational instruction offered through commercial businesses see School,
Commercial. Also see School, Trade. - AMENDED 11/06/2012
SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL: Schools or institutions which are commercial but which may be profit or non-profit oriented and
which are deemed to be a service business. Examples include, but are not limited to, dancing, music, riding, correspondence,
aquatic schools, or driving education. - AMENDED 11/06/2012
SCHOOL, TRADE: A specialized instructional establishment that provides on-site training of business, commercial, and/or
trade skills such as but not limited to accounting, Information Technology, industrial skills, hairdressing, or auto repair. -
AMENDED 11/06/2012
SEASONAL DWELLING: A dwelling which cannot be occupied year-round because one or more factors relating the building
or property preclude such occupancy, such as but not limited to a lack of heat, insulation, or water supply. - AMENDED
11/07/1995, 11/03/2009
SEEDLING: A young tree species that is less than four and one half (4.5) feet in height above ground level. - AMENDED
11/06/2018
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between 2 reference points.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
28
SHADOW FLICKER: Alternating changes in light intensity and shadows caused by the movement of wind turbine blades. -
AMENDED 05/29/09
SHOP FOR BUILDING SMALL BOATS: A shop for building small boats shall mean a workshop where boats are designed
and/or constructed. Only shops that comply with the following limits shall be classified in this use category: manufacturing shall
be limited to boats whose framing and sheathing are principally of wood; manufacturing shall be limited to boats with a hull
length of 25 feet or less; and not more than 3 people may work at the shop at any time. - AMENDED 11/02/2004
SHOPPING CENTER: A grouping of office or commercial uses, such as restaurant, retail, or service uses, that is planned,
developed and managed as a unit with common on-site parking facilities. - AMENDED 11/05/1996
SHORE FRONTAGE: The length of a lot bordering on a water body or wetland measured in a straight line between the
intersections of the lot lines with the shoreline. - AMENDED 11/04/2008
SHORELINE: The normal high-water mark of a waterbody, or the upland edge of a freshwater or coastal wetland.
- AMENDED 11/04/2008
SHORT TERM RESIDENTIAL RENTAL: A dwelling unit, other than a hotel/motel, B&B, Inn, Boarding House, Tourist
Home, Accessory Dwelling Unit etc., that is rented by the owner or the owner's agent for transient occupancy. – AMENDED
11/07/2017
SIGN: Any object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof, visible to persons not located on the lot where such object, etc.,
is located, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization,
business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors,
illumination or projected images, etc. - AMENDED 11/08/2011
SINGLE HOUSEKEEPING UNIT: A unit that includes three or more of the following: cooking, living, sanitary or sleeping
facilities.
SMALL WINDMILL: A Small Windmill intended to produce electrical power primarily for on-site consumption, with a rated
capacity of no greater than 50 kW. The Small Windmill shall consist of a wind turbine, tower, base, a generator, and electrical
collection and supply equipment. - AMENDED 05/29/2009
SOLAR COLLECTOR: A device, such as a PV cell or a solar thermal collector that absorbs solar radiation from the sun and
transforms it into electricity or heat. - AMENDED 11/06/2018
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: Any active Solar Energy System which uses mechanical, physical, or chemical means to convert
energy collected from sunlight into an alternative form of energy. Solar Energy Systems include, but are not limited to:
photovoltaic cells, solar hot water heaters, etc. - AMENDED 11/06/2018
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, BUILDING-INTEGRATED PHOTOVOLTAIC (BIPV): Any Solar Energy System that
consists of photovoltaic cells and/or panels which are fully integrated into the exterior structure of a building. - AMENDED
11/06/2018
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, BUILDING MOUNTED PHOTOVOLTAIC: Any Solar Energy System that consists of
photovoltaic cells and/or panels which are affixed to the exterior of a building such as the façade (see definition of Solar Energy
System, Roof-Mounted). - AMENDED 11/06/2018
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, GROUND-MOUNTED: Any Solar Energy System that is structurally mounted to the ground
and is not attached to a building; may be of any size (small-, medium- or large-scale). - AMENDED 11/06/2018
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, LARGE SCALE: A Solar Energy System which occupies more than 40,000 square feet of
surface area; surface area shall be measured by the total surface area of the solar collector at maximum tilt to the vertical that
occupies a given space or mounting surface, also referred to as the projected area of the array. See Figure 9-B.1 in Article 9-B,
§9-B.4 for an example of measuring surface area. - AMENDED 11/06/2018
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, MEDIUM-SCALE: A Solar Energy System which occupies more than 1,750 square feet but
less than 40,000 square feet of surface area; surface area shall be measured by the total surface area of the solar collector at
maximum tilt to the vertical that occupies a given space or mounting surface, also referred to as the projected area of the array.
See Figure 9-B.1 in Article 9-B, §9-B.4 for an example of measuring surface area. - AMENDED 11/06/2018
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
29
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, PHOTOVOLTAIC (PV): A Solar Energy System that produces electricity by the use of
semiconductor devices, called photovoltaic cells, which generate electricity when exposed to sunlight. A PV system may be roofmounted,
ground-mounted, or pole-mounted. - AMENDED 11/06/2018
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, ROOF-MOUNTED: Any Solar Energy System that is mounted on the roof of a building or
structure; may be of any size (small-, medium- or large-scale). - AMENDED 11/06/2018
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, SMALL-SCALE: A Solar Energy System which occupies no more than 1,750 square feet or
less of surface area; surface area shall be measured by the total surface area of the solar collector at maximum tilt to the vertical
that occupies a given space or mounting surface, also referred to as the projected area of the array. See Figure 9-B.1 in Article 9-
B, §9-B.4 for an example of measuring surface area. - AMENDED 11/06/2018
SOLAR THERMAL SYSTEM (Solar Hot Water or Solar Heating Systems): A Solar Energy System that directly heats water
or other liquid, or air, using sunlight. - AMENDED 11/06/2018
START OF CONSTRUCTION: The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial improvement or other improvement was within 180 days of the
permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or
the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. - AMENDED
11/05/1996
STORM DAMAGED TREE: a tree that has been uprooted, blown down, is lying on the ground, or that remains standing and
is damaged beyond the point of recovery as the result of a storm event. - AMENDED 05/20/2017
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY: Any catch basin, drainage swale, detention basin or pond, pipe, or other
such structure or feature that is intended to control stormwater runoff quantity and quality. - AMENDED 11/04/2014
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN: A statement prepared by a Maine-licensed Professional Engineer (PE), describing
the measures to be taken for control of erosion, drainage, and sedimentation from proposed development and which attests that
the proposed development will not create erosion, ponding, or flooding, either within the development or on other properties,
as well as the calculations that support this conclusion. - AMENDED 11/04/2008
STREAM: A channel between defined banks. A channel is created by the action of surface water and has 2 or more of the
following characteristics:
A. It is depicted as a solid or broken blue line on the most recent highest resolution version of the national
hydrography dataset available from the United States Geological Survey.
B. It contains or is known to contain flowing water continuously for a period of at least 6 months of the year
in most years.
C. The channel bed is primarily composed of mineral material such as sand and gravel, parent material or
bedrock that has been deposited or scoured by water.
D. The channel contains aquatic animals such as fish, aquatic insects or mollusks in the water or, if no surface
water is present, within the stream bed.
E. The channel contains aquatic vegetation and is essentially devoid of upland vegetation.
“Stream” does not mean a ditch or other drainage way constructed, or constructed and maintained, solely for the
purpose of draining storm water, or a grassy swale. - AMENDED 05/09/1992, 11/04/2008, 05/20/2017
STREET: A public or private way open to the travel of the general public which has sufficient width for use by motor vehicles,
whether or not duly recorded with the registry of deeds, or a way shown on a subdivision plan duly approved by the Planning
Board under the State Subdivision Law. This term is used interchangeably with the term "ROAD".
STRUCTURE: Anything built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, goods, or property of any kind, together
with anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, exclusive of survey boundary markers and vehicles.
- AMENDED 05/22/2004, 11/08/2005
STRUCTURE, EXPANSION: (Not withstanding other sections of the ordinance, this definition pertains to the
Shoreland Overlay District only) An increase in the footprint of a structure, including all extensions such as, but not limited
to: attached decks, garages, porches and greenhouses. - AMENDED 11/05/2019
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
30
STRUCTURE HEIGHT: For structures other than buildings, the vertical distance from the average grade of the ground
adjoining the structure to the highest point of the structure, excluding lightning rods and other such appurtenances. For structures
that are buildings, see “building height.” - AMENDED 05/22/2004
SUBDIVISION: The division of a tract or parcel of land into three or more lots, whether accomplished by sale, lease,
development, building or otherwise, in any five year period as further defined by the Maine Subdivision Law (Title 30-A M.R.S.A.
Section 4401)
TEMPORARY DOCKS: A structure that remains in or over the water for six (6) months or less in any period of twelve (12)
consecutive months, and shall not have a permanent fixed location on or in the ground. - AMENDED 05/20/2017
TENT: Any structure with fabric or non-rigid walls or roof or both which provides or is intended to provide or is used for
human habitation.
TIDAL WATERS: All waters affected by tidal action during the highest annual tide. - AMENDED 11/04/2008, 05/20/2017
TILT: The angle of the solar panels and/or solar collector relative to the vertical. Adjustable-tilt Solar Energy Systems can be
manually or automatically adjusted throughout the year. Alternatively, fixed-tilt systems remain at a static tilt year-round. -
AMENDED 11/06/2018
TIMBER HARVESTING: The cutting and removal of timber for the primary purpose of selling or processing forest products.
“Timber harvesting” does not include the cutting or removal of vegetation within the shoreland zone when associated with any
other land use activities. The cutting or removal of trees in the shoreland zone on a lot that has less than two (2) acres within the
shoreland zone shall not be considered timber harvesting. Such cutting or removal of trees shall be regulated pursuant to 8.3.3,
Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other Than Timber Harvesting. - AMENDED 05/20/2017
TOTAL HEIGHT (SMALL WINDMILL): The vertical distance from adjacent grade at the base of the tower to the tip of
the wind turbine blade when it is at its highest point. - AMENDED 05/29/2009
TOURIST HOME: See "LODGING HOME/TOURIST HOME/INN".
TOWER HEIGHT (SMALL WINDMILL): The vertical distance from adjacent grade at the base of the tower to the center
of the turbine rotor hub. - AMENDED 05/29/2009
TOWN OF YORK: All the land within the boundaries of the Town of York including land in the former York Harbor Village
Corporation area and land in the former York Beach Village Corporation area.
TRACT: A lot or contiguous group of lots in single or joint ownership or under single or joint control, and registered on the
current Tax Maps of the Town of York.
TRAILER: A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation.
TRAILER PARK: Any area of land where any recreational vehicle, is parked or stationed.
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY: A stay by the same person or group of people in overnight accommodations of a particular
hotel, motel, inn, bed & breakfast, short term residential rental or other such place for 30 days or less per calendar year. Room
or suite assignments are not relevant in determining whether or not occupancy is transient. - AMENDED 05/19/2012,
11/07/2017
TREE: A woody perennial plant with a well-defined trunk(s) at least two (2) inches in diameter at four and one half (4.5) feet
above the ground with a more or less definite crown, and reaching a height of at least ten (10) feet at maturity. - AMENDED
05/20/2017
TRIBUTARY STREAM: A channel between defined banks created by the action of surface water, which is characterized by
the lack of terrestrial vegetation or by the presence of a bed, devoid of topsoil, containing waterborne deposits or exposed soil,
parent material or bedrock and which is connected hydrologically with other water bodies. “Tributary stream” does not include
rills or gullies forming because of accelerated erosion in disturbed soils where the natural vegetation cover has been removed by
human activity. This definition does not include the term “stream” as defined elsewhere in this Ordinance, and only applies to
that portion of the tributary stream located within the shoreland zone of the receiving water body or wetland. - AMENDED
05/09/1992, 05/20/2017
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
31
TRUCK STOP: Any building, premises or land which is used to provide services to tractor-trailer trucks and similar commercial
vehicles, such services including but not limited to parking, restaurant facilities, convenience store, showers, motor fuel, and
vehicle repair and maintenance. - AMENDED 11/08/1994
TRUCK TERMINAL: An area or a building where trucks load and unload cargo and freight and where the cargo and freight
may be broken down or aggregated into smaller and larger loads for transfer to other vehicles or modes of transportation. -
AMENDED 11/08/94
UPLAND EDGE OF A COASTAL WETLAND: The boundary between a coastal wetland and upland, or the boundary
between a coastal wetland and an inland wetland. This boundary is the line formed by the landward limits of the salt tolerant
vegetation and/or the highest annual tide level including all areas affected by tidal action. - AMENDED 11/04/2008,
11/06/2018
UPLAND EDGE OF AN INLAND WETLAND: The boundary between upland and wetland of an inland wetland. -
AMENDED 11/04/2008
UTILITY DISTRICT: Water supply and sewage disposal as provided by quasi-municipal or municipal government entities
including: York Water District; Kittery Water District; Kennebunk, Kennebunkport & Wells Water District; York Sewer District;
Kittery Sewer District; and Ogunquit Sewer District. Associated water and wastewater utility facilities shall include facilities
providing service, maintenance, or repair of utilities, including but not limited to pumping stations, reservoirs, water storage tanks,
utility lines and their easements, receiving or transmitting facility, storage areas for public utility equipment or vehicles, or the
districts associated offices. - AMENDED 11/06/2012
VACANT LOT: Any lot lacking a principal structure.
VARIANCE: A granting of relief by the Board of Appeals from lot area, frontage, lot coverage, and setback requirements of
the Town of York Zoning Ordinance, in accordance with §18.8.2, and Title 30-A M.R.S.A., Section 4353 and as amended.
- AMENDED 05/29/2009
VEHICLE: A car, truck, motorcycle, all-terrain vehicle or similar wheeled, self-propelled conveyance intended for travel across
the land, but exclusive of power wheelchairs. As used in the definition of “structure” and in the standards that control parking,
the term shall also include trailers customarily towed by vehicles, and component parts of vehicles and/or trailers. Trailers, in
this context, shall be more broadly construed than the narrow definition provided elsewhere in Article 2. - AMENDED
11/08/2005
VIOLATION: Anything contrary to the requirements of this Ordinance, or contrary to a permit or approval granted pursuant
to this Ordinance, that is not lawfully nonconforming. - AMENDED 11/05/1996, 05/18/2013
WAREHOUSES/STORAGE UNITS: Structures in which space is leased for storage of goods, merchandise, or other nonresidential
items.
WASTE TRANSFER FACILITY: A facility which is used to provide for the collection, reuse, recycling, recovery and/or
composting of solid waste materials and construction and demolition debris. No solid waste materials or construction and
demolition debris shall be permanently disposed of at this facility. This type of facility does not include a container/bottle
redemption center licensed by the State of Maine. The Town shall consider a redemption center a service business.
- AMENDED 04/10/1993, 11/05/1996
WATER CROSSING: Any project extending from one bank to the opposite bank of a river, stream, or wetland whether under,
through, or over the water or wetland. Such projects include but may not be limited to roads, fords, bridges, culverts, water lines,
sewer lines, and cables as well as maintenance work on these crossings. This definition includes crossings for timber harvesting
equipment and related activities. - AMENDED 11/04/2008
WATER DISTRICT: The York Water District or the Kittery Water District.
WATERBODY: Any great pond, river, stream or coastal wetland. - AMENDED 05/09/1992, 11/04/2008
WETLAND, COASTAL: All tidal and subtidal lands; all lands with vegetation present that is tolerant to salt water and occurs
primarily in a salt water or estuarine habitat; and any swamp, marsh, bog, beach, flat or other contiguous low land which is subject
to tidal action during the highest annual tide level for the year in which an activity is proposed as identified in the tide tables
published by the National Ocean Service. Coastal wetlands may include portions of coastal sand dunes. NOTE: All areas below
the highest annual tide level are coastal wetlands. These areas may consist of rocky ledges, sand and cobble beaches, mud flats,
etc., in addition to salt marshes and salt meadows. - AMENDED 05/09/1992, 11/04/2008, 05/20/2017
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
32
WETLAND, FORESTED: A freshwater wetland dominated by woody vegetation that is six (6) meters tall (Approximately
twenty (20) feet) or taller. - AMENDED 11/06/2018
WETLAND, INLAND: Wetlands are areas inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater for a sufficient time to support,
under normal circumstances, a prevalence of vegetation adapted to wetness and which have a predominance of “hydric” soils
which form in wet conditions. Wetlands shall be identified as detailed in the Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual
(1987). Wetland vegetation shall be classified as described in the National List of Plant Species that Occur in Wetlands: Northeast
(Region One) (1988), or its subsequent revisions. Hydric soils shall be classified as in Field Indicators for Identifying Hydric Soils
in New England (1998) or its subsequent revisions. Man-made inland waterbodies of 10 acres or less and man-made drainage
facilities shall be exempted from this definition.
Freshwater/Inland Wetlands may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that do not conform to the criteria of this
definition.
(See also: definition of CONTIGUOUS WETLANDS) - AMENDED 05/09/1992, 11/02/2004
WORKFORCE AFFORDABLE HOUSING: Dwelling units that may be purchased or rented for year-round occupancy by
a working household with moderate income. Workforce Affordable Housing may include single-family dwellings, two-family
dwellings, multi-family dwellings, or a combination of these. - AMENDED 11/04/2008, 11/02/2010
YEAR-ROUND DWELLING: Any structure or any portion thereof which is capable of being used as a residence for one or
more persons and which possesses the minimum amount of utilities and services (including, but not limited to heating, water
supply, sewage treatment, electricity, and cooking facilities) to permit the structure to be used continuously as a residence on
every day of the calendar year.
YORK HOUSING: An organization established under the Statutes of Maine by the Town of York in November, 1978, whose
mission is to provide safe, clean, affordable housing. This organization was formerly known as the York Housing Authority. -
AMENDED 11/04/2008
YORK RIVER: That waterway in the Town of York which is commonly called the York River. It includes the low water channel
and the coastal wetlands of the York River and its tributaries.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
33
ARTICLE THREE
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
3.1 Lots Divided by District Boundaries
Where a zoning district boundary line divides a parcel of land, the parcel shall be deemed split into the different zones
and each portion shall be governed by the regulations pertinent to that district.
3.2 Conflict of Districts
Whenever there is a conflict between the Shoreland Overlay District, Watershed Protection Overlay District, or
Floodplain Management Overlay District and an underlying District, the provisions of the more restrictive district shall
prevail.
3.3 Maps Incorporated By Reference
Certain zoning districts are delineated using maps in lieu of verbal boundary descriptions. The full citation of each
zoning map’s title and date of preparation is provided in the section of the text describing that zone’s boundaries.
These maps, though printed separately from this document, are an integral part of this Ordinance and are hereby
incorporated by reference. These maps shall be on file with the Town Clerk and are available for public inspection
when the Clerk’s office is open for business. - AMENDED 11/02/2004
3.4 Map of Base Zoning Districts
A Base Zoning Districts
The boundaries of base zoning districts established pursuant to this Ordinance are delineated in detail on a
map entitled, “York Zoning Ordinance: Base Zoning Districts” dated February 4, 2016. The following base
zones are delineated: - Map Amended 11/08/2005, 11/04/2008, 11/03/2015, 05/21/2016
RES-1 Residential 1
RES-2 Residential 2
RES-3 Residential 3
RES-4 Residential 4
RES-5 Residential 5
RES-6 Residential 6
RES-7 Residential 7
BUS-1 Business 1
BUS-2 Business 2
YBVC York Beach Village Center
YVC-1 York Village Center-1
YVC-2 York Village Center-2
RT 1-1 Route One-1, River
RT 1-2 Route One-2, Small Makes Sense
RT 1-3 Route One-3, Big Makes Sense
RT 1-4 Route One-4, Tourism/Recreation
RT 1-5 Route One-5, Cape Neddick Village
RT 1-6 Route One-6, Rural Mixed Use
GEN-1 General Development 1
GEN-2 General Development 2
GEN-3 General Development 3
B. Interpretation of Maps
Zoning district boundaries delineated on the map of base zoning districts relate to physical features or legal
boundaries. As such, this map shall be interpreted using the following rules:
1. Streets. A zoning district boundary relating to a street shall be considered in relation to the
centerline of the street right-of-way.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
34
2. Property Boundary. Because of the high potential for inaccuracies in the Town’s tax maps, a
zoning district boundary depicted on a lot line shall be based on the actual location of that lot line
on the face of the earth as of the date on which the map become effective. Subsequent property
boundary changes shall not have the effect of shifting zoning district boundaries.
3. Streams and Rivers. A zoning district boundary shown along a stream or river shall be interpreted
as following the thread of the main course.
4. Gaps. There shall be no gaps between adjacent base zoning districts.
C. Authority to Interpret
The Town official or body charged with administration of provisions of this Ordinance shall have the
authority to interpret this map in the course of their duties. To the extent additional information is required
to interpret zoning district boundaries, the Town official or body may take into account personal experience
and knowledge, past interpretations, input from people or firms with suitable expertise in specific disciplines
(e.g.: Professional Land Surveyor), and other input deemed appropriate. - AMENDED 11/02/2004
3.5 District Boundary Lines
A district boundary line that is field verified, delineated on an official town map or shown on a professionally certified
plan shall form an invisible vertical plane perpendicular to the ground surface. - AMENDED 11/08/2016
3.6 Reserved. - AMENDED 11/02/2004
3.7 Reserved. - AMENDED 11/02/2004
3.8 Shoreland Overlay District
The boundaries of this district and its sub-districts are delineated on a pair of maps entitled, “York Zoning Ordinance:
Shoreland Overlay District, Northern Section),” dated November 4, 2008, and “York Zoning Ordinance: Shoreland
Overlay District, Southern Section” dated May 29, 2009. This map is available at the Town Clerk’s Office. This
district’s boundaries are based on criteria, as specified in §3.8.1, below. This Overlay District is divided into subdistricts,
as specified in §3.8.2, below. Interpretation of the boundaries of this Overlay District shall be governed by §3.8.3,
below, as well as other applicable sections of this Ordinance. See Article 8 for standards pertaining to this Overlay
District. Also note that certain setback requirements of the Shoreland Overlay District can apply to areas outside this
Overlay District (beyond 250 feet from protected resources) and this is intentional. - AMENDED 11/08/2005,
11/04/2008
1. Criteria. The Shoreland Overlay District Map was based on designation of resources in accordance with
the following criteria:
a. Tidal waters, coastal wetlands, and inland wetlands contiguous to these resources regardless of
their size, and those areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high water mark of
such resources.
1. Exception. Where the Shoreland Overlay District overlaps the York Village Hospital
Overlay District, the boundary of the Shoreland Overlay District and structure setbacks
shall be measured from the upland edge of the coastal wetlands, not from the upland edge
of the contiguous inland wetlands. The inland wetlands in this area are forested, as defined
in the State’s Chapter 1000 Shoreland Zoning Guidelines, and have an area significantly
less than 10 acres. For both of these reasons, this exception to the local rule fully complies
with State requirements. The exception is provided to more fully accommodate the public
policy objectives of the York Village Hospital Overlay District. - AMENDED 11/06/2007
b. Those areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high water mark of Bell Marsh
Reservoir, Boulter Pond, Chases Pond, Folly Pond, Lake Carolyn, Middle Pond, Scituate Pond,
Welchs Pond, Phillips Pond, and York Pond, including wetlands contiguous to these water bodies,
and those areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high water mark or upland edge
of such resources.
c. All inland wetlands with a contiguous area of 4 acres or more, and all areas within 250 feet of the
upland edge of such wetlands.
d. Those lands lying within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high water mark of a stream
designated on the Shoreland Overlay District Map.
e. The provisions of the Shoreland Zoning Overlay District also apply to any structure built on, over,
or abutting a dock, wharf or pier, or other structure extending beyond or located below the normal
high water mark of a waterbody or within a wetland. - AMENDED 11/04/2008
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
35
2. Subdistricts. The district is comprised of sub-districts as follows:
a. Resource Protection Sub-district. This subdistrict shall include all areas that meet the criteria that
follow. This designation shall supersede the classification of Limited Residential or Mixed-Use
sub-district designations.
1. Coastal Wetlands. The wetland area itself.
2. Inland Wetlands. The wetland area itself for inland wetlands with a contiguous area of
4 or more acres, or that are contiguous to coastal wetlands.
3. Map-Designated Areas. All areas so designated on the Shoreland Overlay District Map.
4. Steep Slopes. Within the Limited Residential or Mixed-Use subdistrict, areas of 2 or
more contiguous acres with sustained slopes of 20% or greater, as shown on the
Shoreland Overlay District Map. The area of steep slopes may extend beyond the
boundaries of the Shoreland Overlay District, but only that portion of the steep area
that lies within the Shoreland Overlay District shall be designated as resource
protection.
5. 100-Year Floodplain. Any Shoreland area included within the Velocity Zone on
FEMA’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps shall be classified as Resource Protection. Along
the tidal reaches of the Cape Neddick River, York River and Brave Boat Harbor, any
Shoreland area included in the 100-year floodplain on FEMA’s Flood Insurance Rate
Maps shall be classified as Resource Protection. Because the majority of these areas are
narrow slivers of land which would not display legibly on the Shoreland Overlay District
Map, these designations shall be determined on a case-by-case basis. - AMENDED
11/04/2008
6. Bird Habitat Areas. The Resource Protection Subdistrict shall include upland areas
adjacent to wetlands which are rated “moderate” or “high” value waterfowl and wading
bird habitat by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, as shown on the
Shoreland Overlay District Map. - AMENDED 11/04/2008
7. Unstable Bluffs. The Resource Protection Subdistrict shall include the face of any
unstable or highly unstable coastal bluff along tidal waters, as shown on the Shoreland
Overlay District map. These areas are designated because they are subject to severe
erosion or mass movement. The source of the data is mapping by the Maine Geological
Survey. - AMENDED 11/04/2008
b. Limited Residential Sub-district. All areas so designated on the Shoreland Overlay District Map.
c. Mixed-Use Sub-district. All areas so designated on the Shoreland Overlay District Map.
d. Stream Protection Sub-district. All areas so designated on the Shoreland Overlay District Map,
and as indicated in §3.8.3.C. - AMENDED 11/04/2008
3. Interpretation of Map.
A. The resource locations and boundaries shown on the map are subject to field verification. This is
particularly important because the map is a generalized depiction of the resource conditions on the
ground. In instances where the map and text conflict, the map shall prevail unless expressly
provided in the remainder of this section (§3.8.3).
B. Any tidal water, coastal wetland, and inland wetland contiguous to these resources, and the entire
area within 250’ of this resource, shall be included in this Overlay District whether properly shown
on the Shoreland Overlay District Map or not.
C. The inclusion of streams in this Overlay District shall be based on the standard that the stream
and adjacent uplands shall be included in the Overlay District downstream from its initial point of
inclusion, and that there are to be no gaps except as specified below. Any stream flowing out of
a Shoreland-designated wetland or great pond shall be considered in the Stream Protection Subdistrict
even if it is not properly designated on the Shoreland Overlay District Map.
The exceptions to continuous inclusion of a stream in the Overlay are:
1. where a stream enters into a man-made roadside drainage system, it shall be excluded
from the Overlay, but shall resume its inclusion below the outfall from the drainage
system; or
2. where a stream is contained in a culvert or similar structure for a length of 100 feet or
more, it shall be excluded from the Overlay, but shall resume its inclusion below the
outfall of the culvert.
In both exceptions cited above, the Stream Protection Subdistrict shall break perpendicular to the
stream channel at the point where it enters and exits the drainage system or culvert.
- AMENDED 05/09/1992, 11/02/2004, 11/04/2008
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
36
3.9 Watershed Protection Overlay District
3.9.1 The Watershed Protection Overlay District consists of that area in which surface and subsurface waters ultimately
flow or drain into the public water supply, including the area of the ponds. The boundaries of this district are
delineated on a map entitled, “York Zoning Ordinance: Watershed Protection Overlay District,” dated May 5, 2004.
- AMENDED 11/02/2004
3.9.2 Due to the scale of the map there may be small inaccuracies in the delineation of the watershed boundary. Where
there is some dispute as to where the watershed boundary lies on a particular property, the Water District and the
landowner shall conduct an on-site investigation to determine where the drainage divide lies. If the Water District
and the landowner cannot agree on the location of the drainage divide based on the on-site investigation, the burden
of proof shall lie with the landowner to provide the York Planning Office with information from a registered land
surveyor showing where the drainage divide lies.
3.10 Reserved
3.11 Reserved. - AMENDED 04/10/1993, 11/04/1997, 11/02/2004, 05/19/2012
3.12 Wetlands Protection Overlay District
Any area that meets the definition of Inland Wetland, regardless of size, shall be considered a wetland subject to the
provisions of the Wetlands Protection Overlay District. - AMENDED 11/07/2000, 11/02/2004
3.13 York Village Hospital Overlay District
The York Village Hospital Overlay District shall include the lots as shown on a map entitled, “York Zoning Ordinance:
York Village Hospital Overlay District” dated January 31, 2018. - AMENDED 05/17/2003, 5/19/2018
3.14 York Village Affordable Elderly Housing Overlay District
The York Village Affordable Elderly Housing Overlay District shall include the property as shown on a map entitled,
“York Zoning Ordinance: York Village Affordable Elderly Housing Overlay District” dated December 8, 2015.
- AMENDED 05/17/2003, 05/21/2016
3.15 Reserved. - AMENDED 05/20/2006, 11/03/2015, 05/21/2016
3.16 Workforce Affordable Housing Overlay District
The Workforce Affordable Housing Overlay District shall include the lots as shown on a map entitled, “York Zoning
Ordinance: “Workforce Affordable Housing Overlay District” dated May 6, 2019.- AMENDED 11/04/2008,
11/05/2019
3.17 Farm Enterprise Overlay District
The Farm Enterprise Overlay District shall include the lots as shown on a map entitled, “York Zoning Ordinance:
Farm Enterprise Overlay District, November 5, 2013”. This map constitutes a registry of approved properties
comprising the Farm Enterprise Overlay District. For a farm to qualify for inclusion in the Farm Enterprise Overlay
District, the property owner must demonstrate that the total agricultural land is a minimum of five acres in size, and
contains at least two contiguous acres on which agriculture has contributed to a gross annual value of at least $2,000
per year. The acreage minimum may be met by any combination of ownership, rental, or lease of agricultural land. The
Farm Enterprise Overlay District map may be amended by referenda upon application for inclusion by a property
owner that has demonstrated they meet the acreage and use requirements of the overlay district. - AMENDED
11/02/2010, 05/21/2011, 11/05/2013
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
37
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
38
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
39
ARTICLE FOUR
USE REGULATIONS
4.1 Base Zone Requirements. The uses listed for each zone in this Article are permitted, and all others are prohibited.
A. Residential Use Category, With Permit/Approval Jurisdiction. The following is a list of all the principal
uses within the Residential Use Category. In the zone-by-zone listing of permitted principal uses in the Residential
Use Category, any use listed for that zone shall be an allowed use, and uses from this list which are not listed shall
be expressly prohibited. Where a permit or approval is required for establishment or modification of the use, the
proper authority is identified below after the use. Where uses are referenced in overlay districts, permit or approval
authority for the use shall be the same as in the base zones unless otherwise specified.
• Dwelling, Single-Family – CEO
• Dwelling, Two-Family – CEO
• Dwelling, Multi-Family – Planning Board
• Bed & Breakfast – Board of Appeals, by Special Exception per §18.8.2.2
• Boarding House – Board of Appeals, by Special Exception per §18.8.2.2
• Elderly Housing – Planning Board
• Elderly Congregate Housing – Planning Board
B. Civic & Public Use Category, With Permit/Approval Jurisdiction. The following is a list of all the principal
uses within the Civic & Public Use Category. In the zone-by-zone listing of permitted principal uses in the Civic
& Public Use Category, any use listed for that zone shall be an allowed use, and uses from this list which are not
listed shall be expressly prohibited. Where a permit or approval is required for establishment or modification of
the use, the proper authority is identified below after the use. Where uses are referenced in overlay districts,
permit or approval authority for the use shall be the same as in the base zones unless otherwise specified.
• Cemetery - CEO
• Civic Use – See §18.15
• Cultural Facility - See §18.15
• Essential Services - CEO
• Hospital – See §18.15
• Medical Facility - See §18.15
• Membership Organization - See §18.15
• Municipal Use - See §18.15
• Nursing Home - See §18.15
• Religious Use - See §18.15
• School - See §18.15
• Utility District - See §18.15
C. Other Use Categories. Uses which are permitted are listed by category for each zoning district.
- AMENDED 05/19/2012, 11/06/2012
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
40
§4.1.1 Residential Districts
Permitted Uses in RES 1-A and RES 1-B
Residential Use Category (RES 1-A & RES 1-B) - AMENDED 05/19/2012
• Single-Family Dwelling
• Two-Family Dwelling
• Boarding House
• Bed & Breakfast
• Elderly Housing
• Elderly Congregate Housing
Commercial Use Category (RES 1-A & RES 1-B)
• Motels/Hotels – Permitted only on Harris Island.
• Lodging and Tourist Homes/Inns – Maximum of 3 rooms for rent. Only permitted as an accessory use incidental
to single-family or two-family dwellings.
• Restaurants – Permitted only on Harris Island and only in conjunction with a hotel or motel.
• Marinas – Permitted only on Harris Island.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Service Businesses Serving Local Needs; Small (under 2,500 square feet) Store for
Retail Sale of Merchandise; Large Store or Mall (Group of Stores Under Single Roof) With Total Floor Space
Over 2,500 Square Feet for Retail Sale of Merchandise; Banks; Antique Shops; Laundries and Dry Cleaning
Facilities; Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise such as but not limited to Lumber Yards and Building Supply
Yards; Plumbing, Electrical or Carpentry Shop or Other Similar Service or Repair Establishment; Fast Food
Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an accessory use; Formula Restaurants, whether the use is a
principal use or an accessory use; Ice Cream Stands; Truck Stops; Florists; Garden Centers; Pet Shops;
Commercial Schools; Day Care Facilities; Fruit and Vegetable Produce Stores; Medical Marijuana Registered
Caregiver Retail Stores; Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facility; Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary;
Medical Marijuana Testing Facilities; Artisanal Food and/or Beverage Facility.
- AMENDED 11/04/2014, 05/16/2015, 11/05/2019
Office Use Category (RES 1-A & RES 1-B)
• Town of York or York School District Offices
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Business, Financial, Professional or Government Offices, Except Town of York
or York School District Offices; Offices and Clinics for Medical, Psychiatric, or Other Health Services for the
Examination or Treatment of Persons as Outpatients, including only Laboratories that are Part of Such Office or
Clinic; Laboratory or Research Facility; Radio or Television Studio.
Civic & Public Use Category (RES 1-A & RES 1-B)
• Civic Use – Uses occupying structures shall not exceed 2,500 square feet of floor area. Excluding parks that have
athletic fields that use high intensity lights and/or outdoor seating, and which are greater than 15,000 square feet
in size.
• Cultural Facility
• Essential Services
• Municipal Use - Excluding Department of Public Works facilities which involve the regular storage of heavy
equipment and construction materials.
• Religious Use
• School
• Utility District – Treatment plants not permitted
- AMENDED 11/06/2012
Industrial Use Category (RES 1-A & RES 1-B)
• Bulk Storage Collection Bin
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Printing, Binding, Publishing and Related Arts and Trades; Bottling of Beverages;
Machine Shop, Assembly, Packaging, or Manufacturing; Wholesale Business and Storage in a Roofed Structure;
Wood Manufacturing and Fabrication; Waste Transfer Facility; Waste Processing or Disposal Facility; Bulk Fuel
Storage; Truck Terminals.
Vehicular Use Category (RES 1-A & RES 1-B)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Vehicle Service Stations, Auto Repair Garages; Auto Body Repair Shops; Sale,
Rental and Accessory Storage of Automobiles, Light Trucks, Motorcycles, and Mopeds Conducted Wholly or
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
41
Partially in Open Lots; Sale of Pickup Coaches, Campers, Tent Trailers and Similar Equipment, Including
Snowmobiles; Place for Repair, Sale, Rent or Storage of Pleasure Boats; Salvage Yards, Junk Yards, Wrecking
Yards; Car Washing Establishment.
Rural & Agricultural Use Category (RES 1-A & RES 1-B)
• Soil and Water Conservation Practices – Conducted in accordance with the standards of the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service including but not limited to creation and maintenance of farm ponds for
agricultural purposes.
• Aquaculture
• General Purpose Farm, Agriculture and Nurseries – Excluding any use injurious, noxious, or offensive to the
neighborhood.
• Timber Harvesting
• Forest Management Activities Except for Timber Harvesting
• Sale of Produce Raised on Same Premises – Stand size limited to 200 square feet.
• Wildlife Management Practices
• Harvesting of Wild Crops
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Mineral Exploration; Sand/Gravel Pits, Quarries, etc.; Animal Breeding (Small
Domestic Animals); Commercial Stables.
Recreation & Amusement Use Category (RES 1-A & RES 1-B)
• Country Club
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Campgrounds and Travel Trailer Parks; Amusement Arcades (as Primary or
Accessory Use); Indoor Amusement/Entertainment/Assembly Place (Enclosed); Indoor Sports Facility (No
Gambling); Outdoor Sport and Amusement Facilities Conducted for Profit; Open Air or Drive-In Theater or
Other Open Air Places of Entertainment; Bath House, for Non-Commercial Purposes.
Miscellaneous Use Category (RES 1-A & RES 1-B)
• Piers, Docks, Wharves, Breakwaters, Causeways, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or
Below the Normal High Water Mark – Temporary or Permanent.
• Filling or Other Earthmoving Activities
• Road and Driveway Construction
• Structures Accessory to Permitted Uses – If the principal structure or principal use is a dwelling unit, an accessory
structure shall not have cooking facilities and shall not have more than one of the following: living facilities,
sanitary facilities or sleeping facilities.
• Accessory Uses Customarily Incident to Allowed Uses
• Uses Similar to Permitted Uses
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Flea Markets; Casino; Mortuary, Undertaking or Funeral Establishment; Place for
Exhibition, Lettering or Sale of Gravestones; Head Shop; Obscene Exhibitions; Dumps; Billboards; Medium-
Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System; Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System; Uses Similar
to Prohibited Uses; All Other Uses. - AMENDED 11/06/2012, 11/06/2018
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
42
Permitted Uses in RES-2
Residential Use Category (RES-2) - AMENDED 05/19/2012
• Single-Family Dwelling
• Two-Family Dwelling
• Boarding House
• Bed & Breakfast
Commercial Use Category (RES-2)
• Motels/Hotels – Only facilities which existed as of March 30, 1985 and which have a master plan approved by
the DEP may expand. Expansions may only be within the owner’s lot of record and contiguous lots owned by
that owner as of March 30, 1985. These motel and restaurant facilities and their permitted expansions are to be
considered a conforming use in this district.
• Lodging and Tourist Homes/Inns – Maximum of 3 rooms for rent. Only permitted as an accessory use incidental
to single-family or two-family dwellings.
• Restaurants – Permitted only in conjunction with a hotel. See Hotel/Motel listed above.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Service Businesses Serving Local Needs; Small (under 2,500 square feet) Store for
Retail Sale of Merchandise; Large Store or Mall (Group of Stores Under Single Roof) With Total Floor Space
Over 2,500 Square Feet for Retail Sale of Merchandise; Banks; Antique Shops; Laundries and Dry Cleaning
Facilities; Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise such as but not limited to Lumber Yards and Building Supply
Yards; Plumbing, Electrical or Carpentry Shop or Other Similar Service or Repair Establishment; Fast Food
Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an accessory use; Formula Restaurants, whether the use is a
principal use or an accessory use; Ice Cream Stands; Truck Stops; Marinas; Florists; Garden Centers; Pet Shops;
Commercial Schools; Day Care Facilities; Fruit and Vegetable Produce Stores; Medical Marijuana Registered
Caregiver Retail Stores; Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facility; Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary;
Medical Marijuana Testing Facilities; Artisanal Food and/or Beverage Facility.
- AMENDED 11/04/2014, 05/16/2015, 11/05/2019
Office Use Category (RES-2)
• Town of York or York School District Offices
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Business, Financial, Professional or Government Offices, Except Town of York
or York School District Offices; Offices and Clinics for Medical, Psychiatric, or Other Health Services for the
Examination or Treatment of Persons as Outpatients, including only Laboratories that are Part of Such Office or
Clinic; Laboratory or Research Facility; Radio or Television Studio.
Civic & Public Use Category (RES-2)
• Civic Use – Uses occupying structures shall not exceed 2,500 square feet of floor area. Excluding parks that have
athletic fields that use high intensity lights and/or outdoor seating, and which are greater than 15,000 square feet
in size.
• Cultural Facility
• Essential Services
• Municipal Use - Excluding Department of Public Works facilities which involve the regular storage of heavy
equipment and construction materials.
• School
• Religious Use
• Utility District – Treatment plants not permitted.
- AMENDED 11/06/2012
Industrial Use Category (RES-2)
• Bulk Storage Collection Bin
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Printing, Binding, Publishing and Related Arts and Trades; Bottling of Beverages;
Machine Shop, Assembly, Packaging, or Manufacturing; Wholesale Business and Storage in a Roofed Structure;
Wood Manufacturing and Fabrication; Waste Transfer Facility; Waste Processing or Disposal Facility; Bulk Fuel
Storage; Truck Terminals.
Vehicular Use Category (RES-2)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Vehicle Service Stations, Auto Repair Garages; Auto Body Repair Shops; Sale,
Rental and Accessory Storage of Automobiles, Light Trucks, Motorcycles, and Mopeds Conducted Wholly or
Partially in Open Lots; Sale of Pickup Coaches, Campers, Tent Trailers and Similar Equipment, Including
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
43
Snowmobiles; Place for Repair, Sale, Rent or Storage of Pleasure Boats; Salvage Yards, Junk Yards, Wrecking
Yards; Car Washing Establishment.
Rural & Agricultural Use Category (RES-2)
• Soil and Water Conservation Practices – Conducted in accordance with the standards of the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service including but not limited to creation and maintenance of farm ponds for
agricultural purposes.
• Aquaculture
• General Purpose Farm, Agriculture and Nurseries – Excluding any use injurious, noxious, or offensive to the
neighborhood.
• Timber Harvesting
• Forest Management Activities Except for Timber Harvesting
• Sale of Produce Raised on Same Premises – Stand size limited to 200 square feet.
• Wildlife Management Practices
• Harvesting of Wild Crops
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Mineral Exploration; Sand/Gravel Pits, Quarries, etc.; Animal Breeding (Small
Domestic Animals); Commercial Stables.
Recreation & Amusement Use Category (RES-2)
• Country Club
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Campgrounds and Travel Trailer Parks; Amusement Arcades (as Primary or
Accessory Use); Indoor Amusement/Entertainment/Assembly Place (Enclosed); Indoor Sports Facility (No
Gambling); Outdoor Sport and Amusement Facilities Conducted for Profit; Open Air or Drive-In Theater or
Other Open Air Places of Entertainment; Bath House, for Non-Commercial Purposes.
Miscellaneous Use Category (RES-2)
• Piers, Docks, Wharves, Breakwaters, Causeways, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or
Below the Normal High Water Mark – Temporary or Permanent.
• Filling or Other Earthmoving Activities
• Road and Driveway Construction
• Structures Accessory to Permitted Uses – If the principal structure or principal use is a dwelling unit, an accessory
structure shall not have cooking facilities and shall not have more than one of the following: living facilities,
sanitary facilities or sleeping facilities.
• Accessory Uses Customarily Incident to Allowed Uses
• Uses Similar to Permitted Uses
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Flea Markets; Casino; Mortuary, Undertaking or Funeral Establishment; Place for
Exhibition, Lettering or Sale of Gravestones; Head Shop; Obscene Exhibitions; Dumps; Billboards; Medium-
Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System; Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System; Uses Similar
to Prohibited Uses; All Other Uses.
- AMENDED 11/06/2012, 11/06/2018
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
44
Permitted Uses in RES-3
Residential Use Category (RES-3) - AMENDED 05/19/2012
• Single-Family Dwelling
• Two-Family Dwelling
• Boarding House
• Bed & Breakfast
Commercial Use Category (RES-3)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Service Businesses Serving Local Needs; Small (under 2,500 square feet) Store for
Retail Sale of Merchandise; Large Store or Mall (Group of Stores Under Single Roof) With Total Floor Space
Over 2,500 Square Feet for Retail Sale of Merchandise; Banks; Antique Shops; Laundries and Dry Cleaning
Facilities; Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise such as but not limited to Lumber Yards and Building Supply
Yards; Plumbing, Electrical or Carpentry Shop or Other Similar Service or Repair Establishment; Motels/Hotels;
Lodging and Tourist Homes/Inns; Restaurants; Fast Food Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an
accessory use; Formula Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an accessory use; Ice Cream Stands;
Truck Stops; Marinas; Florists; Garden Centers; Pet Shops; Commercial Schools; Day Care Facilities; Fruit and
Vegetable Produce Stores; Medical Marijuana Registered Caregiver Retail Stores; Medical Marijuana
Manufacturing Facility; Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary; Medical Marijuana Testing Facilities; Artisanal
Food and/or Beverage Facility.
- AMENDED 11/04/2014, 05/16/2015
Office Use Category (RES-3)
• Town of York or York School District Offices
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Business, Financial, Professional or Government Offices, Except Town of York
or York School District Offices; Offices and Clinics for Medical, Psychiatric, or Other Health Services for the
Examination or Treatment of Persons as Outpatients, including only Laboratories that are Part of Such Office or
Clinic; Laboratory or Research Facility; Radio or Television Studio.
Civic & Public Use Category (RES-3)
• Civic Use – Uses occupying structures shall not exceed 2,500 square feet of floor area. Excluding parks that have
athletic fields that use high intensity lights and/or outdoor seating, and which are greater than 15,000 square feet
in size.
• Cultural Facility
• Essential Services
• Municipal Use - Excluding Department of Public Works facilities which involve the regular storage of heavy
equipment and construction materials.
• Religious Use
• School
• Utility District – Treatment plants not permitted
- AMENDED 11/06/2012
Industrial Use Category (RES-3)
• Bulk Storage Collection Bin
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Printing, Binding, Publishing and Related Arts and Trades; Bottling of Beverages;
Machine Shop, Assembly, Packaging, or Manufacturing; Wholesale Business and Storage in a Roofed Structure;
Wood Manufacturing and Fabrication; Waste Transfer Facility; Waste Processing or Disposal Facility; Bulk Fuel
Storage; Truck Terminals.
Vehicular Use Category (RES-3)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Vehicle Service Stations, Auto Repair Garages; Auto Body Repair Shops; Sale,
Rental and Accessory Storage of Automobiles, Light Trucks, Motorcycles, and Mopeds Conducted Wholly or
Partially in Open Lots; Sale of Pickup Coaches, Campers, Tent Trailers and Similar Equipment, Including
Snowmobiles; Place for Repair, Sale, Rent or Storage of Pleasure Boats; Salvage Yards, Junk Yards, Wrecking
Yards; Car Washing Establishment.
Rural & Agricultural Use Category (RES-3)
• Soil and Water Conservation Practices – Conducted in accordance with the standards of the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service including but not limited to creation and maintenance of farm ponds for
agricultural purposes.
• Aquaculture
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
45
• General Purpose Farm, Agriculture and Nurseries – Excluding any use injurious, noxious, or offensive to the
neighborhood.
• Timber Harvesting
• Forest Management Activities Except for Timber Harvesting
• Sale of Produce Raised on Same Premises – Stand size limited to 200 square feet.
• Wildlife Management Practices
• Harvesting of Wild Crops
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Mineral Exploration; Sand/Gravel Pits, Quarries, etc.; Animal Breeding (Small
Domestic Animals); Commercial Stables.
Recreation & Amusement Use Category (RES-3)
• Country Club
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Campgrounds and Travel Trailer Parks; Amusement Arcades (as Primary or
Accessory Use); Indoor Amusement/Entertainment/Assembly Place (Enclosed); Indoor Sports Facility (No
Gambling); Outdoor Sport and Amusement Facilities Conducted for Profit; Open Air or Drive-In Theater or
Other Open Air Places of Entertainment; Bath House, for Non-Commercial Purposes.
Miscellaneous Use Category (RES-3)
• Piers, Docks, Wharves, Breakwaters, Causeways, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or
Below the Normal High Water Mark – Temporary or Permanent.
• Filling or Other Earthmoving Activities
• Road and Driveway Construction
• Structures Accessory to Permitted Uses – If the principal structure or principal use is a dwelling unit, an accessory
structure shall not have cooking facilities and shall not have more than one of the following: living facilities,
sanitary facilities or sleeping facilities.
• Accessory Uses Customarily Incident to Allowed Uses
• Uses Similar to Permitted Uses
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Flea Markets; Casino; Mortuary, Undertaking or Funeral Establishment; Place for
Exhibition, Lettering or Sale of Gravestones; Head Shop; Obscene Exhibitions; Dumps; Billboards; Medium-
Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System; Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System; Uses Similar
to Prohibited Uses; All Other Uses.
- AMENDED 11/06/2018
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
46
Permitted Uses in RES-4
Residential Use Category (RES-4) - AMENDED 05/19/2012
• Single-Family Dwelling – Private garages are limited to the storage or parking of 3 motor vehicles.
• Two-Family Dwelling – Allowed only by Special Exception. The Board of Appeals may grant a special exception
if the proposed use is determined to comply with the conditions listed in §18.8.2.2 and the dwelling will be the
primary residence of the owner. In addition, private garages are limited to the storage or parking of 3 motor
vehicles.
• Boarding House – Allowed only by Special Exception. The Board of Appeals may grant a special exception if
the proposed use is determined to comply with the conditions listed in §18.8.2.2 and the dwelling will be the
primary residence of the owner.
• Bed & Breakfast
• Elderly Housing
• Elderly Congregate Housing
Commercial Use Category (RES-4)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Service Businesses Serving Local Needs; Small (under 2,500 square feet) Store for
Retail Sale of Merchandise; Large Store or Mall (Group of Stores Under Single Roof) With Total Floor Space
Over 2,500 Square Feet for Retail Sale of Merchandise; Banks; Antique Shops; Laundries and Dry Cleaning
Facilities; Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise such as but not limited to Lumber Yards and Building Supply
Yards; Plumbing, Electrical or Carpentry Shop or Other Similar Service or Repair Establishment; Motels/Hotels;
Lodging and Tourist Homes/Inns; Restaurants; Fast Food Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an
accessory use; Formula Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an accessory use; Ice Cream Stands;
Truck Stops; Marinas; Florists; Garden Centers; Pet Shops; Commercial Schools; Day Care Facilities; Fruit and
Vegetable Produce Stores; Medical Marijuana Registered Caregiver Retail Stores; Medical Marijuana
Manufacturing Facility; Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary; Medical Marijuana Testing Facilities; Artisanal
Food and/or Beverage Facility.
- AMENDED 11/04/2014, 05/16/2015, 11/05/2019
Office Use Category (RES-4)
• Town of York or York School District Offices
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Business, Financial, Professional or Government Offices, Except Town of York
or York School District Offices; Offices and Clinics for Medical, Psychiatric, or Other Health Services for the
Examination or Treatment of Persons as Outpatients, including only Laboratories that are Part of Such Office or
Clinic; Laboratory or Research Facility; Radio or Television Studio.
Civic & Public Use Category (RES-4)
• Civic Use – Uses occupying structures shall not exceed 2,500 square feet of floor area. Excluding parks that have
athletic fields that use high intensity lights and/or outdoor seating, and which are greater than 15,000 square feet
in size.
• Cultural Facility
• Essential Services
• Municipal Use - Excluding Department of Public Works facilities which involve the regular storage of heavy
equipment and construction materials
• Religious Use
• School
• Utility District – Treatment plants not permitted
- AMENDED 11/06/2012
Industrial Use Category (RES-4)
• Bulk Storage Collection Bin
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Printing, Binding, Publishing and Related Arts and Trades; Bottling of Beverages;
Machine Shop, Assembly, Packaging, or Manufacturing; Wholesale Business and Storage in a Roofed Structure;
Wood Manufacturing and Fabrication; Waste Transfer Facility; Waste Processing or Disposal Facility; Bulk Fuel
Storage; Truck Terminals.
Vehicular Use Category (RES-4)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Vehicle Service Stations, Auto Repair Garages; Auto Body Repair Shops; Sale,
Rental and Accessory Storage of Automobiles, Light Trucks, Motorcycles, and Mopeds Conducted Wholly or
Partially in Open Lots; Sale of Pickup Coaches, Campers, Tent Trailers and Similar Equipment, Including
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
47
Snowmobiles; Place for Repair, Sale, Rent or Storage of Pleasure Boats; Salvage Yards, Junk Yards, Wrecking
Yards; Car Washing Establishment.
Rural & Agricultural Use Category (RES-4)
• Soil and Water Conservation Practices – Conducted in accordance with the standards of the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service including but not limited to creation and maintenance of farm ponds for
agricultural purposes.
• Aquaculture
• Timber Harvesting
• Forest Management Activities Except for Timber Harvesting
• Wildlife Management Practices
• Harvesting of Wild Crops
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Mineral Exploration; Sand/Gravel Pits, Quarries, etc.; General Purpose Farm,
Agriculture and Nurseries; Sale of Produce Raised on Same Premises; Animal Breeding (Small Domestic Animals);
Commercial Stables.
Recreation & Amusement Use Category (RES-4)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Campgrounds and Travel Trailer Parks; Amusement Arcades (as Primary or
Accessory Use); Indoor Amusement/Entertainment/Assembly Place (Enclosed); Indoor Sports Facility (No
Gambling); Outdoor Sport and Amusement Facilities Conducted for Profit; Country Club; Open Air or Drive-
In Theater or Other Open Air Places of Entertainment; Bath House, for Non-Commercial Purposes.
Miscellaneous Use Category (RES-4)
• Piers, Docks, Wharves, Breakwaters, Causeways, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or
Below the Normal High Water Mark – Temporary or Permanent.
• Filling or Other Earthmoving Activities
• Road and Driveway Construction
• Structures Accessory to Permitted Uses – If the principal structure or principal use is a dwelling unit, an accessory
structure shall not have cooking facilities and shall not have more than one of the following: living facilities,
sanitary facilities or sleeping facilities.
• Accessory Uses Customarily Incident to Allowed Uses
• Uses Similar to Permitted Uses
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Flea Markets; Casino; Mortuary, Undertaking or Funeral Establishment; Place for
Exhibition, Lettering or Sale of Gravestones; Head Shop; Obscene Exhibitions; Dumps; Billboards; Medium-
Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System; Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System; Uses Similar
to Prohibited Uses; All Other Uses.
- AMENDED 11/06/2012, 11/06/2018
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
48
Permitted Uses in RES-5
Residential Use Category (RES-5) - AMENDED 05/19/2012
• Single-Family Dwelling
• Two-Family Dwelling
• Boarding House
• Bed & Breakfast
Commercial Use Category (RES-5)
• Motels/Hotels – A transient rental accommodation with cooking facilities in a hotel/motel shall not be rented or
leased to the same person or persons for more than 90 days in any 120 consecutive day period. This length of
stay shall be considered as a rental or lease of any accommodation with cooking facilities in the same hotel/motel
and not only the rental of the same accommodation to the same person or persons.
• Lodging and Tourist Homes/Inns
• Restaurants – Seating for 75 or more persons only. Food and beverages must be sold for consumption within
the premises - take-out stands shall not be permitted.
• Ice Cream Stands
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Service Businesses Serving Local Needs; Small (under 2,500 square feet) Store for
Retail Sale of Merchandise; Large Store or Mall (Group of Stores Under Single Roof) With Total Floor Space
Over 2,500 Square Feet for Retail Sale of Merchandise; Banks; Antique Shops; Laundries and Dry Cleaning
Facilities; Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise such as but not limited to Lumber Yards and Building Supply
Yards; Plumbing, Electrical or Carpentry Shop or Other Similar Service or Repair Establishment; Fast Food
Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an accessory use; Formula Restaurants, whether the use is a
principal use or an accessory use; Truck Stops; Marinas; Florists; Garden Centers; Pet Shops; Commercial Schools;
Day Care Facilities; Fruit and Vegetable Produce Stores; Medical Marijuana Registered Caregiver Retail Stores;
Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facility; Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary; Medical Marijuana Testing
Facilities; Artisanal Food and/or Beverage Facility.
- AMENDED 11/04/2014, 05/16/2015, 11/05/2019
Office Use Category (RES-5)
• Town of York or York School District Offices
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Business, Financial, Professional or Government Offices, Except Town of York
or York School District Offices; Offices and Clinics for Medical, Psychiatric, or Other Health Services for the
Examination or Treatment of Persons as Outpatients, including only Laboratories that are Part of Such Office or
Clinic; Laboratory or Research Facility; Radio or Television Studio.
Civic & Public Use Category (RES-5)
• Civic Use – Uses occupying structures shall not exceed 2,500 square feet of floor area. Excluding parks that have
athletic fields that use high intensity lights and/or outdoor seating, and which are greater than 15,000 square feet
in size.
• Cultural Facility
• Essential Services
• Municipal Use - Excluding Department of Public Works facilities which involve the regular storage of heavy
equipment and construction materials
• Religious Use
• School
• Utility District – Treatment plants not permitted
- AMENDED 11/06/2012
Industrial Use Category (RES-5)
• Bulk Storage Collection Bin
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Printing, Binding, Publishing and Related Arts and Trades; Bottling of Beverages;
Machine Shop, Assembly, Packaging, or Manufacturing; Wholesale Business and Storage in a Roofed Structure;
Wood Manufacturing and Fabrication; Waste Transfer Facility; Waste Processing or Disposal Facility; Bulk Fuel
Storage; Truck Terminals.
Vehicular Use Category (RES-5)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Vehicle Service Stations, Auto Repair Garages; Auto Body Repair Shops; Sale,
Rental and Accessory Storage of Automobiles, Light Trucks, Motorcycles, and Mopeds Conducted Wholly or
Partially in Open Lots; Sale of Pickup Coaches, Campers, Tent Trailers and Similar Equipment, Including
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
49
Snowmobiles; Place for Repair, Sale, Rent or Storage of Pleasure Boats; Salvage Yards, Junk Yards, Wrecking
Yards; Car Washing Establishment.
Rural & Agricultural Use Category (RES-5)
• Soil and Water Conservation Practices – Conducted in accordance with the standards of the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service including but not limited to creation and maintenance of farm ponds for
agricultural purposes.
• Aquaculture
• Timber Harvesting
• Forest Management Activities Except for Timber Harvesting
• Wildlife Management Practices
• Harvesting of Wild Crops
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Mineral Exploration; Sand/Gravel Pits, Quarries, etc.; General Purpose Farm,
Agriculture and Nurseries; Sale of Produce Raised on Same Premises; Animal Breeding (Small Domestic Animals);
Commercial Stables.
Recreation & Amusement Use Category (RES-5)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Campgrounds and Travel Trailer Parks; Amusement Arcades (as Primary or
Accessory Use); Indoor Amusement/Entertainment/Assembly Place (Enclosed); Indoor Sports Facility (No
Gambling); Outdoor Sport and Amusement Facilities Conducted for Profit; Country Club; Open Air or Drive-
In Theater or Other Open Air Places of Entertainment; Bath House, for Non-Commercial Purposes.
Miscellaneous Use Category (RES-5)
• Piers, Docks, Wharves, Breakwaters, Causeways, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or
Below the Normal High Water Mark – Temporary or Permanent.
• Filling or Other Earthmoving Activities
• Road and Driveway Construction
• Structures Accessory to Permitted Uses – If the principal structure or principal use is a dwelling unit, an accessory
structure shall not have cooking facilities and shall not have more than one of the following: living facilities,
sanitary facilities or sleeping facilities.
• Accessory Uses Customarily Incident to Allowed Uses
• Uses Similar to Permitted Uses
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Flea Markets; Casino; Mortuary, Undertaking or Funeral Establishment; Place for
Exhibition, Lettering or Sale of Gravestones; Head Shop; Obscene Exhibitions; Dumps; Billboards; Medium-
Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System; Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System; Uses Similar
to Prohibited Uses; All Other Uses. - AMENDED 11/06/2018
Special Restrictions for RES-5 Zone: see §4.2.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
50
Permitted Uses in RES-6
Residential Use Category (RES-6) - AMENDED 05/19/2012
• Single-Family Dwelling
• Two-Family Dwelling
• Boarding House
• Bed & Breakfast
• Elderly Housing
Commercial Use Category (RES-6)
• Marinas
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Service Businesses Serving Local Needs; Small (under 2,500 square feet) Store for Retail
Sale of Merchandise; Large Store or Mall (Group of Stores Under Single Roof) With Total Floor Space Over 2,500 Square
Feet for Retail Sale of Merchandise; Banks; Antique Shops; Laundries and Dry Cleaning Facilities; Store for Retail Sale of
Merchandise such as but not limited to Lumber Yards and Building Supply Yards; Plumbing, Electrical or Carpentry Shop
or Other Similar Service or Repair Establishment; Motels/Hotels; Lodging and Tourist Homes/Inns; Restaurants; Fast
Food Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an accessory use; Formula Restaurants, whether the use is a principal
use or an accessory use; Ice Cream Stands; Truck Stops; Florists; Garden Centers; Pet Shops; Commercial Schools; Day
Care Facilities; Fruit and Vegetable Produce Stores; Medical Marijuana Registered Caregiver Retail Stores; Medical Marijuana
Manufacturing Facility; Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary; Medical Marijuana Testing Facilities; Artisanal Food
and/or Beverage Facility.- AMENDED 11/04/2014, 05/16/2015, 11/05/2019
Office Use Category (RES-6)
• Town of York or York School District Offices
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Business, Financial, Professional or Government Offices, Except Town of York
or York School District Offices; Offices and Clinics for Medical, Psychiatric, or Other Health Services for the
Examination or Treatment of Persons as Outpatients, including only Laboratories that are Part of Such Office or
Clinic; Laboratory or Research Facility; Radio or Television Studio.
Civic & Public Use Category (RES-6)
• Civic Use – Uses occupying structures shall not exceed 2,500 square feet of floor area. Excluding parks that have
athletic fields that use high intensity lights and/or outdoor seating, and which are greater than 15,000 square feet
in size.
• Cultural Facility
• Essential Services
• Municipal Use - Excluding Department of Public Works facilities which involve the regular storage of heavy
equipment and construction materials.
• Religious Use
• School
• Utility District
- AMENDED 11/06/2012
Industrial Use Category (RES-6)
• Bulk Storage Collection Bin
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Printing, Binding, Publishing and Related Arts and Trades; Bottling of Beverages;
Machine Shop, Assembly, Packaging, or Manufacturing; Wholesale Business and Storage in a Roofed Structure;
Wood Manufacturing and Fabrication; Waste Transfer Facility; Waste Processing or Disposal Facility; Bulk Fuel
Storage; Truck Terminals.
Vehicular Use Category (RES-6)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Vehicle Service Stations, Auto Repair Garages; Auto Body Repair Shops; Sale,
Rental and Accessory Storage of Automobiles, Light Trucks, Motorcycles, and Mopeds Conducted Wholly or
Partially in Open Lots; Sale of Pickup Coaches, Campers, Tent Trailers and Similar Equipment, Including
Snowmobiles; Place for Repair, Sale, Rent or Storage of Pleasure Boats; Salvage Yards, Junk Yards, Wrecking
Yards; Car Washing Establishment.
Rural & Agricultural Use Category (RES-6)
• Soil and Water Conservation Practices – Conducted in accordance with the standards of the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service including but not limited to creation and maintenance of farm ponds for
agricultural purposes.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
51
• Aquaculture
• Timber Harvesting
• Forest Management Activities Except for Timber Harvesting
• Wildlife Management Practices
• Harvesting of Wild Crops
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Mineral Exploration; Sand/Gravel Pits, Quarries, etc.; General Purpose Farm,
Agriculture and Nurseries; Sale of Produce Raised on Same Premises; Animal Breeding (Small Domestic Animals);
Commercial Stables.
Recreation & Amusement Use Category (RES-6)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Campgrounds and Travel Trailer Parks; Amusement Arcades (as Primary or
Accessory Use); Indoor Amusement/Entertainment/Assembly Place (Enclosed); Indoor Sports Facility (No
Gambling); Outdoor Sport and Amusement Facilities Conducted for Profit; Country Club; Open Air or Drive-
In Theater or Other Open Air Places of Entertainment; Bath House, for Non-Commercial Purposes.
Miscellaneous Use Category (RES-6)
• Piers, Docks, Wharves, Breakwaters, Causeways, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or
Below the Normal High Water Mark – Temporary or Permanent.
• Filling or Other Earthmoving Activities
• Road and Driveway Construction
• Structures Accessory to Permitted Uses – If the principal structure or principal use is a dwelling unit, an accessory
structure shall not have cooking facilities and shall not have more than one of the following: living facilities,
sanitary facilities or sleeping facilities.
• Accessory Uses Customarily Incident to Allowed Uses
• Uses Similar to Permitted Uses
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Flea Markets; Casino; Mortuary, Undertaking or Funeral Establishment; Place for
Exhibition, Lettering or Sale of Gravestones; Head Shop; Obscene Exhibitions; Dumps; Billboards; Medium-
Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System; Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System; Uses Similar
to Prohibited Uses; All Other Uses.
- AMENDED 11/06/2012, 11/06/2018
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
52
Permitted Uses in RES-7
Residential Use Category (RES-7) - AMENDED 05/19/2012
• Single-Family Dwelling
• Two-Family Dwelling
• Multi-Family Dwelling
• Boarding House
• Bed & Breakfast
• Elderly Housing
Commercial Use Category (RES-7)
• Motels/Hotels – A transient rental accommodation with cooking facilities in a hotel/motel shall not be rented or
leased to the same person or persons for more than 90 days in any 120 consecutive day period. This length of
stay shall be considered as a rental or lease of any accommodation within cooking facilities in the same hotel/motel
and not only the rental of the same accommodation to the same person or persons.
• Lodging and Tourist Homes/Inns
• Restaurants – Seating for 75 or more persons only. Food and beverages must be sold for consumption within
the premises - take-out stands shall not be permitted.
• Ice Cream Stands
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Service Businesses Serving Local Needs; Small (under 2,500 square feet) Store for
Retail Sale of Merchandise; Large Store or Mall (Group of Stores Under Single Roof) With Total Floor Space
Over 2,500 Square Feet for Retail Sale of Merchandise; Banks; Antique Shops; Laundries and Dry Cleaning
Facilities; Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise such as but not limited to Lumber Yards and Building Supply
Yards; Plumbing, Electrical or Carpentry Shop or Other Similar Service or Repair Establishment; Fast Food
Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an accessory use; Formula Restaurants, whether the use is a
principal use or an accessory use; Truck Stops; Marinas; Florists; Garden Centers; Pet Shops; Commercial Schools;
Day Care Facilities; Fruit and Vegetable Produce Stores; Medical Marijuana Registered Caregiver Retail Stores;
Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facility; Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary; Medical Marijuana Testing
Facilities; Artisanal Food and/or Beverage Facility. - AMENDED 11/04/2014, 05/16/2015, 11/05/2019
Office Use Category (RES-7)
• Town of York or York School District Offices
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Business, Financial, Professional or Government Offices, Except Town of York
or York School District Offices; Offices and Clinics for Medical, Psychiatric, or Other Health Services for the
Examination or Treatment of Persons as Outpatients, including only Laboratories that are Part of Such Office or
Clinic; Laboratory or Research Facility; Radio or Television Studio.
Civic & Public Use Category (RES-7)
• Civic Use – Uses occupying structures shall not exceed 2,500 square feet of floor area. Excluding parks that have
athletic fields that use high intensity lights and/or outdoor seating, and which are greater than 15,000 square feet
in size.
• Cultural Facility
• Essential Services
• Municipal Use - Excluding Department of Public Works facilities which involve the regular storage of heavy
equipment and construction materials.
• Religious Use
• School
• Utility District – Treatment plants not permitted
- AMENDED 11/06/2012
Industrial Use Category (RES-7)
• Bulk Storage Collection Bin
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Printing, Binding, Publishing and Related Arts and Trades; Bottling of Beverages;
Machine Shop, Assembly, Packaging, or Manufacturing; Wholesale Business and Storage in a Roofed Structure;
Wood Manufacturing and Fabrication; Waste Transfer Facility; Waste Processing or Disposal Facility; Bulk Fuel
Storage; Truck Terminals.
Vehicular Use Category (RES-7)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Vehicle Service Stations, Auto Repair Garages; Auto Body Repair Shops; Sale,
Rental and Accessory Storage of Automobiles, Light Trucks, Motorcycles, and Mopeds Conducted Wholly or
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
53
Partially in Open Lots; Sale of Pickup Coaches, Campers, Tent Trailers and Similar Equipment, Including
Snowmobiles; Place for Repair, Sale, Rent or Storage of Pleasure Boats; Salvage Yards, Junk Yards, Wrecking
Yards; Car Washing Establishment.
Rural & Agricultural Use Category (RES-7)
• Soil and Water Conservation Practices – Conducted in accordance with the standards of the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service including but not limited to creation and maintenance of farm ponds for
agricultural purposes.
• Aquaculture
• General Purpose Farm, Agriculture and Nurseries – Excluding any use injurious, noxious, or offensive to the
neighborhood.
• Timber Harvesting
• Forest Management Activities Except for Timber Harvesting
• Sale of Produce Raised on Same Premises – Stand size limited to 200 square feet.
• Wildlife Management Practices
• Harvesting of Wild Crops
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Mineral Exploration; Sand/Gravel Pits, Quarries, etc.; Animal Breeding (Small
Domestic Animals); Commercial Stables.
Recreation & Amusement Use Category (RES-7)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Campgrounds and Travel Trailer Parks; Amusement Arcades (as Primary or
Accessory Use); Indoor Amusement/Entertainment/Assembly Place (Enclosed); Indoor Sports Facility (No
Gambling); Outdoor Sport and Amusement Facilities Conducted for Profit; Country Club; Open Air or Drive-
In Theater or Other Open Air Places of Entertainment; Bath House, for Non-Commercial Purposes.
Miscellaneous Use Category (RES-7)
• Piers, Docks, Wharves, Breakwaters, Causeways, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or
Below the Normal High Water Mark – Temporary or Permanent.
• Filling or Other Earthmoving Activities
• Road and Driveway Construction
• Structures Accessory to Permitted Uses – If the principal structure or principal use is a dwelling unit, an accessory
structure shall not have cooking facilities and shall not have more than one of the following: living facilities,
sanitary facilities or sleeping facilities.
• Accessory Uses Customarily Incident to Allowed Uses
• Uses Similar to Permitted Uses
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Flea Markets; Casino; Mortuary, Undertaking or Funeral Establishment; Place for
Exhibition, Lettering or Sale of Gravestones; Head Shop; Obscene Exhibitions; Dumps; Billboards; Medium-
Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System; Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System; Uses Similar
to Prohibited Uses; All Other Uses.
- AMENDED 11/06/2012, 11/06/2018
Special Restriction for RES-7 Zone: see §4.2.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
54
§4.1.2 Business, Village and General Districts
Permitted Uses in BUS-1
Residential Use Category (BUS-1)
• Single-Family Dwelling – Private garages are limited to the storage or parking of 3 motor vehicles.
• Two-Family Dwelling – Private garages are limited to the storage or parking of 3 motor vehicles. Also, reference
density standard of §5.4.4.
• Multi-Family Dwelling – Private garages are limited to the storage or parking of 3 motor vehicles. Also, reference
density standard of §5.4.4.
• Boarding House – Allowed only by Special Exception. The Board of Appeals may grant a special exception if
the proposed use is determined to comply with the conditions listed in §18.8.2.2 and the dwelling will be the
primary residence of the owner.
• Bed & Breakfast
• Elderly Housing
• Elderly Congregate Housing
Commercial Use Category (BUS-1)
• Service Businesses Serving Local Needs such as, but not limited to, barber shops, shoe repair, self-service laundry
or dry-cleaning pick-up agency, tailoring, printing shop, caterer or other similar uses
• Small (under 2,500 square feet) Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise provided all display, storage and sale of
materials are conducted within a building and provided there is no manufacturing or assembly on premises
• Banks (with or without drive-through window)
• Antique Shops
• Laundries and Dry Cleaning Facilities (on public sewer)
• Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise such as but not limited to Lumber Yards and Building Supply Yards wherin
merchandise is stored in the open, provided that all merchandise so stored is screened from ground level view
from any abutting residential property
• Plumbing, Electrical or Carpentry Shop or Other Similar Service or Repair Establishment
• Restaurants – Provided that food and beverages are sold only for consumption within the premises. Take-out
stands shall not be permitted.
• Florists
• Pet Shops
• Commercial Schools
• Day Care Facilities
• Fruit and Vegetable Produce Stores
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Store for retail sale of merchandise with more than 2,500 square feet of gross
floor area; Motels/Hotels; Lodging and Tourist Homes/Inns; Fast Food Restaurants, whether the use is a
principal use or an accessory use; Formula Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an accessory use; Ice
Cream Stands; Truck Stops; Marinas; Garden Centers; Medical Marijuana Registered Caregiver Retail Stores;
Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facility; Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary; Medical Marijuana Testing
Facilities; Artisanal Food and/or Beverage Facility.
- AMENDED 11/04/2014, 05/16/2015, 11/05,2019
Office Use Category (BUS-1)
• Business, Financial, Professional or Government Offices, Except Town of York or York School District Offices
• Town of York or York School District Offices
• Offices and Clinics for Medical, Psychiatric, or Other Health Services for the Examination or Treatment of
Persons as Outpatients, including only Laboratories that are Part of Such Office or Clinic
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Laboratory or Research Facility; Radio or Television Studio.
Civic & Public Use Category (BUS-1)
• Cultural Facility
• Civic Use –Excluding parks that have athletic fields that use high intensity lights and/or outdoor seating, and
which are greater than 15,000 square feet in size.
• Essential Services
• Municipal Use - Excluding Department of Public Works facilities which involve the regular storage of heavy
equipment and construction materials
• Religious Use
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
55
• School
• Utility District – Treatment plants not permitted - AMENDED 11/06/2012
Industrial Use Category (BUS-1)
• Bulk Storage Collection Bin
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Printing, Binding, Publishing and Related Arts and Trades; Bottling of Beverages;
Machine Shop, Assembly, Packaging, or Manufacturing; Wholesale Business and Storage in a Roofed Structure;
Wood Manufacturing and Fabrication; Waste Transfer Facility; Waste Processing or Disposal Facility; Bulk Fuel
Storage; Truck Terminals.
Vehicular Use Category (BUS-1)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Vehicle Service Stations, Auto Repair Garages; Auto Body Repair Shops; Sale,
Rental and Accessory Storage of Automobiles, Light Trucks, Motorcycles, and Mopeds Conducted Wholly or
Partially in Open Lots; Sale of Pickup Coaches, Campers, Tent Trailers and Similar Equipment, Including
Snowmobiles; Place for Repair, Sale, Rent or Storage of Pleasure Boats; Salvage Yards, Junk Yards, Wrecking
Yards; Car Washing Establishment.
Rural & Agricultural Use Category (BUS-1)
• Soil and Water Conservation Practices – Conducted in accordance with the standards of the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service including but not limited to creation and maintenance of farm ponds for
agricultural purposes.
• Aquaculture
• Timber Harvesting
• Forest Management Activities Except for Timber Harvesting
• Sale of Produce Raised on Same Premises
• Wildlife Management Practices
• Harvesting of Wild Crops
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Mineral Exploration; Sand/Gravel Pits, Quarries, etc.; General Purpose Farm,
Agriculture and Nurseries; Animal Breeding (Small Domestic Animals); Commercial Stables; Veterinary
Establishment, Kennel, or Similar Establishment.
Recreation & Amusement Use Category (BUS-1)
• Bath House for Non-Commercial Purposes
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Campgrounds and Travel Trailer Parks; Amusement Arcades (as Primary or
Accessory Use); Indoor Amusement/Entertainment/Assembly Place (Enclosed); Indoor Sports Facility (No
Gambling); Outdoor Sport and Amusement Facilities Conducted for Profit; Country Club; Open Air or Drive-
In Theater or Other Open Air Places of Entertainment.
Miscellaneous Use Category (BUS-1)
• Piers, Docks, Wharves, Breakwaters, Causeways, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or
Below the Normal High Water Mark – Temporary or Permanent.
• Mortuary, Undertaking or Funeral Establishment
• Filling or Other Earthmoving Activities
• Road and Driveway Construction
• Structures Accessory to Permitted Uses – If the principal structure or principal use is a dwelling unit, an accessory
structure shall not have cooking facilities and shall not have more than one of the following: living facilities,
sanitary facilities or sleeping facilities.
• Accessory Uses Customarily Incident to Allowed Uses
• Uses Similar to Permitted Uses
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Flea Markets; Casino; Place for Exhibition, Lettering or Sale of Gravestones;
Head Shop; Obscene Exhibitions; Dumps; Billboards; Medium-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System;
Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System; Uses Similar to Prohibited Uses. - AMENDED 11/06/2018
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
56
Permitted Uses in BUS-2
Residential Use Category (BUS-2) - AMENDED 05/19/2012
• Single-Family Dwelling – Private garages are limited to the storage or parking of 3 motor vehicles.
• Two-Family Dwelling – Allowed only by Special Exception. The Board of Appeals may grant a special exception
if the proposed use is determined to comply with the conditions listed in §18.8.2.2 and the dwelling will be the
primary residence of the owner. In addition, private garages are limited to the storage or parking of 3 motor
vehicles.
• Boarding House – Allowed only by Special Exception. The Board of Appeals may grant a special exception if
the proposed use is determined to comply with the conditions listed in §18.8.2.2 and the dwelling will be the
primary residence of the owner.
• Bed & Breakfast
• Elderly Housing
Commercial Use Category (BUS-2)
• Service Businesses Serving Local Needs such as, but not limited to, barber shops, shoe repair, self-service laundry
or dry-cleaning pick-up agency, tailoring, printing shop, caterer or other similar uses
• Small (under 2,500 square feet) Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise provided all display, storage and sale of
materials are conducted within a building and provided there is no manufacturing or assembly on premises
• Banks (with or without drive-through window)
• Antique Shops
• Laundries and Dry Cleaning Facilities (on public sewer)
• Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise such as but not limited to Lumber Yards and Building Supply Yards wherin
merchandise is stored in the open, provided that all merchandise so stored is screened from ground level view
from any abutting residential property
• Plumbing, Electrical or Carpentry Shop or Other Similar Service or Repair Establishment
• Motels/Hotels – A transient rental accommodation with cooking facilities in a motel/hotel shall not be rented or
leased to the same person or persons for more than 90 days in any 120 consecutive day period. This length of stay
shall be considered as a rental or lease of any accommodation with cooking facilities in the same motel/hotel and
not only the rental of the same accommodation to the same person or persons.
• Lodging and Tourist Homes/Inns
• Restaurants – Provided that food and beverages are sold only for consumption within the premises. Take-out
stands shall not be permitted.
• Ice Cream Stands
• Florists
• Pet Shops
• Commercial Schools
• Day Care Facilities
• Fruit and Vegetable Produce Stores
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Store for retail sale of merchandise with more than 2,500 square feet of gross
floor area; Fast Food Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an accessory use; Formula Restaurants,
whether the use is a principal use or an accessory use; Truck Stops; Marinas; Garden Centers; Medical Marijuana
Registered Caregiver Retail Stores; Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facility; Medical Marijuana Registered
Dispensary; Medical Marijuana Testing Facilities; Artisanal Food and/or Beverage Facility.
- AMENDED 11/04/2014, 05/16/2015, 11/05/2019
Office Use Category (BUS-2)
• Business, Financial, Professional or Government Offices, Except Town of York or York School District Offices
• Town of York or York School District Offices
• Offices and Clinics for Medical, Psychiatric, or Other Health Services for the Examination or Treatment of
Persons as Outpatients, including only Laboratories that are Part of Such Office or Clinic
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Laboratory or Research Facility; Radio or Television Studio.
Civic & Public Use Category (BUS-2)
• Civic Use - excluding parks that have athletic fields that use high intensity lights and/or outdoor seating, and
which are greater than 15,000 square feet in size.
• Cultural Facility
• Essential Services
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
57
• Municipal Use - Excluding Department of Public Works facilities which involve the regular storage of heavy
equipment and construction materials
• Religious Use
• School
• Utility District – Treatment plants not permitted
- AMENDED 11/06/2012
Industrial Use Category (BUS-2)
• Bulk Storage Collection Bin
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Printing, Binding, Publishing and Related Arts and Trades; Bottling of Beverages;
Machine Shop, Assembly, Packaging, or Manufacturing; Wholesale Business and Storage in a Roofed Structure;
Wood Manufacturing and Fabrication; Waste Transfer Facility; Waste Processing or Disposal Facility; Bulk Fuel
Storage; Truck Terminals.
Vehicular Use Category (BUS-2)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Vehicle Service Stations, Auto Repair Garages; Auto Body Repair Shops; Sale,
Rental and Accessory Storage of Automobiles, Light Trucks, Motorcycles, and Mopeds Conducted Wholly or
Partially in Open Lots; Sale of Pickup Coaches, Campers, Tent Trailers and Similar Equipment, Including
Snowmobiles; Place for Repair, Sale, Rent or Storage of Pleasure Boats; Salvage Yards, Junk Yards, Wrecking
Yards; Car Washing Establishment.
Rural & Agricultural Use Category (BUS-2)
• Soil and Water Conservation Practices – Conducted in accordance with the standards of the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service including but not limited to creation and maintenance of farm ponds for
agricultural purposes.
• Aquaculture
• Timber Harvesting
• Forest Management Activities Except for Timber Harvesting
• Sale of Produce Raised on Same Premises
• Wildlife Management Practices
• Harvesting of Wild Crops
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Mineral Exploration; Sand/Gravel Pits, Quarries, etc.; General Purpose Farm,
Agriculture and Nurseries; Animal Breeding (Small Domestic Animals); Commercial Stables; Veterinary
Establishment, Kennel, or Similar Establishment.
Recreation & Amusement Use Category (BUS-2)
• Campgrounds and Travel Trailer Parks – Must meet the standards of §7.2.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Amusement Arcades (as Primary or Accessory Use); Indoor
Amusement/Entertainment/Assembly Place (Enclosed); Indoor Sports Facility (No Gambling); Outdoor Sport
and Amusement Facilities Conducted for Profit; Country Club; Open Air or Drive-In Theater or Other Open Air
Places of Entertainment; Bath House for Non-Commercial Purposes.
Miscellaneous Use Category (BUS-2)
• Piers, Docks, Wharves, Breakwaters, Causeways, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or
Below the Normal High Water Mark – Temporary or Permanent.
• Mortuary, Undertaking or Funeral Establishment
• Filling or Other Earthmoving Activities
• Road and Driveway Construction
• Structures Accessory to Permitted Uses – If the principal structure or principal use is a dwelling unit, an accessory
structure shall not have cooking facilities and shall not have more than one of the following: living facilities,
sanitary facilities or sleeping facilities.
• Accessory Uses Customarily Incident to Allowed Uses
• Uses Similar to Permitted Uses
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Flea Markets; Casino; Place for Exhibition, Lettering or Sale of Gravestones;
Head Shop; Obscene Exhibitions; Dumps; Billboards; Medium-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System;
Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System; Uses Similar to Prohibited Uses.
- AMENDED 11/06/2012, 11/06/2018
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
58
Permitted Uses in YBVC
Residential Use Category (YBVC) - AMENDED 05/19/2012
• Single-Family Dwelling
• Two-Family Dwelling
• Multi-Family Dwelling
• Boarding House
• Bed & Breakfast
• Elderly Housing
Commercial Use Category (YBVC)
• Service Businesses Serving Local Needs such as, but not limited to, barber shops, shoe repair, self-service laundry
or dry-cleaning pick-up agency, tailoring, printing shop, caterer or other similar uses – No external display of
goods or wares by any business whether goods were previously displayed or not.
• Small (under 2,500 square feet) Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise provided all display, storage and sale of
materials are conducted within a building and provided there is no manufacturing or assembly on premises – No
external display of goods or wares by any business whether goods were previously displayed or not.
• Store for retail sale of merchandise with more than 2,500 square feet of gross floor area
• Banks – Drive-through windows prohibited.
• Antique Shops – No external display of goods or wares by any business whether goods were previously displayed
or not.
• Laundries and Dry Cleaning Facilities (on public sewer)
• Motels/Hotels – A transient rental accommodation with cooking facilities in a motel/hotel shall not be rented or
leased to the same person or persons for more than 90 days in any 120 consecutive day period. This length of stay
shall be considered as a rental or lease of any accommodation with cooking facilities in the same motel/hotel and
not only the rental of the same accommodation to the same person or persons.
• Lodging and Tourist Homes/Inns
• Restaurants
• Ice Cream Stands
• Florists – No external display of goods or wares by any business whether goods were previously displayed or not.
• Pet Shops
• Day Care Facilities
• Fruit and Vegetable Produce Stores
• Artisanal Food and/or Beverage Facility (Not to exceed 5,000 square feet) – Retail Sales of Merchandise as part
of this use shall not supersede 2,500 square feet of gross floor area.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise such as but not limited to Lumber Yards and
Building Supply Yards; Plumbing, Electrical or Carpentry Shop or Other Similar Service or Repair Establishment;
Fast Food Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an accessory use; Formula Restaurants, whether the
use is a principal use or an accessory use; Truck Stops; Marinas; Garden Centers; Commercial Schools; Medical
Marijuana Registered Caregiver Retail Stores; Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facility; Medical Marijuana
Registered Dispensary; Medical Marijuana Testing Facilities.
- AMENDED 11/4/2014, 05/16/2015, 11/05/2019
Office Use Category (YBVC)
• Business, Financial, Professional or Government Offices, Except Town of York or York School District Offices
• Town of York or York School District Offices
• Offices and Clinics for Medical, Psychiatric, or Other Health Services for the Examination or Treatment of
Persons as Outpatients, including only Laboratories that are Part of Such Office or Clinic
• Radio or Television Studio
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Laboratory or Research Facility.
Civic & Public Use Category (YBVC)
• Civic Use
• Cultural Facility
• Essential Services
• Medical Facility
• Membership Organization
• Municipal Use - Excluding Department of Public Works facilities which involve the regular storage of heavy
equipment and construction materials.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
59
• Religious Use
• School
• Utility District – Treatment plants not permitted
- AMENDED 11/06/2012
Industrial Use Category (YBVC)
• Bulk Storage Collection Bin
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Printing, Binding, Publishing and Related Arts and Trades; Bottling of Beverages
(Except as permitted within or accessory to an Artisanal Food and/or Beverage Facility); Machine Shop,
Assembly, Packaging, or Manufacturing; Wholesale Business and Storage in a Roofed Structure; Wood
Manufacturing and Fabrication; Waste Transfer Facility; Waste Processing or Disposal Facility; Bulk Fuel Storage;
Truck Terminals.
- AMENDED 11/03/2015
Vehicular Use Category (YBVC)
• Sale, Rental and Accessory Storage of Automobiles, Light Trucks, Motorcycles, and Mopeds Conducted Wholly
or Partially in Open Lots – But only for rental of non-motorized boats, bicycles and mopeds, and for vehicle
storage.
• Commercial Parking
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Vehicle Service Stations, Auto Repair Garages; Auto Body Repair Shops; Sale of
Pickup Coaches, Campers, Tent Trailers and Similar Equipment, Including Snowmobiles; Place for Repair, Sale,
Rent or Storage of Pleasure Boats; Salvage Yards, Junk Yards, Wrecking Yards; Car Washing Establishment.
Rural & Agricultural Use Category (YBVC)
• Soil and Water Conservation Practices – Conducted in accordance with the standards of the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service including but not limited to creation and maintenance of farm ponds for
agricultural purposes.
• Aquaculture
• Timber Harvesting
• Forest Management Activities Except for Timber Harvesting
• Sale of Produce Raised on Same Premises
• Wildlife Management Practices
• Harvesting of Wild Crops
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Mineral Exploration; Sand/Gravel Pits, Quarries, etc.; General Purpose Farm,
Agriculture and Nurseries; Animal Breeding (Small Domestic Animals); Commercial Stables; Veterinary
Establishment, Kennel, or Similar Establishment.
Recreation & Amusement Use Category (YBVC)
• Campgrounds and Travel Trailer Parks
• Amusement Arcades (as Primary or Accessory Use) – Enclosed within a structure.
• Indoor Amusement/Entertainment/Assembly Place (Enclosed)
• Indoor Sports Facility (No Gambling)
• Outdoor Sport and Amusement Facilities Conducted for Profit
• Open Air or Drive-In Theater or Other Open Air Places of Entertainment – Drive-in theater is prohibited.
• Bath House for Non-Commercial Purposes
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Country Club.
Miscellaneous Use Category (YBVC)
• Piers, Docks, Wharves, Breakwaters, Causeways, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or
Below the Normal High Water Mark – Temporary or Permanent.
• Mortuary, Undertaking or Funeral Establishment
• Filling or Other Earthmoving Activities
• Road and Driveway Construction
• Structures Accessory to Permitted Uses – If the principal structure or principal use is a dwelling unit, an accessory
structure shall not have cooking facilities and shall not have more than one of the following: living facilities,
sanitary facilities or sleeping facilities.
• Accessory Uses Customarily Incident to Allowed Uses
• Uses Similar to Permitted Uses
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
60
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Flea Markets; Casino; Place for Exhibition, Lettering or Sale of Gravestones;
Head Shop; Obscene Exhibitions; Dumps; Billboards; Medium-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System;
Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System; Uses Similar to Prohibited Uses.
- AMENDED 11/06/2012, 11/06/2018
Special Restrictions for YBVC Zone: see §4.2.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
61
Permitted Uses in YVC-1 and YVC-2
Residential Use Category (YVC-1 & YVC-2) - AMENDED 05/21/16
• Single-Family Dwelling- On lots with frontage on York Street, Woodbridge Road or Long Sands Road the use
shall only be permitted within a mixed-use building and shall occupy no more than 50% of the first floor gross
floor area.
• Two-Family Dwelling- On lots with frontage on York Street, Woodbridge Road or Long Sands Road the use shall
only be permitted within a mixed-use building and shall occupy no more than 50% of the first floor gross floor
area.
• Multi-Family Dwelling- Only on lots served by public sewer and public water. On lots with frontage on York
Street, Woodbridge Road or Long Sands Road the use shall only be permitted within a mixed-use building and
shall occupy no more than 50% of the first floor gross floor area.
• Boarding House- Only on lots served by public sewer and public water. On lots with frontage on York Street,
Woodbridge Road or Long Sands Road the use shall only be permitted within a mixed-use building and shall
occupy no more than 50% of the first floor gross floor area.
• Bed & Breakfast- Only on lots served by public sewer and public water.
• Elderly Housing- Only on lots served by public sewer and public water. On lots with frontage on York Street,
Woodbridge Road or Long Sands Road the use shall only be permitted within a mixed-use building and shall
occupy no more than 50% of the first floor gross floor area.
• Elderly Congregate Housing- Only on lots served by public sewer and public water. On lots with frontage on
York Street, Woodbridge Road or Long Sands Road the use shall only be permitted within a mixed-use building
and shall occupy no more than 50% of the first floor gross floor area.
Commercial Use Category (YVC-1 & YVC-2)
• Service Business Serving Local Needs such as, but not limited to, barber shop/hair salon/spa, shoe repair,
Laundromat, dry-cleaning pick-up agency, tailoring, printing shop, caterer or other similar use (Individual
establishment not to exceed 2,500 square feet of gross floor area).
• Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise provided all display, storage and sale of materials are conducted within a
building. Store may also produce goods onsite, provided such are sold on site and the production area is smaller
than the retail area (Individual establishment not to exceed 3,500 square feet of gross floor area).
• Bank without drive-through window, not to exceed 2,500 square feet of gross floor area.
• Lodging and Tourist Home/Inn
• Restaurant- Individual establishment not to exceed 3,500 square feet of gross floor area.
• Artisanal Food and/or Beverage Facility- Individual establishment not to exceed 5,000 square feet of gross floor
area; retail sales of merchandise as part of this use shall not supersede 2,500 square feet of gross floor area.
• Ice Cream Stand- Individual establishment not to exceed 2,500 square feet of gross floor area.
• Florist- Individual establishment not to exceed 2,500 square feet of gross floor area.
• Pet Supply Shop- The sale of live animals is prohibited. Individual establishment not to exceed 2,500 square feet
of gross floor area.
• Commercial School- Permitted throughout except if the lot contains frontage on York Street, Woodbridge Road
or Long Sands Road, the use shall be located on the second floor or higher in the YVC-1 District. In both districts,
an individual establishment shall not exceed 2,500 square feet of gross floor area.
• Day Care Facility- Individual establishment not to exceed 2,500 square feet of gross floor area.
• Produce Store such as, but not limited to small grocery stores selling meats, cheeses, fruits and vegetables or other
similar goods. Individual establishment not to exceed 2,500 square feet of gross floor area.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED Motel/Hotel; Fast Food Restaurant, whether the use is a principal use or an
accessory use; Formula Restaurant, whether the use is a principal use or an accessory use; Truck Stop; Marina;
Medical Marijuana Registered Caregiver Retail Stores; Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facility; Medical
Marijuana Registered Dispensary; Medical Marijuana Testing Facilities; Dry Cleaning Facility.
-Amended 11/05/2019
Office Use Category (YVC-1 & YVC-2)
• Business, Financial, Professional or Government Office, Excluding Town of York or York School District Office
(provided the use does not occupy more than 50% of the street level gross floor area and does not occupy more
than 50% of the front half of a building adjacent to York Street, Woodbridge Road or Long Sands Road).
• Town of York or York School District Office
• Office and or Clinic for Medical, Psychiatric, or Other Health Service for the Examination or Treatment of
Persons as Outpatients, including laboratories that are part of such office or clinic provided the use does not
occupy more than 50% of the street level gross floor area and does not occupy more than 50% of the front half
of a building adjacent to York Street, Woodbridge Road or Long Sands Road.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
62
• Radio or Television Studio (provided such use is located on the second floor or above and does not include a
tower or antenna).
Civic & Public Use Category (YVC 1 & YVC-2)
• Cemetery
• Civic Use
• Cultural Facility
• Essential Services
• Hospital- Shall only be permitted within the hospital overlay district.
• Medical Facility- Shall only be permitted within the hospital overlay district.
• Membership Organization (provided such use is located on the second floor or above).
• Municipal Use
• Religious Use
• School
• Utility District
Industrial Use Category (YVC-1 & YVC-2)
• Printing, Binding, Publishing and Related Arts and Trades- Individual establishment not to exceed 2,500 square
feet of gross floor area.
• Bottling of Beverages- Permitted only as accessory to an Artisanal Food and/or Beverage Facility.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Waste Processing or Disposal Facility; Bulk Fuel Storage; Truck Terminal; Waste
Transfer Facility; Bulk Storage Collection Bin; Wood Manufacturing and Fabrication; Wholesale Business and
Storage in a Roofed Structure; Machine Shop, Assembly, Packaging, or Manufacturing.
Vehicular Use Category (YVC-1 & YVC-2)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Sale, Rental and Accessory Storage of Automobiles, Light Trucks, Motorcycles,
and Mopeds Conducted Wholly or Partially in Open Lots; Sale of Pickup Coaches, Campers, Tent Trailers and
Similar Equipment, including Snowmobiles; Salvage Yard, Junk Yard, Wrecking Yard; Car Washing
Establishment; Vehicle Service Station, Auto Repair Garage; Auto Body Repair Shop; Place for Repair, Sale, Rent
or Storage of Pleasure Boats.
Rural & Agricultural Use Category (YVC-1 & YVC-2)
• Soil and Water Conservation Practices- Conducted in accordance with the standards of the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service including but not limited to creation and maintenance of farm ponds for
agricultural purposes.
• Aquaculture
• General Purpose Farm, Agriculture and Nurseries
• Timber Harvesting
• Forest Management Activities Except for Timber Harvesting
• Sale of Produce Raised on Same Premises
• Wildlife Management Practices
• Harvesting of Wild Crops
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Commercial Stable; Veterinary Establishment, Kennel, or Similar Establishment;
Mineral Exploration; Sand/Gravel Pit, Quarry, etc.
Recreation & Amusement Use Category (YVC-1 & YVC-2)
• Indoor Amusement/Entertainment/Assembly Place, which may include a performing arts facility (Enclosed and
individual establishment not to exceed 5,000 square feet of gross floor area).
• Open Air Venue/Area for Theatrical and Musical Performances (Capacity not to exceed 300 persons).
• Indoor Sports Facility (No Gambling).
• Outdoor Sport and Amusement Facility
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Campground; Travel Trailer Park; Amusement Arcade (as Primary or Accessory
Use); Drive-In Theater; Bath House for Non-Commercial Purposes; Country Club.
Miscellaneous Use Category (YVC-1 & YVC-2)
• Piers, Docks, Wharves, Breakwaters, Causeways, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or
Below the Normal High Water Mark- Temporary or Permanent.
• Mortuary, Undertaking or Funeral Establishment- Individual establishment not to exceed 2,500 square feet of
gross floor area.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
63
• Lettering or Sale of Gravestones- Individual establishment not to exceed 2,500 square feet of gross floor area.
• Filling or Other Earthmoving Activity
• Road and Driveway Construction
• Structure Accessory to Permitted Use- If the principal structure or principal use is a dwelling unit, an accessory
structure shall not have a cooking facility and shall not have more than one of the following: living facility, sanitary
facility or sleeping facility.
• Accessory Use Customarily Incidental to Allowed Use
• Use Similar to Permitted Use
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Casino; Head Shop; Obscene Exhibition; Dump; Billboard; Medium-Scale
Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System; Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System; Flea Market; Use
Similar to Prohibited Use; Drive through facility.
- AMENDED 05/21/2016, 11/06/2018
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
64
Permitted Uses in GEN-1
Residential Use Category (GEN-1) - AMENDED 05/19/2012
• Single-Family Dwelling
• Two-Family Dwelling
• Boarding House
• Bed & Breakfast
Commercial Use Category (GEN-1)
• Service Businesses Serving Local Needs such as, but not limited to, barber shops, shoe repair, self-service laundry
or dry-cleaning pick-up agency, tailoring, printing shop, caterer or other similar uses
• Small (under 2,500 square feet) Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise provided all display, storage and sale of
materials are conducted within a building and provided there is no manufacturing or assembly on premises
• Antique Shops
• Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise such as but not limited to Lumber Yards and Building Supply Yards wherein
merchandise is stored in the open, provided that all merchandise so stored is screened from ground level view
from any abutting residential property
• Plumbing, Electrical or Carpentry Shop or Other Similar Service or Repair Establishment
• Lodging and Tourist Homes/Inns
• Restaurants – Seating under 75 persons.
• Ice Cream Stands
• Florists
• Garden Centers
• Pet Shops
• Commercial Schools
• Day Care Facilities
• Fruit and Vegetable Produce Stores
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Large Store or Mall (Group of Stores Under Single Roof) With Total Floor Space
Over 2,500 Square Feet for Retail Sale of Merchandise; Banks; Laundries and Dry Cleaning Facilities;
Motels/Hotels; Fast Food Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an accessory use; Formula
Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an accessory use; Truck Stops; Marinas; Medical Marijuana
Registered Caregiver Retail Stores; Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facility; Medical Marijuana Registered
Dispensary; Medical Marijuana Testing Facilities; Artisanal Food and/or Beverage Facility.
- AMENDED 11/04/2014, 05/16/2015, 11/05/2019
Office Use Category (GEN-1)
• Business, Financial, Professional or Government Offices, Except Town of York or York School District Offices
• Town of York or York School District Offices
• Offices and Clinics for Medical, Psychiatric, or Other Health Services for the Examination or Treatment of
Persons as Outpatients, including only Laboratories that are Part of Such Office or Clinic
• Laboratory or Research Facility
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Radio or Television Studio.
Civic & Public Use Category (GEN-1)
• Cemeteries
• Civic Use
• Cultural Facility
• Essential Services
• Hospital
• Medical Facility
• Membership Organization
• Municipal Use
• Nursing Homes
• Religious Use
• School
• Utility District
- AMENDED 11/06/2012
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
65
Industrial Use Category (GEN-1)
• Printing, Binding, Publishing and Related Arts and Trades
• Bottling of Beverages
• Machine Shop, Assembly, Packaging, or Manufacturing
• Wholesale Business and Storage in a Roofed Structure
• Wood Manufacturing and Fabrication
• Bulk Storage Collection Bin
• Waste Transfer Facility – Under municipal ownership and control.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Waste Processing or Disposal Facility; Bulk Fuel Storage; Truck Terminals.
Vehicular Use Category (GEN-1)
• Vehicle Service Stations, Auto Repair Garages
• Auto Body Repair Shops
• Place for Repair, Sale, Rent or Storage of Pleasure Boats
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Sale, Rental and Accessory Storage of Automobiles, Light Trucks, Motorcycles,
and Mopeds Conducted Wholly or Partially in Open Lots; Sale of Pickup Coaches, Campers, Tent Trailers and
Similar Equipment, Including Snowmobiles; Salvage Yards, Junk Yards, Wrecking Yards; Car Washing
Establishment.
Rural & Agricultural Use Category (GEN-1)
• Soil and Water Conservation Practices – Conducted in accordance with the standards of the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service including but not limited to creation and maintenance of farm ponds for
agricultural purposes.
• Aquaculture
• General Purpose Farm, Agriculture and Nurseries
• Timber Harvesting
• Forest Management Activities Except for Timber Harvesting
• Sale of Produce Raised on Same Premises
• Wildlife Management Practices
• Animal Breeding (Small Domestic Animals)
• Harvesting of Wild Crops
• Commercial Stables
• Veterinary Establishment, Kennel, or Similar Establishment – Provided that in commercial zones animals are kept
wholly indoors.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Mineral Exploration; Sand/Gravel Pits, Quarries, etc..
Recreation & Amusement Use Category (GEN-1)
• Indoor Amusement/Entertainment/Assembly Place (Enclosed)
• Indoor Sports Facility (No Gambling)
• Outdoor Sport and Amusement Facilities Conducted for Profit
• Country Club
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Campgrounds and Travel Trailer Parks; Amusement Arcades (as Primary or
Accessory Use); Open Air or Drive-In Theater or Other Open Air Places of Entertainment; Bath House for Non-
Commercial Purposes.
Miscellaneous Use Category (GEN-1)
• Piers, Docks, Wharves, Breakwaters, Causeways, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or
Below the Normal High Water Mark – Temporary or Permanent.
• Flea Markets
• Medium-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System
• Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System
• Mortuary, Undertaking or Funeral Establishment
• Place for Exhibition, Lettering or Sale of Gravestones
• Filling or Other Earthmoving Activities
• Road and Driveway Construction
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
66
• Structures Accessory to Permitted Uses – If the principal structure or principal use is a dwelling unit, an accessory
structure shall not have cooking facilities and shall not have more than one of the following: living facilities,
sanitary facilities or sleeping facilities.
• Accessory Uses Customarily Incident to Allowed Uses
• Uses Similar to Permitted Uses
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Casino; Head Shop; Obscene Exhibitions; Dumps; Billboards; Uses Similar to
Prohibited Uses. - AMENDED 11/06/2012, 11/06/2018
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
67
Permitted Uses in GEN-2
Residential Use Category (GEN-2) - AMENDED 05/19/2012
• Single-Family Dwelling
• Two-Family Dwelling
• Boarding House
• Bed & Breakfast
Commercial Use Category (GEN-2)
• Service Businesses Serving Local Needs such as, but not limited to, barber shops, shoe repair, self-service laundry
or dry-cleaning pick-up agency, tailoring, printing shop, caterer or other similar uses
• Small (under 2,500 square feet) Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise provided all display, storage and sale of
materials are conducted within a building and provided there is no manufacturing or assembly on premises
• Antique Shops
• Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise such as but not limited to Lumber Yards and Building Supply Yards wherein
merchandise is stored in the open, provided that all merchandise so stored is screened from ground level view
from any abutting residential property
• Plumbing, Electrical or Carpentry Shop or Other Similar Service or Repair Establishment
• Lodging and Tourist Homes/Inns
• Restaurants – Seating under 75 persons.
• Ice Cream Stands
• Florists
• Garden Centers
• Pet Shops
• Commercial Schools
• Day Care Facilities
• Fruit and Vegetable Produce Stores
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Large Store or Mall (Group of Stores Under Single Roof) With Total Floor Space
Over 2,500 Square Feet for Retail Sale of Merchandise; Banks; Laundries and Dry Cleaning Facilities;
Motels/Hotels; Fast Food Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an accessory use; Formula
Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an accessory use; Truck Stops; Marinas; Medical Marijuana
Registered Caregiver Retail Stores; Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facility; Medical Marijuana Registered
Dispensary; Medical Marijuana Testing Facilities; Artisanal Food and/or Beverage Facility.
- AMENDED 11/04/2014, 05/16/2015, 11/05/2019
Office Use Category (GEN-2)
• Business, Financial, Professional or Government Offices, Except Town of York or York School District Offices
• Town of York or York School District Offices
• Offices and Clinics for Medical, Psychiatric, or Other Health Services for the Examination or Treatment of
Persons as Outpatients, including only Laboratories that are Part of Such Office or Clinic
• Laboratory or Research Facility
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Radio or Television Studio.
Civic & Public Use Category (GEN-2)
• Cemeteries
• Civic Use
• Cultural Facility
• Essential Services
• Hospitals
• Medical Facility
• Membership Organization
• Municipal Use
• Nursing Homes
• Religious Use
• School
• Utility District
- AMENDED 11/06/2012
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
68
Industrial Use Category (GEN-2)
• Printing, Binding, Publishing and Related Arts and Trades
• Bottling of Beverages
• Machine Shop, Assembly, Packaging, or Manufacturing
• Wholesale Business and Storage in a Roofed Structure
• Wood Manufacturing and Fabrication
• Bulk Storage Collection Bin
• Waste Transfer Facility – Under municipal ownership and control; and only permitted in that section of the GEN-
2 zone which is located south of Mountain Road. Mountain Road extends from Route One to the York-South
Berwick municipal boundary.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Waste Processing or Disposal Facility; Bulk Fuel Storage; Truck Terminals. -
AMENDED 11/06/2012
Vehicular Use Category (GEN-2)
• Vehicle Service Stations, Auto Repair Garages
• Auto Body Repair Shops
• Place for Repair, Sale, Rent or Storage of Pleasure Boats
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Sale, Rental and Accessory Storage of Automobiles, Light Trucks, Motorcycles,
and Mopeds Conducted Wholly or Partially in Open Lots; Sale of Pickup Coaches, Campers, Tent Trailers and
Similar Equipment, Including Snowmobiles; Salvage Yards, Junk Yards, Wrecking Yards; Car Washing
Establishment.
Rural & Agricultural Use Category (GEN-2)
• Sand/Gravel Pits, Quarries, etc. – Excavations must be at least 50 feet from any public way and natural screening
must be provided between the excavation and the public way.
• Soil and Water Conservation Practices – Conducted in accordance with the standards of the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service including but not limited to creation and maintenance of farm ponds for
agricultural purposes.
• Aquaculture
• General Purpose Farm, Agriculture and Nurseries
• Timber Harvesting
• Forest Management Activities Except for Timber Harvesting
• Sale of Produce Raised on Same Premises
• Wildlife Management Practices
• Animal Breeding (Small Domestic Animals)
• Harvesting of Wild Crops
• Commercial Stables
• Veterinary Establishment, Kennel, or Similar Establishment – Provided that in commercial zones animals are kept
wholly indoors.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Mineral Exploration.
Recreation & Amusement Use Category (GEN-2)
• Indoor Amusement/Entertainment/Assembly Place (Enclosed)
• Indoor Sports Facility (No Gambling)
• Outdoor Sport and Amusement Facilities Conducted for Profit
• Country Club
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Campgrounds and Travel Trailer Parks; Amusement Arcades (as Primary or
Accessory Use); Open Air or Drive-In Theater or Other Open Air Places of Entertainment; Bath House for Non-
Commercial Purposes.
Miscellaneous Use Category (GEN-2)
• Piers, Docks, Wharves, Breakwaters, Causeways, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or
Below the Normal High Water Mark – Temporary or Permanent.
• Flea Markets
• Mortuary, Undertaking or Funeral Establishment
• Medium-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System
• Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
69
• Place for Exhibition, Lettering or Sale of Gravestones
• Filling or Other Earthmoving Activities
• Road and Driveway Construction
• Structures Accessory to Permitted Uses – If the principal structure or principal use is a dwelling unit, an accessory
structure shall not have cooking facilities and shall not have more than one of the following: living facilities,
sanitary facilities or sleeping facilities.
• Accessory Uses Customarily Incident to Allowed Uses
• Uses Similar to Permitted Uses
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Casino; Head Shop; Obscene Exhibitions; Dumps; Billboards; Uses Similar to
Prohibited Uses. - AMENDED 11/06/2012, 11/06/2018
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
70
Permitted Uses in GEN-3
Residential Use Category (GEN-3) - AMENDED 05/19/2012
• Single-Family Dwelling
• Two-Family Dwelling
• Multi-Family Dwelling – Only on lots served by public sewer and public water.
• Boarding House
• Bed & Breakfast
• Elderly Housing
• Elderly Congregate Housing
Commercial Use Category (GEN-3)
• Service Businesses Serving Local Needs such as, but not limited to, barber shops, shoe repair, self-service laundry
or dry-cleaning pick-up agency, tailoring, printing shop, caterer or other similar uses (South of the Little River)
• Small (under 2,500 square feet) Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise provided all display, storage and sale of
materials are conducted within a building and provided there is no manufacturing or assembly on premises (South
of the Little River)
• Banks (with or without drive-through window) (South of the Little River)
• Laundries and Dry Cleaning Facilities (on public sewer) (South of the Little River)
• Plumbing, Electrical or Carpentry Shop or Other Similar Service or Repair Establishment (South of the Little
River)
• Lodging and Tourist Homes/Inns (South of the Little River)
• Restaurants (South of the Little River)
• Ice Cream Stands (South of the Little River)
• Florists (South of the Little River)
• Garden Centers (South of the Little River)
• Pet Shops (South of the Little River)
• Commercial Schools (on public sewer)
• Day Care Facilities
• Fruit and Vegetable Produce Stores
• Farm Stands
• Artisanal Food and/or Beverage Facility (Not to exceed 5,000 square feet) – Allowed only in that portion of the
zone that is located south of the Little River. Retail Sales of Merchandise as part of this use shall not supersede
2,500 square feet of gross floor area.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Large Store or Mall (Group of Stores Under Single Roof) With Total Floor Space
Over 2,500 Square Feet for Retail Sale of Merchandise; Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise such as but not
limited to Lumber Yards and Building Supply Yards wherein merchandise is stored in the open;
Motels/Hotels; Fast Food Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an accessory use; Formula
Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an accessory use; Truck Stops; Marinas; Medical Marijuana
Registered Caregiver Retail Stores; Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facility; Medical Marijuana Registered
Dispensary; Medical Marijuana Testing Facilities.
- AMENDED 11/04/2014, 05/16/2015, 11/05/2019
Office Use Category (GEN-3)
• Business, Financial, Professional or Government Offices, Except Town of York or York School District Offices
(South of the Little River)
• Town of York or York School District Offices
• Offices and Clinics for Medical, Psychiatric, or Other Health Services for the Examination or Treatment of
Persons as Outpatients, including only Laboratories that are Part of Such Office or Clinic (South of the Little
River)
• Laboratory or Research Facility (South of the Little River)
• Radio or Television Studio
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED:
- AMENDED 05/16/2015
Civic & Public Use Category (GEN-3)
• Cemeteries
• Civic Use
• Cultural Facility (on public sewer)
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
71
• Essential Services
• Hospitals (South of the Little River)
• Medical Facility (South of the Little River)
• Membership Organization (South of the Little River)
• Municipal Use
• Nursing Homes (on public water and sewer)
• Religious Use
• School
• Utility District
- AMENDED 11/06/2012, 05/16/2015
Industrial Use Category (GEN-3)
• Printing, Binding, Publishing and Related Arts and Trades (South of the Little River)
• Bottling of Beverages (South of the Little River)
• Machine Shop, Assembly, Packaging, or Manufacturing (South of the Little River)
• Wholesale Business and Storage in a Roofed Structure (South of the Little River)
• Wood Manufacturing and Fabrication (South of the Little River)
• Bulk Storage Collection Bin (South of the Little River)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Waste Processing or Disposal Facility; Bulk Fuel Storage; Truck Terminals; Waste
Transfer Facility.
- AMENDED 05/16/2015
Vehicular Use Category (GEN-3)
• Vehicle Service Stations, Auto Repair Garages (South of the Little River)
• Auto Body Repair Shops (South of the Little River)
• Place for Repair, Sale, Rent or Storage of Pleasure Boats
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Sale, Rental and Accessory Storage of Automobiles, Light Trucks, Motorcycles,
and Mopeds Conducted Wholly or Partially in Open Lots; Sale of Pickup Coaches, Campers, Tent Trailers and
Similar Equipment, Including Snowmobiles; Salvage Yards, Junk Yards, Wrecking Yards; Car Washing
Establishment.
- AMENDED 05/16/2015
Rural & Agricultural Use Category (GEN-3)
• Soil and Water Conservation Practices – Conducted in accordance with the standards of the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service including but not limited to creation and maintenance of farm ponds for
agricultural purposes.
• Aquaculture
• General Purpose Farm, Agriculture and Nurseries
• Timber Harvesting
• Forest Management Activities Except for Timber Harvesting
• Wildlife Management Practices
• Animal Breeding (Small Domestic Animals)
• Harvesting of Wild Crops
• Veterinary Establishment, Kennel, or Similar Establishment – Provided that in commercial zones animals are kept
wholly indoors.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Commercial Stables; Mineral Exploration; Sand/Gravel Pits, Quarries, etc...
- AMENDED 05/16/2015
Recreation & Amusement Use Category (GEN-3)
• Indoor Amusement/Entertainment/Assembly Place (Enclosed) (South of the Little River)
• Open Air Venues/Areas for Theatrical and Musical Performances with a capacity not to exceed 300 persons
(South of the Little River)
• Indoor Sports Facility (No Gambling) (South of the Little River)
• Outdoor Sport and Amusement Facilities
• Country Club
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Campgrounds and Travel Trailer Parks; Amusement Arcades (as Primary or
Accessory Use); Drive-In Theater.
- AMENDED 05/16/2015, 11/03/2015
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
72
Miscellaneous Use Category (GEN-3)
• Piers, Docks, Wharves, Breakwaters, Causeways, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or
Below the Normal High Water Mark – Temporary or Permanent.
• Flea Markets (South of the Little River)
• Mortuary, Undertaking or Funeral Establishment (South of the Little River)
• Medium-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System (South of the Little River)
• Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System (South of the Little River)
• Place for Exhibition, Lettering or Sale of Gravestones (South of the Little River)
• Filling or Other Earthmoving Activities
• Road and Driveway Construction
• Structures Accessory to Permitted Uses – If the principal structure or principal use is a dwelling unit, an accessory
structure shall not have cooking facilities and shall not have more than one of the following: living facilities,
sanitary facilities or sleeping facilities.
• Accessory Uses Customarily Incidental to Allowed Uses
• Uses Similar to Permitted Uses
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Casino; Head Shop; Obscene Exhibitions; Dumps; Billboards; Uses Similar to
Prohibited Uses.
- AMENDED 11/06/2012, 05/16/2015, 11/06/2018
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
73
4.1.3 Reserved. (for Shoreland Overlay District uses see §8.2.1.)
4.1.4 Route One Districts
Permitted Uses in Route One-1
Residential Use Category (RT 1-1) - AMENDED 05/19/2012
• Single-Family Dwelling
• Two-Family Dwelling
• Boarding House
• Bed & Breakfast
• Elderly Housing
Commercial Use Category (RT 1-1)
• Day Care Center – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Service Businesses; Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise; Shopping Center; Banks;
Grocery Store; Laundries and Dry Cleaning Facilities; Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise such as but not limited
to Lumber Yards and Building Supply Yards; Plumbing, Electrical or Carpentry Shop or Other Similar Service or
Repair Establishment; Motels/Hotels; Small Lodging and Tourist Homes/Inns; Restaurants; Fast Food
Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an accessory use; Formula Restaurants, whether the use is a
principal use or an accessory use (except that a grocery store or a retail store which sells food shall be permitted
to make and serve prepared food or other such products prepared primarily with foods which it sells in the store,
that are prepared on-site, for consumption off-site); Ice Cream Stands; Truck Stops; Marinas; Garden Centers;
Animal Boarding (Commercial); Animal Grooming; Animal Hospitals/Veterinarians; Animal Retail Sales;
Commercial Schools; Fruit and Vegetable Produce Stores; Parking Lot Owned or Managed by a Non-Public
Entity for Commercial Purposes, Provided there is No Parking Garage; Medical Marijuana Registered Caregiver
Retail Stores; Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facility; Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary; Medical
Marijuana Testing Facilities; Artisanal Food and/or Beverage Facility.
- AMENDED 11/04/2014, 05/16/2015, 11/05/2019
Office Use Category (RT 1-1)
• Business, Financial, Professional or Government Offices, Except Town of York or York School District Offices
– With less than 5,000 square feet of floor space. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Town of York or York School District Offices – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Laboratory or Research Facility; Radio or Television Studio.
Civic & Public Use Category (RT 1-1)
• Civic Use
• Cultural Facility – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Essential Services – Route One Use Permit from CEO required, unless essential services proposed are in
conjunction with a Planning Board application.
• Medical Facility – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Membership Organization - Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Municipal Use - Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Religious Use - Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• School - With Less than 5,000 square feet of floor space. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Utility District – Route One Use Permit from CEO Required.
- AMENDED 11/06/2012
Industrial Use Category (RT 1-1)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Printing, Binding, Publishing and Related Arts and Trades; Machine Shop,
Assembly, Packaging, Wood Fabrication, or Manufacturing; Warehouse or Distribution Facilities; Wholesale
Business and Storage in a Roofed Structure; Self-Storage Facilities; Waste Transfer Facility, Commercial; Waste
Processing or Disposal Facilities, Commercial; Bulk Fuel Storage; Truck Terminals.
Vehicular Use Category (RT 1-1)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Vehicle Service Stations, Auto Repair Garages; Auto Body Repair Shops; Sale,
Rental and Accessory Storage of Automobiles, Light Trucks, Motorcycles, and Mopeds Conducted Wholly or
Partially on Open Lots; Sale of Pickup Coaches/Campers, Tent Trailers and Similar Equipment Including
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
74
Snowmobile; Place for Repair, Sale, Rental or Storage of Pleasure Boats; Salvage Yards, Junk Yards, Wrecking
Yards; Car Washing Establishment.
Rural & Agricultural Use Category (RT 1-1)
• Soil and Water Conservation Practices – Conducted in accordance with the standards of the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service including but not limited to creation and maintenance of farm ponds for
agricultural purposes. Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• General Purpose Farm, Agriculture and Nurseries – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Forest Management Activities Except for Timber Harvesting – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Sale of Produce Raised on Same Premises – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Wildlife Management Practices – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Animal Breeding (Small Domestic Animals) – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Harvesting of Wild Crops – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Mineral Exploration; Sand/Gravel Pits, Quarries, etc.; Aquaculture; Timber
Harvesting.
Recreation & Amusement Use Category (RT 1-1)
• Bath House, for Non-Commercial Purposes – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Campground and Travel Trailer Park; Indoor Sports Facility (No Gambling);
Athletic Club/Fitness Center; Indoor Amusement/Entertainment/Assembly Place; Outdoor Sport and
Amusement Facilities Conducted for Profit; Golf Course; Country Club; Open Air or Drive-In Theater or Other
Open Air Places of Entertainment; Fraternal Organizations/Clubs/Lodges.
Miscellaneous Use Category (RT 1-1)
• Piers, Docks, Wharves, Breakwaters, Causeways, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or
Below the Normal High Water Mark – Temporary or Permanent. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board
required.
• Filling or Other Earthmoving Activities – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Road and Driveway Construction – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Medium-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board Required.
• Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board Required.
• Structures Accessory to Permitted Uses – Route One Use Permit from either Planning Board or CEO required,
based on permitting procedure required for primary use. Also, if the principal structure or principal use is a
dwelling unit, an accessory structure shall not have cooking facilities and shall not have more than one of the
following: living facilities, sanitary facilities or sleeping facilities.
• Accessory Uses Customarily Incident to Allowed Uses – Route One Use Permit from either Planning Board or
CEO required, based on permitting procedure required for primary use.
• Uses Similar to Permitted Uses – Route One Use Permit from either Planning Board or CEO required based on
permitting procedure for the use to which it is similar.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Flea Markets; Casino; Mortuary, Undertaking or Funeral Establishment; Place for
Exhibition, Lettering or Sale of Gravestones; Head Shop; Obscene Exhibitions; Dumps; Billboards; Uses Similar
to Prohibited Uses; All Other Uses.
- AMENDED 11/06/2012, 11/06/2018
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
75
Permitted Uses in Route One-2
Residential Use Category (RT 1-2) - AMENDED 05/19/2012
• Single-Family Dwelling
• Two-Family Dwelling
• Multi-Family Dwelling
• Boarding House
• Bed & Breakfast
• Elderly Housing
Commercial Use Category (RT 1-2)
• Service Businesses – With Less than 5,000 square feet of floor space. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board
required.
• Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise – With Less than 5,000 square feet of floor space. Store may also produce
goods on site, provided such are sold on site and the production area is smaller in size than the retail area. Route
One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Shopping Center – Provided no single store for retail sale of merchandise exceeds size limitations of zoning
district. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Banks, With or Without Drive-Through Windows – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Grocery Store – With Less than 5,000 square feet of floor space. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board
required.
• Laundries and Dry Cleaning Facilities (on Public Sewer) – Serviced by Public Sewer. Route One Use Permit from
Planning Board required.
• Plumbing, Electrical or Carpentry Shop or Other Similar Service or Repair Establishment – Route One Use Permit
from Planning Board required.
• Small Lodging and Tourist Homes/Inns – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Restaurants – With Less than 5,000 square feet of floor space. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board
required.
• Ice Cream Stands – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Garden Centers – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Animal Boarding (Commercial) – Permitted only as an accessory use to an approved veterinarian use. Route One
Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Animal Grooming – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Animal Hospitals/Veterinarians – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Animal Retail Sales – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Commercial Schools – With Less than 5,000 square feet of floor space. Boarding of students is prohibited. Route
One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Day Care Center – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Fruit and Vegetable Produce Stores – With Less than 5,000 square feet of floor space. Route One Use Permit
from Planning Board required.
• Artisanal Food and/or Beverage Facility (Not to exceed 5,000 square feet) – Retail Sales of Merchandise as part
of this use shall not supersede 2,500 square feet of gross floor area. – Route One Use Permit from the Planning
Board is required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise such as but not limited to Lumber Yards and
Building Supply Yards; Motels/Hotels; Fast Food Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an accessory
use; Formula Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an accessory use (except that a grocery store or a
retail store which sells food shall be permitted to make and serve prepared food or other such products prepared
primarily with foods which it sells in the store, that are prepared on-site, for consumption off-site); Truck Stops;
Marinas; Parking Lot Owned or Managed by a Non-Public Entity for Commercial Purposes, Provided there is
No Parking Garage; Medical Marijuana Registered Caregiver Retail Stores; Medical Marijuana Manufacturing
Facility; Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary; Medical Marijuana Testing Facilities.
- AMENDED 11/04/2014, 05/16/2015, 11/05/2019
Office Use Category (RT 1-2)
• Business, Financial, Professional or Government Offices, Except Town of York or York School District Offices
– Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required. If more than 5,000 square feet of floor space, then a
Special Exception from the Board of Appeals per Article 18 is also required.
• Town of York or York School District Offices – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Laboratory or Research Facility; Radio or Television Studio.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
76
Civic & Public Use Category (RT 1-2)
• Civic Use
• Cultural Facility – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Essential Services – Route One Use Permit from CEO required, unless essential services proposed are in
conjunction with a Planning Board application.
• Hospitals
• Medical Facility – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Membership Organization - Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Municipal Use - Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Nursing Homes – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Religious Use - Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• School - With Less than 5,000 square feet of floor space. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Utility District – Route One Use Permit from CEO Required.
- AMENDED 11/06/2012
Industrial Use Category (RT 1-2)
• Printing, Binding, Publishing and Related Arts and Trades - Allowed only in that portion of the zone that is
northerly of Fieldstone Estates Road and Southerly of Rogers Road, and with less than 5,000 square feet of floor
space. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required. - AMENDED 05/17/2014
• Machine Shop, Assembly, Packaging, Wood Fabrication, or Manufacturing - Allowed only in that portion of the
zone that is northerly of Fieldstone Estates Road and Southerly of Rogers Road, and with less than 5,000 square
feet of floor space. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required. - AMENDED 05/17/2014
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Warehouse or Distribution Facilities; Wholesale Business and Storage in a Roofed
Structure; Self-Storage Facilities; Waste Transfer Facility, Commercial; Waste Processing or Disposal Facilities,
Commercial; Bulk Fuel Storage; Truck Terminals. - AMENDED 05/17/2014
Vehicular Use Category (RT 1-2)
• Vehicle Service Stations, Auto Repair Garages – Allowed only in that portion of the zone that is northerly of
Fieldstone Estates Road and Southerly of Rogers Road. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
- AMENDED 05/17/2014
• Auto Body Repair Shops - Allowed only in that portion of the zone that is northerly of Fieldstone Estates Road
and Southerly of Rogers Road. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required. - AMENDED
05/17/2014
• Sale, Rental and Accessory Storage of Automobiles, Light Trucks, Motorcycles, and Mopeds – Allowed only in
that portion of the zone that is northerly of Fieldstone Estates Road and Southerly of Rogers Road, and limited
such that all vehicles are displayed and stored indoors only. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
- AMENDED 05/17/2014
• Sale of Pickup Coaches/Campers, Tent Trailers and Similar Equipment Including Snowmobiles – Allowed only
in that portion of the zone that is northerly of Fieldstone Estates Road and Southerly of Rogers Road, and limited
such that all such products are displayed and stored indoors only. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board
required. - AMENDED 05/17/2014
• Place for Repair, Sale, Rental or Storage of Pleasure Boats - Allowed only in that portion of the zone that is
northerly of Fieldstone Estates Road and Southerly of Rogers Road, and limited such that all boats are displayed,
repaired, and stored indoors only. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required. - AMENDED
05/17/2014
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Salvage Yards, Junk Yards, Wrecking Yards; Car Washing Establishment. -
AMENDED 05/17/2014
Rural & Agricultural Use Category (RT 1-2)
• Soil and Water Conservation Practices – Conducted in accordance with the standards of the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service including but not limited to creation and maintenance of farm ponds for
agricultural purposes. Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• General Purpose Farm, Agriculture and Nurseries – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Timber Harvesting – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Forest Management Activities Except for Timber Harvesting – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Sale of Produce Raised on Same Premises – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Wildlife Management Practices – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Animal Breeding (Small Domestic Animals) – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
77
• Harvesting of Wild Crops – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Mineral Exploration; Sand/Gravel Pits, Quarries, etc.; Aquaculture.
Recreation & Amusement Use Category (RT 1-2)
• Fraternal Organizations/Clubs/Lodges – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Bath House, for Non-Commercial Purposes – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Campground and Travel Trailer Park; Indoor Sports Facility (No Gambling);
Athletic Club/Fitness Center; Indoor Amusement/Entertainment/Assembly Place; Outdoor Sport and
Amusement Facilities Conducted for Profit; Golf Course; Country Club; Open Air or Drive-In Theater or Other
Open Air Places of Entertainment.
Miscellaneous Use Category (RT 1-2)
• Piers, Docks, Wharves, Breakwaters, Causeways, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or
Below the Normal High Water Mark – Temporary or Permanent. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board
required.
• Place for Exhibition, Lettering or Sale of Gravestones – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Filling or Other Earthmoving Activities – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Road and Driveway Construction – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Medium-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board Required.
• Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board Required.
• Structures Accessory to Permitted Uses – Route One Use Permit from either Planning Board or CEO required,
based on permitting procedure required for primary use. Also, if the principal structure or principal use is a
dwelling unit, an accessory structure shall not have cooking facilities and shall not have more than one of the
following: living facilities, sanitary facilities or sleeping facilities.
• Accessory Uses Customarily Incident to Allowed Uses – Route One Use Permit from either Planning Board or
CEO required, based on permitting procedure required for primary use.
• Uses Similar to Permitted Uses – Route One Use Permit from either Planning Board or CEO required based on
permitting procedure for the use to which it is similar.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Flea Markets; Casino; Mortuary, Undertaking or Funeral Establishment; Head
Shop; Obscene Exhibitions; Dumps; Billboards; Uses Similar to Prohibited Uses; All Other Uses.
- AMENDED 11/06/2012, 11/06/2018
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
78
Permitted Uses in Route One-3
Residential Use Category (RT 1-3) - AMENDED 05/19/2012
• Single-Family Dwelling
• Two-Family Dwelling
• Multi-Family Dwelling
• Boarding House
• Bed & Breakfast
• Elderly Housing
Commercial Use Category (RT 1-3)
• Service Businesses –Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise – With Less than 20,000 square feet of floor space. Store with less than 5,000
square feet of floor space may also produce goods on site, provided such are sold on site and the production area
is smaller in size than the retail area. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Shopping Center – Provided no single store for retail sale of merchandise exceeds size limitations of zoning
district. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Banks, With or Without Drive-Through Windows – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Grocery Store –Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Laundries and Dry Cleaning Facilities (on Public Sewer) – Serviced by Public Sewer. Route One Use Permit from
Planning Board required.
• Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise such as but not limited to Lumber Yards and Building Supply Yards wherein
merchandise is stored in the open, provided that all merchandise so stored is screened from ground level view
from any abutting residential property – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Plumbing, Electrical or Carpentry Shop or Other Similar Service or Repair Establishment – Route One Use Permit
from Planning Board required.
• Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facility- without cultivation.
• Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary- without cultivation and/or manufacturing.
• Motels/Hotels – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Small Lodging and Tourist Homes/Inns – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Restaurants –Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Ice Cream Stands – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Garden Centers – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Animal Boarding (Commercial) – Permitted only as an accessory use to an approved veterinarian use. Route One
Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Animal Grooming – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Animal Hospitals/Veterinarians – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Animal Retail Sales – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Commercial Schools – With Less than 5,000 square feet of floor space. Boarding of students is prohibited. Route
One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Day Care Center – As an accessory use to a permitted use only. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board
required.
• Fruit and Vegetable Produce Stores – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Parking Lot Owned or Managed by a Non-Public Entity for Commercial Purposes, Provided there is No Parking
Garage – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Artisanal Food and/or Beverage Facility – Retail Sales of Merchandise as part of this use shall not supersede 2,500
square feet of gross floor area. Route One Use Permit from the Planning Board is required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Fast Food Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an accessory use;
Formula Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an accessory use (except that a grocery store or a retail
store which sells food shall be permitted to make and serve prepared food or other such products prepared
primarily with foods which it sells in the store, that are prepared on-site, for consumption off-site); Truck Stops;
Marinas; Medical Marijuana Registered Caregiver Retail Stores; Medical Marijuana Testing Facilities.
- AMENDED 11/04/2014, 05/16/2015, 11/05/2019
Office Use Category (RT 1-3)
• Business, Financial, Professional or Government Offices, Except Town of York or York School District Offices
–Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Town of York or York School District Offices – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Laboratory or Research Facility – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Radio or Television Studio – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
79
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: not applicable.
Civic & Public Use Category (RT 1-3)
• Civic Use
• Cultural Facility – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Essential Services – Route One Use Permit from CEO required, unless essential services proposed are in
conjunction with a Planning Board application.
• Hospitals –Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Medical Facility - Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required
• Membership Organization - Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Municipal Use - Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Nursing Homes – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Religious Use - Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• School - With Less than 5,000 square feet of floor space. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Utility District – Route One Use Permit from CEO Required.
- AMENDED 11/06/2012
Industrial Use Category (RT 1-3)
• Printing, Binding, Publishing and Related Arts and Trades – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Machine Shop, Assembly, Packaging, Wood Fabrication, or Manufacturing – Route One Use Permit from
Planning Board required.
• Warehouse or Distribution Facilities – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Wholesale Business and Storage in a Roofed Structure – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Self-Storage Facilities – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Bulk Fuel Storage – Limited to storage of fuel and natural gas for retail sales use only. All storage for wholesale
sales shall be prohibited, and located west of Route One only. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board
required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Waste Transfer Facility, Commercial; Waste Processing or Disposal Facilities,
Commercial; Truck Terminals.
Vehicular Use Category (RT 1-3)
• Vehicle Service Stations, Auto Repair Garages – Provided all work is carried out within the building and no major
body work is done on premises. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Auto Body Repair Shops – Enclosed within a structure. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Sale, Rental and Accessory Storage of Automobiles, Light Trucks, Motorcycles, and Mopeds Conducted Wholly
or Partially on Open Lots – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Sale of Pickup Coaches/Campers, Tent Trailers and Similar Equipment Including Snowmobile –Route One Use
Permit from Planning Board required.
• Place for Repair, Sale, Rental or Storage of Pleasure Boats – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Car Washing Establishment – Serviced by public sewer. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Salvage Yards, Junk Yards, Wrecking Yards.
Rural & Agricultural Use Category (RT 1-3)
• Soil and Water Conservation Practices – Conducted in accordance with the standards of the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service including but not limited to creation and maintenance of farm ponds for
agricultural purposes. Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• General Purpose Farm, Agriculture and Nurseries – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Timber Harvesting – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Forest Management Activities Except for Timber Harvesting – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Sale of Produce Raised on Same Premises – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Wildlife Management Practices – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Animal Breeding (Small Domestic Animals) – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Harvesting of Wild Crops – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Mineral Exploration; Sand/Gravel Pits, Quarries, etc.; Aquaculture.
Recreation & Amusement Use Category (RT 1-3)
• Indoor Amusement/Entertainment/Assembly Place – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Indoor Sports Facility (No Gambling) – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
80
• Athletic Club/Fitness Center – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Fraternal Organizations/Clubs/Lodges – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Campground and Travel Trailer Park; Outdoor Sport and Amusement Facilities
Conducted for Profit; Golf Course; Country Club; Open Air or Drive-In Theater or Other Open Air Places of
Entertainment; Bath House, for Non-Commercial Purposes.
Miscellaneous Use Category (RT 1-3)
• Mortuary, Undertaking or Funeral Establishment – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Place for Exhibition, Lettering or Sale of Gravestones – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Filling or Other Earthmoving Activities – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Road and Driveway Construction – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Medium-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board Required.
• Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board Required.
• Structures Accessory to Permitted Uses – Route One Use Permit from either Planning Board or CEO required,
based on permitting procedure required for primary use. Also, if the principal structure or principal use is a
dwelling unit, an accessory structure shall not have cooking facilities and shall not have more than one of the
following: living facilities, sanitary facilities or sleeping facilities.
• Accessory Uses Customarily Incident to Allowed Uses – Route One Use Permit from either Planning Board or
CEO required, based on permitting procedure required for primary use.
• Uses Similar to Permitted Uses – Route One Use Permit from either Planning Board or CEO required based on
permitting procedure for the use to which it is similar.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Piers, Docks, Wharves, Breakwaters, Causeways, Bridges and Other Structures
and Uses Extending Over or Below the Normal High Water Mark; Flea Markets; Casino; Head Shop; Obscene
Exhibitions; Dumps; Billboards; Uses Similar to Prohibited Uses; All Other Uses.
- AMENDED 11/06/2012, 11/06/2018
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
81
Permitted Uses in Route One-4
Residential Use Category (RT 1-4) - AMENDED 05/19/2012
• Single-Family Dwelling
• Two-Family Dwelling
• Multi-Family Dwelling
• Boarding House
• Bed & Breakfast
• Elderly Housing
• Elderly Congregate Housing – East of Route One only.
Commercial Use Category (RT 1-4)
• Service Businesses – With Less than 5,000 square feet of floor space. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board
required.
• Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise – With Less than 20,000 square feet of floor space. Store with less than 5,000
square feet of floor space may also produce goods on site, provided such are sold on site and the production area
is smaller in size than the retail area. Store with 5,000 square feet or more of floor space requires a Special
Exception from the Board of Appeals per Article 18. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Shopping Center – Provided no single store for retail sale of merchandise exceeds size limitations of zoning
district. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Banks, With or Without Drive-Through Windows – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Motels/Hotels – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Small Lodging and Tourist Homes/Inns – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Restaurants –Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Ice Cream Stands – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Animal Boarding (Commercial) –Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Commercial Schools – With Less than 5,000 square feet of floor space. Boarding of students is prohibited. Route
One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Day Care Center –Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Fruit and Vegetable Produce Stores – With Less than 5,000 square feet of floor space. Route One Use Permit
from Planning Board required.
• Parking Lot Owned or Managed by a Non-Public Entity for Commercial Purposes, Provided there is No Parking
Garage – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Artisanal Food and/or Beverage Facility (Not to exceed 5,000 square feet) – Retail Sales of Merchandise as part
of this use shall not supersede 2,500 square feet of gross floor area. Route One Use Permit from the Planning
Board is required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Grocery Store; Laundries and Dry Cleaning Facilities; Store for Retail Sale of
Merchandise such as but not limited to Lumber Yards and Building Supply Yards; Plumbing, Electrical or
Carpentry Shop or Other Similar Service or Repair Establishment; Fast Food Restaurants, whether the use is a
principal use or an accessory use; Formula Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an accessory use
(except that a grocery store or a retail store which sells food shall be permitted to make and serve prepared food
or other such products prepared primarily with foods which it sells in the store, that are prepared on-site, for
consumption off-site); Truck Stops; Marinas; Garden Centers; Animal Grooming; Animal
Hospitals/Veterinarians; Animal Retail Sales; Medical Marijuana Registered Caregiver Retail Stores; Medical
Marijuana Manufacturing Facility; Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary; Medical Marijuana Testing Facilities.
- AMENDED 11/04/2014, 05/16/2015, 11/05/2019
Office Use Category (RT 1-4)
• Business, Financial, Professional or Government Offices, Except Town of York or York School District Offices
– Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required. If more than 5,000 square feet of floor space, then a
Special Exception from the Board of Appeals per Article 18 is also required.
• Town of York or York School District Offices – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Laboratory or Research Facility; Radio or Television Studio.
Civic & Public Use Category (RT 1-4)
• Civic Use
• Cultural Facility – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Essential Services – Route One Use Permit from CEO required, unless essential services proposed are in
conjunction with a Planning Board application.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
82
• Hospitals
• Medical Facility – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Membership Organization - Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Municipal Use - Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Nursing Homes
• Religious Use - Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• School - With Less than 5,000 square feet of floor space. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Utility District – Route One Use Permit from CEO Required.
- AMENDED 11/06/2012
Industrial Use Category (RT 1-4)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Printing, Binding, Publishing and Related Arts and Trades; Machine Shop,
Assembly, Packaging, Wood Fabrication, or Manufacturing; Warehouse or Distribution Facilities; Wholesale
Business and Storage in a Roofed Structure; Self-Storage Facilities; Waste Transfer Facility, Commercial; Waste
Processing or Disposal Facilities, Commercial; Bulk Fuel Storage; Truck Terminals.
Vehicular Use Category (RT 1-4)
• Sale of Pickup Coaches/Campers, Tent Trailers and Similar Equipment Including Snowmobile – Sale of
recreational vehicles, such as campers, tent trailers and similar accessory equipment, but not including
snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles or similar motorized vehicles, is permitted only as an accessory use to an
approved campground. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Vehicle Service Stations, Auto Repair Garages; Auto Body Repair Shops; Sale,
Rental and Accessory Storage of Automobiles, Light Trucks, Motorcycles, and Mopeds Conducted Wholly or
Partially on Open Lots; Place for Repair, Sale, Rental or Storage of Pleasure Boats; Salvage Yards, Junk Yards,
Wrecking Yards; Car Washing Establishment.
Rural & Agricultural Use Category (RT 1-4)
• Soil and Water Conservation Practices – Conducted in accordance with the standards of the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service including but not limited to creation and maintenance of farm ponds for
agricultural purposes. Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• General Purpose Farm, Agriculture and Nurseries – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Timber Harvesting – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Forest Management Activities Except for Timber Harvesting – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Sale of Produce Raised on Same Premises – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Wildlife Management Practices – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Animal Breeding (Small Domestic Animals) – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Harvesting of Wild Crops – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Mineral Exploration; Sand/Gravel Pits, Quarries, etc.; Aquaculture.
Recreation & Amusement Use Category (RT 1-4)
• Campground and Travel Trailer Park – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Indoor Amusement/Entertainment/Assembly Place (Enclosed) – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board
required.
• Indoor Sports Facility (No Gambling) – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Athletic Club/Fitness Center – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Outdoor Sport and Amusement Facilities Conducted for Profit – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board
required. Structures that are greater than 35 feet in height shall be located only east of Route One, shall maintain
a minimum setback of 200 feet from Route One, and shall allow public use of an access road from Route One to
the York Beach area.
• Golf Course – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Country Club – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Open Air or Drive-In Theater or Other Open Air Places of Entertainment – Route One Use Permit from
Planning Board required.
• Fraternal Organizations/Clubs/Lodges – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Bath House, for Non-Commercial Purposes – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: n.a.
Miscellaneous Use Category (RT 1-4)
• Filling or Other Earthmoving Activities – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
83
• Medium-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board Required.
• Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board Required.
• Road and Driveway Construction – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Structures Accessory to Permitted Uses – Route One Use Permit from either Planning Board or CEO required,
based on permitting procedure required for primary use. Also, if the principal structure or principal use is a
dwelling unit, an accessory structure shall not have cooking facilities and shall not have more than one of the
following: living facilities, sanitary facilities or sleeping facilities.
• Accessory Uses Customarily Incident to Allowed Uses – Route One Use Permit from either Planning Board or
CEO required, based on permitting procedure required for primary use.
• Uses Similar to Permitted Uses – Route One Use Permit from either Planning Board or CEO required based on
permitting procedure for the use to which it is similar.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Piers, Docks, Wharves, Breakwaters, Causeways, Bridges and Other Structures
and Uses Extending Over or Below the Normal High Water Mark; Flea Markets; Casino; Mortuary, Undertaking
or Funeral Establishment; Place for Exhibition, Lettering or Sale of Gravestones; Head Shop; Obscene
Exhibitions; Dumps; Billboards; Uses Similar to Prohibited Uses; All Other Uses.
- AMENDED 11/06/2012, 11/06/2018
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
84
Permitted Uses in Route One-5
Residential Use Category (RT 1-5) - AMENDED 05/19/2012
• Single-Family Dwelling
• Two-Family Dwelling
• Multi-Family Dwelling
• Boarding House
• Bed & Breakfast
• Elderly Housing
Commercial Use Category (RT 1-5)
• Service Businesses – With Less than 2,500 square feet of floor space. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board
required.
• Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise – With Less than 2,500 square feet of floor space. Store may also produce
goods on site, provided such are sold on site and the production area is smaller in size than the retail area. Route
One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Shopping Center – Provided no single store for retail sale of merchandise exceeds size limitations of zoning
district. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Banks, With or Without Drive-Through Windows – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Grocery Store – With Less than 5,000 square feet of floor space. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board
required.
• Plumbing, Electrical or Carpentry Shop or Other Similar Service or Repair Establishment – With Less than 2,500
square feet of floor space. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Small Lodging and Tourist Homes/Inns – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Restaurants – With Less than 2,500 square feet of floor space. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board
required.
• Ice Cream Stands – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Garden Centers – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Animal Grooming – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Animal Hospitals/Veterinarians – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Animal Retail Sales – With Less than 2,500 square feet of floor space. Route One Use Permit from Planning
Board required.
• Commercial Schools – With Less than 5,000 square feet of floor space. Boarding of students is prohibited. Route
One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Day Care Center – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Fruit and Vegetable Produce Stores – With Less than 2,500 square feet of floor space. Route One Use Permit
from Planning Board required.
• Artisanal Food and/or Beverage Facility (Not to exceed 2,500 square feet of floor space). Route One Use Permit
from the Planning Board is required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Laundries and Dry Cleaning Facilities; Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise such
as but not limited to Lumber Yards and Building Supply Yards; Motels/Hotels; Fast Food Restaurants, whether
the use is a principal use or an accessory use; Formula Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an
accessory use (except that a grocery store or a retail store which sells food shall be permitted to make and serve
prepared food or other such products prepared primarily with foods which it sells in the store, that are prepared
on-site, for consumption off-site); Truck Stops; Marinas; Animal Boarding (Commercial); Parking Lot Owned or
Managed by a Non-Public Entity for Commercial Purposes, Provided there is No Parking Garage; Medical
Marijuana Registered Caregiver Retail Stores; Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facility; Medical Marijuana
Registered Dispensary; Medical Marijuana Testing Facilities.
- AMENDED 11/04/2014, 05/16/2015, 11/05/2019
Office Use Category (RT 1-5)
• Business, Financial, Professional or Government Offices, Except Town of York or York School District Offices
– With less than 5,000 square feet of floor space. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Town of York or York School District Offices – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Laboratory or Research Facility; Radio or Television Studio.
Civic & Public Use Category (RT 1-5)
• Civic Use
• Cultural Facility – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
85
• Essential Services – Route One Use Permit from CEO required, unless essential services proposed are in
conjunction with a Planning Board application.
• Hospitals
• Medical Facility – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Membership Organization - Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Municipal Use - Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Nursing Homes – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Religious Use - Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• School - With Less than 5,000 square feet of floor space. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Utility District – Route One Use Permit from CEO Required.
- AMENDED 11/06/2012
Industrial Use Category (RT 1-5)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Printing, Binding, Publishing and Related Arts and Trades; Machine Shop,
Assembly, Packaging, Wood Fabrication, or Manufacturing; Warehouse or Distribution Facilities; Wholesale
Business and Storage in a Roofed Structure; Self-Storage Facilities; Waste Transfer Facility, Commercial; Waste
Processing or Disposal Facilities, Commercial; Bulk Fuel Storage; Truck Terminals.
Vehicular Use Category (RT 1-5)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Vehicle Service Stations, Auto Repair Garages; Auto Body Repair Shops; Sale,
Rental and Accessory Storage of Automobiles, Light Trucks, Motorcycles, and Mopeds Conducted Wholly or
Partially on Open Lots; Sale of Pickup Coaches/Campers, Tent Trailers and Similar Equipment Including
Snowmobile; Place for Repair, Sale, Rental or Storage of Pleasure Boats; Salvage Yards, Junk Yards, Wrecking
Yards; Car Washing Establishment.
Rural & Agricultural Use Category (RT 1-5)
• Soil and Water Conservation Practices – Conducted in accordance with the standards of the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service including but not limited to creation and maintenance of farm ponds for
agricultural purposes. Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• General Purpose Farm, Agriculture and Nurseries – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Timber Harvesting – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Forest Management Activities Except for Timber Harvesting – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Sale of Produce Raised on Same Premises – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Wildlife Management Practices – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Animal Breeding (Small Domestic Animals) – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Harvesting of Wild Crops – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Mineral Exploration; Sand/Gravel Pits, Quarries, etc.; Aquaculture.
Recreation & Amusement Use Category (RT 1-5)
• Fraternal Organizations/Clubs/Lodges – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Campground and Travel Trailer Park; Indoor Sports Facility (No Gambling);
Athletic Club/Fitness Center; Indoor Amusement/Entertainment/Assembly Place; Outdoor Sport and
Amusement Facilities Conducted for Profit; Golf Course; Country Club; Open Air or Drive-In Theater or Other
Open Air Places of Entertainment; Bath House, for Non-Commercial Purposes.
Miscellaneous Use Category (RT 1-5)
• Filling or Other Earthmoving Activities – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Road and Driveway Construction – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Medium-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board Required.
• Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board Required.
• Structures Accessory to Permitted Uses – Route One Use Permit from either Planning Board or CEO required,
based on permitting procedure required for primary use. Also, if the principal structure or principal use is a
dwelling unit, an accessory structure shall not have cooking facilities and shall not have more than one of the
following: living facilities, sanitary facilities or sleeping facilities.
• Accessory Uses Customarily Incident to Allowed Uses – Route One Use Permit from either Planning Board or
CEO required, based on permitting procedure required for primary use.
• Uses Similar to Permitted Uses – Route One Use Permit from either Planning Board or CEO required based on
permitting procedure for the use to which it is similar.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
86
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Piers, Docks, Wharves, Breakwaters, Causeways, Bridges and Other Structures
and Uses Extending Over or Below the Normal High Water Mark; Flea Markets; Casino; Mortuary, Undertaking
or Funeral Establishment; Place for Exhibition, Lettering or Sale of Gravestones; Head Shop; Obscene
Exhibitions; Dumps; Billboards; Uses Similar to Prohibited Uses; All Other Uses.
- AMENDED 11/06/2012, 11/06/2018
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
87
Permitted Uses in Route One-6
Residential Use Category (RT 1-6) - AMENDED 05/19/2012
• Single-Family Dwelling
• Two-Family Dwelling
• Multi-Family Dwelling
• Boarding House
• Bed & Breakfast
• Elderly Housing
Commercial Use Category (RT 1-6)
• Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise – With Less than 5,000 square feet of floor space. Store may also produce
goods on site, provided such are sold on site and the production area is smaller in size than the retail area. Route
One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Grocery Store – With Less than 5,000 square feet of floor space. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board
required.
• Motels/Hotels – A Motel/Hotel only may have a restaurant(s), retail store(s), service business(es) and/or indoor
amusement/entertainment/assembly uses as accessory uses. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board
required.
• Small Lodging and Tourist Homes/Inns – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Garden Centers – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Animal Boarding (Commercial) – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Animal Grooming – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Animal Hospitals/Veterinarians – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Animal Retail Sales – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Commercial Schools – With Less than 5,000 square feet of floor space. Boarding of students is prohibited. Route
One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Day Care Center – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Service Businesses; Shopping Center; Banks; Laundries and Dry Cleaning
Facilities; Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise such as but not limited to Lumber Yards and Building Supply
Yards; Plumbing, Electrical or Carpentry Shop or Other Similar Service or Repair Establishment; Restaurants;
Fast Food Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an accessory use; Formula Restaurants, whether the
use is a principal use or an accessory use (except that a grocery store or a retail store which sells food shall be
permitted to make and serve prepared food or other such products prepared primarily with foods which it sells
in the store, that are prepared on-site, for consumption off-site); Ice Cream Stands; Truck Stops; Marinas; Fruit
and Vegetable Produce Stores; Parking Lot Owned or Managed by a Non-Public Entity for Commercial Purposes,
Provided there is No Parking Garage; Medical Marijuana Registered Caregiver Retail Stores; Medical Marijuana
Manufacturing Facility; Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary; Medical Marijuana Testing Facilities; Artisanal
Food and/or Beverage Facility.
- AMENDED 11/04/2014, 05/16/2015, 11/05/2019
Office Use Category (RT 1-6)
• Business, Financial, Professional or Government Offices, Except Town of York or York School District Offices
– Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required. If more than 5,000 square feet of floor space, then a
Special Exception from the Board of Appeals per Article 18 is also required.
• Town of York or York School District Offices – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Laboratory or Research Facility – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Radio or Television Studio.
Civic & Public Use Category (RT 1-6)
• Civic Use
• Cultural Facility – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Essential Services – Route One Use Permit from CEO required, unless essential services proposed are in
conjunction with a Planning Board application.
• Hospitals
• Medical Facility – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Membership Organization - Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Municipal Use - Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Nursing Homes – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
88
• Religious Use - Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• School - With Less than 5,000 square feet of floor space. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Utility District – Route One Use Permit from CEO Required.
- AMENDED 11/06/2012
Industrial Use Category (RT 1-6)
• Printing, Binding, Publishing and Related Arts and Trades – An industrial use shall only be located in an area that
can provide 100 feet of natural screening or an amount of planted vegetation along Route One. An individual
industrial use shall not have more than 30,000 square feet of floor space unless the Board of Appeals grants a
Special Exception pursuant to Article 18. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Machine Shop, Assembly, Packaging, Wood Fabrication, or Manufacturing – An industrial use shall only be
located in an area that can provide 100 feet of natural screening or an amount of planted vegetation along Route
One. An individual industrial use shall not have more than 30,000 square feet of floor space unless the Board of
Appeals grants a Special Exception pursuant to Article 18. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Warehouse or Distribution Facilities – An industrial use shall only be located in an area that can provide 100 feet
of natural screening or an amount of planted vegetation along Route One. An individual industrial use shall not
have more than 30,000 square feet of floor space unless the Board of Appeals grants a Special Exception pursuant
to Article 18. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Wholesale Business and Storage in a Roofed Structure – An industrial use shall only be located in an area that can
provide 100 feet of natural screening or an amount of planted vegetation along Route One. An individual
industrial use shall not have more than 30,000 square feet of floor space unless the Board of Appeals grants a
Special Exception pursuant to Article 18. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Self-Storage Facilities – An industrial use shall only be located in an area that can provide 100 feet of natural
screening or an amount of planted vegetation along Route One. An individual industrial use shall not have more
than 30,000 square feet of floor space unless the Board of Appeals grants a Special Exception pursuant to Article
18. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Waste Transfer Facility, Commercial; Waste Processing or Disposal Facilities,
Commercial; Bulk Fuel Storage; Truck Terminals.
Vehicular Use Category (RT 1-6)
• Sale of Pickup Coaches/Campers, Tent Trailers and Similar Equipment Including Snowmobile – Sale of
recreational vehicles, such as campers, tent trailers and similar accessory equipment, but not including
snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles or similar motorized vehicles, is permitted only as an accessory use to an
approved campground. Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Vehicle Service Stations, Auto Repair Garages; Auto Body Repair Shops; Sale,
Rental and Accessory Storage of Automobiles, Light Trucks, Motorcycles, and Mopeds Conducted Wholly or
Partially on Open Lots; Place for Repair, Sale, Rental or Storage of Pleasure Boats; Salvage Yards, Junk Yards,
Wrecking Yards; Car Washing Establishment.
Rural & Agricultural Use Category (RT 1-6)
• Soil and Water Conservation Practices – Conducted in accordance with the standards of the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service including but not limited to creation and maintenance of farm ponds for
agricultural purposes. Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• General Purpose Farm, Agriculture and Nurseries – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Timber Harvesting – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Forest Management Activities Except for Timber Harvesting – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Sale of Produce Raised on Same Premises – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Wildlife Management Practices – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Animal Breeding (Small Domestic Animals) – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Harvesting of Wild Crops – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Mineral Exploration; Sand/Gravel Pits, Quarries, etc.; Aquaculture.
Recreation & Amusement Use Category (RT 1-6)
• Campground and Travel Trailer Park – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Indoor Sports Facility (No Gambling) – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Athletic Club/Fitness Center – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Golf Course – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Country Club – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
• Fraternal Organizations/Clubs/Lodges – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board required.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
89
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Indoor Amusement/Entertainment/Assembly Place; Outdoor Sport and
Amusement Facilities Conducted for Profit; Open Air or Drive-In Theater or Other Open Air Places of
Entertainment; Bath House, for Non-Commercial Purposes.
Miscellaneous Use Category (RT 1-6)
• Filling or Other Earthmoving Activities – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Road and Driveway Construction – Route One Use Permit from CEO required.
• Medium-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board Required.
• Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System – Route One Use Permit from Planning Board Required.
• Structures Accessory to Permitted Uses – Route One Use Permit from either Planning Board or CEO required,
based on permitting procedure required for primary use. Also, if the principal structure or principal use is a
dwelling unit, an accessory structure shall not have cooking facilities and shall not have more than one of the
following: living facilities, sanitary facilities or sleeping facilities.
• Accessory Uses Customarily Incident to Allowed Uses – Route One Use Permit from either Planning Board or
CEO required, based on permitting procedure required for primary use.
• Uses Similar to Permitted Uses – Route One Use Permit from either Planning Board or CEO required based on
permitting procedure for the use to which it is similar.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Piers, Docks, Wharves, Breakwaters, Causeways, Bridges and Other Structures
and Uses Extending Over or Below the Normal High Water Mark; Flea Markets; Casino; Mortuary, Undertaking
or Funeral Establishment; Place for Exhibition, Lettering or Sale of Gravestones; Head Shop; Obscene
Exhibitions; Dumps; Billboards; Uses Similar to Prohibited Uses; All Other Uses.
- AMENDED: Entire §4.1 Replaced 11/08/2011, 11/06/2012, 11/06/2018
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
90
4.2 Prohibited Uses (Applicable to RES-5, RES-6, RES-7 and BUS-3)
4.2.1 No use, whether permitted or conditional, shall be allowed on the seaward side of:
4.2.1.1 Long Beach Avenue where it borders the beach with the exception of public bathhouse facilities as
approved by the Planning Board, the Board of Selectmen and the Legislative Body and signs as
approved by the Planning Board and the Board of Selectmen.
4.2.1.2 Ocean Avenue Extension from its intersection with Willow Avenue to Lot No. 136 (Page 25 of the
Town of York map).
4.2.1.3 Ocean Avenue bounded by the northeast boundary line of Short Sands Park south to the juncture of
Ocean Avenue Extension without the approval of:
a. Sands Park: The Park Trustees and the Planning Board.
b. Adjoining beach and land of the Town of York: The Planning Board, the Board of Selectmen
and the Legislative Body.
4.2.2 No use, whether permitted or conditional, shall be allowed on Sohier Park property without approval of
the Sohier Park Committee, the Planning Board, the Board of Selectmen and the Legislative Body.
4.3 Additional Requirements
A. Shoreland/Wetland Permits (All Districts): Certain activities within designated shoreland or wetland areas require
a special permit. See Articles: 4 (Use Regulations); 8 (Shoreland Overlay District); and 11 (Wetlands Protection
Overlay District.
B. Watershed Protection Overlay District (RES-2, GEN-1, GEN-2 Districts): Certain activities within the
Watershed Protection Overlay District require a permit from either the Planning Board or Code Enforcement
Officer. See Article 10.
C. Planning Board Subdivision/Site plan Review (All Districts): Subdivision/Site Plan approval is required from the
Planning Board for:
1. All non-residential development, except that which must receive an Article 18 Route One Use Permit,
which is greater than 5,000 square feet of floor space; or
2. The construction of 3 or more units for lease, rent or sale; or
3. The development of 3 or more residential house lots.
D. Route One Use Permit (Route One-1, Route One-2, Route One-3, Route One-4, Route One-5, Route One-6
Districts): Certain activities within the Route One Districts require a Route One Use Permit from the Planning
Board or Code Enforcement Officer. See Articles: 4 (Use Regulations); 6.3 (Supplemental Use Requirements);
and 18.1 (Administration).
E. York Harbor Site Design Review (RES-4, BUS-1, BUS-2 Districts): The Board of Design Review reviews all nonresidential
development within the confines of Zoning Districts RES-4, BUS-1 and BUS-2. See §18.9.
F. York Beach Design Review Standards (YBVC District): See §6.4.
- AMENDED §4.3 Added 11/08/2011
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
91
ARTICLE FIVE
DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
5.1 General Requirements
5.1.1 All structures must be located in accordance with the front yard, rear yard and side yard minimum setbacks listed in
Section 5.2.1 and 5.2.2 below. Exempted from these yard setback requirements are fences, walls, utility poles, and
sign poles which are regulated by Article 16. Unenclosed stairs or ramps projecting less than 10 feet from the
structure shall not be considered part of the structure for the purposes of determining setback requirements.
5.1.2 Awnings are exempt from setbacks and lot coverage if they:
5.1.2.1 extend no more than five feet from the building;
5.1.2.2 are contained entirely on the lot on which they building is located, except that awnings may project over Townowned
sidewalks;
5.1.2.3 are not enclosed;
5.1.2.4 have a minimum clearance of seven feet from the sidewalk, except the bottom of the valance of canvas awnings
may extend six feet nine inches above the walk; and
5.1.2.5 obtain a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer.
5.1.3 Fire escapes may be exempted from setbacks and lot coverage if the appropriate Town Fire Inspector or Code
Enforcement Officer agree a second fire exit is necessary. This exemption shall only allow for the minimum safe
fire exit in cases where no other practical alternative exists.
5.1.4 Projecting overhangs such as porches, bay windows, or other objects projecting two feet or more shall be included
in the foundation coverage calculation. Roof overhangs and steps shall be excluded from this calculation.
5.1.5 Height and Setback Exceptions
5.1.5.1 Height Exception.
a. The limitations on "Maximum Building and Structure Height" stated in Section 5.2 (Schedule of Dimensional
Regulations) shall not apply to the height of: distribution and transmission lines and poles, substations or
their appurtenances when used by public utilities in the distribution and transmission of electricity. When
said proposed lines, poles, substations and appurtenances exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height, a permit is
required to be issued by the Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue the
permit when the Officer has determined that the proposed height of the poles, lines, substations or
appurtenances meet or exceed the National Electric Safety Code standards, the standard requirements of the
utility and will not impose an adverse impact on public safety. - AMENDED 12/29/1993, 11/05/1996,
05/22/2004, 11/02/2004
b. Where located outside the Shoreland Overlay District, the limitations on "Maximum Building and
Structure Height" stated in Section 5.2 (Schedule of Dimensional Regulations) altered if granted a Special
Exception by the Board of Appeals in accordance with §18.8.2.2.B and in accordance with the limits
provided below.
1. Public Water Supply Facilities. Public water supply facilities for the storage and/or distribution
of water, where the need for the height of the facility is demonstrated in a master plan for the
water system, adopted by the body that runs the water system.
2. Barns and Silos for Agricultural and/or Animal Husbandry Purposes. The height of these
buildings may be increased to a maximum of 50’, provided the applicant demonstrates why the
35’ height limit causes some sort of practical difficulty. Additionally, the barn or silo cannot be
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
92
converted to another use, nor used for the co-location of wireless communications facilities for a
minimum of 10 years.
3. Church Steeples. The measure of the height of a building used as a church shall exclude the
steeple. Church steeples may be permitted to be not more than 80’ in height, provided that the
design results in a church that is in scale with the surrounding neighborhood and traditional church
architecture of this area. - AMENDED 11/02/2004, 11/03/2009
4. Auditoriums, theaters, gymnasiums, or similar facilities at the site of existing public school
buildings. Building height may be increased to a maximum of 45 feet, provided the applicant
demonstrates that the increase in height limit within the base zone is integral to the functional and
technical purposes of the building as demonstrated by a Registered Design Professional. -
AMENDED 01/30/2016
5.1.5.2 Setback Exception. The following types of structures shall be exempt from structure setbacks established in §5.2.1,
5.2.2, and 5.2.4: sidewalks, driveways, mailboxes, septic systems, utility poles, utility lines, flag poles, fences less
than 8 feet tall, pergolas less than 8 feet tall, and retaining walls less than 4 feet tall. - AMENDED 05/20/2000,
05/22/2004, 05/19/2012
5.1.5.3 Special Exception for Front Setback.
The following shall not apply to BUS-1, BUS-2, or RES-4 zones.
a. Purpose. In order to allow consistent and fair residential development patterns, a dwelling unit may be
permitted to be built or expanded with a front setback reduced, if granted by special exception.
b. Special Exception. If granted a Special Exception, dwellings units may be permitted to be built or
expanded with a front setback from the street line equal to the average front setbacks of the existing
houses on the adjacent lots. If one of the adjacent lots is a vacant lot, contains a non-residential use, or
has it’s street frontage on a different street than the proposed lot for construction, it shall be considered
to have a structure built at the minimum front setback for that zone for the purposes of this calculation.
The Board of Appeals shall grant the Special Exception only when all of the following conditions are met:
1. In the Growth Area as designated in the Comprehensive Plan, adjacency shall be considered the lots
on the same and the facing sides of the street where the proposed dwelling unit’s lot has street frontage,
within a radius of 125’ from the lot boundary.
2. In the Rural Area as designated in the Comprehensive Plan, adjacency shall be considered the lots on
the same and the facing sides of the street where the proposed dwelling unit’s lot has street frontage,
within a radius of 200’ from the lot boundary.
3. The reduced setback shall not be less than 15’ in any case.
- AMENDED 11/05/1996, 05/22/2004, 05/17/2008
5.1.5.4 In the Route One-4 Tourism/Recreation Zoning District, structures which qualify as outdoor sport and amusement
facilities conducted for profit which require a structure height of greater than thirty-five feet as an operational necessity
for the amusement shall be exempt from the thirty-five foot building height limitation. All such structures shall be
setback an additional five feet from all required minimum property line setbacks for the Route One-4 zoning district
for each 2 feet in structure height greater than thirty-five feet. Such structures shall only be located on the east side of
Route One and shall maintain a minimum setback of 200 feet from Route One. - AMENDED 11/05/1996
5.1.5.5 Setback Exceptions for Ground-mounted Mechanicals Adjacent to Residential Buildings
Ground-mounted mechanical units adjacent to residential buildings shall be exempt from structure setback
requirements established in §5.2.1, §5.2.2, and §5.2.4 when the following conditions are met:
1. The unit is as close to the house as the manufacturers specifications or Town code allows.
2. There is no reasonable option to locate the unit in a conforming location.
3. If there is more than one location that the unit can be placed, the location shall be that location expected to
have the least adverse impact on neighbors.
4. Must adhere to the Noise Ordinance.
5. Must have adequate screening for sound and aesthetics as determined by the Code Enforcement Office.
6. In no case may the side or rear setback be less than 5 feet.
7. In no case may the front setback be less than 15 feet.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
93
8. Electric generators shall be used for emergency use only.
Ground-mounted mechanical units shall include, but not be limited to: air conditioning compressors; propane tanks;
oil tanks; and emergency electric generators. - AMENDED 05/22/2010
5.1.6 Reduced Setback for Minor Accessory Structure or Building
To allow added flexibility for smaller buildings in certain zones, the minimum setback for up one minor accessory
structure or building per lot shall be 5’ from any property line rather than the standard setbacks for that base zone, if
the property is located within the Growth Area and is in any of the following base zones: RES 1-A, RES1-B, RES-5,
RES-6, RES-7, YBVC, GEN-3, RT 1-1, RT 1-2, RT 1-3, RT 1-4 or RT 1-5. - AMENDED 11/08/2005, 05/19/2012
5.1.7 Exemption for Water and Sewer Utilities.
Water supply and sewage disposal is provided by quasi-municipal government entities including: York Water District;
Kittery Water District; KK&W Water District; York Sewer District; and Ogunquit Sewer District. Owing to the unique
physical infrastructure requirements for water distribution systems and sewage collection systems, the above-listed
utilities shall be entitled to the following exemptions from dimensional requirements:
A. A one-story, above-ground pump station with a building footprint not to exceed 300 square feet shall only
be required to be set back 10’ from any property line if the building is built to have an appearance similar to
and compatible with nearby buildings and outbuildings.
B. Lot coverage for a property on which a utility easement for a pump stations shall not be required to include
the utility building or associated pavement in the calculation of lot coverage.
C. Lot size requirements shall not apply to lots to be used exclusively for water or sewer pump stations. -
AMENDED 11/08/2005
5.1.8 Corner Clearance Setbacks
To help maintain clear sight distance at street intersections, fences which would obscure sight distance shall be not be
allowed within a triangle adjacent to each street corner. Such triangle shall be defined as having two sides at the inside
edges of the intersecting streets (curb line, or edge of paving or gravel, not the edge of the right-of-way), with the third
side being the triangle’s hypotenuse connecting these two sides. The street sides of this triangle shall be 20’ from the
point of intersection, or in the case of rounded street corners, from the point of intersection of the street edge tangents.
- AMENDED 05/19/2012
5.1.9 Building Height Certification
Proposed buildings within five (5) feet of the maximum building height allowed in this ordinance shall require the
following:
A. Maine-licensed Professional Land Surveyor (PLS) certification regarding the average pre-development
grade of the ground adjoining the building for the purpose of establishing building height (see definition of
Building Height); and
B. Maine-licensed Professional Engineer (PE) or a Maine-licensed Professional Land Surveyor (PLS)
certification regarding the height of the building prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit.
Notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S. § 302, this ordinance amendment shall apply retroactively to any and all
applications accepted by the Planning Board or Code Enforcement Officer on or after April 13, 2016, which is the
date when the first public hearing was posted for the amendment. - AMENDED 11/8/2016
5.2 Schedule of Dimensional Regulations
5.2.1 Residential Districts
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
94
NOTE: Dimensional Regulations for Other Districts (Business, General Development) appear in section 5.2.2;
Shoreland Overlay Districts appear in Article 8; Watershed Overlay District appear in Article 10; and Route
One Districts appear in section 5.2.4
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
RES-2
RES-5
RES-6
ZONING DISTRICT Res-1A s RES-1B RES-3 RES-4 RES-7 AMENDED
Minimum Land Area (Square Feet)
without year-round public water or sewer 87,120 43,560 87,120 43,560 20,000 m
with year-round public water 87,120 43,560 87,120 43,560 20,000 m
with year-round public water and sewer 43,560 s 30,000 43,560 30,000 12,000 m
Minimum Street Frontage (Feet)
without year-round public water or sewer 200 e 125 e 200 e 135 100
with year-round public water 200 e 125 e 200 e 135 100
with year-round public water and sewer 150 e s 100 e 150 e 135 100
Minimum Lot Depth (Feet) None None None 100 None
Minimum Front Yard Setback (Feet)
without year-round public water or sewer 50 k 30 k 50 k 30 20 11/03/2015
with year-round public water 50 k 30 k 50 k 30 20 11/03/2015
with year-round public water and sewer 40 k s 30 k 40 k 30 20 b 11/03/2015
Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet)
without year-round public water or sewer 30 k 20 k 30 k 20 12
with year-round public water 30 k 20 k 30 k 20 12
with year-round public water and sewer 20 k s 20 k 20 k 20 12
Minimum Side Yard Setback (Feet)
without year-round public water or sewer 30 20 30 20 12
with year-round public water 30 20 30 20 12
with year-round public water and sewer 20 s 20 20 20 12
Maximum Coverage (Impervious
Surface Ratio) 25% 25% l 25% l 25% 30 % 11/05/1996
Maximum Building and Structure Height
(Feet)
35 35 35 35 35 12/29/1993
05/22/2004
AMENDED
11/06/2007
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
95
5.2 Schedule of Dimensional Regulations
5.2.2 Other Districts
YVC-1 YVC-2
BUS-1 GEN-1
NEW ZONING DISTRICT BUS-2 YBVC GEN-2 GEN-3
Minimum Land Area (Sq. Feet)
w/o year-round public water or sewer 43,560 20,000 130,680 43,560 20,000 20,000
with year-round public water 43,560 20,000 130,680 43,560 20,000 20,000
with year-round public water and sewer 30,000 5,000 130,860 30,000 5,000 10,000
Minimum Street Frontage (Feet)
w/o year-round public water or sewer 135 100 200 e 125 e 100 100
with year-round public water 135 100 200 e 125 e 100 100
with year-round public water and sewer 135 50 200 e 100 e 50 50
Minimum Lot Depth (Feet) 100 None None None None None
Minimum Front Yard Setback (Feet)
w/o year-round public water or sewer 30 20 b 50 k 30 k N/A 15v
with year-round public water 30 20 b 50 k 30 k N/A 15v
with year-round public water and sewer 30 None 50 k 30 k N/A 15v
Maximum Front Yard Setback (Feet)
N/A N/A N/A N/A 15 v N/A
Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet)
w/o year-round public water or sewer 20 12 30 k 20 k 12 12
with year-round public water 20 12 30 k 20 k 12 12
with year-round public water and sewer 20 10 30 k 20 k 6 12
Minimum Side Yard Setback (Feet)
w/o year-round public water or sewer 20 12 30 k 20 k 12 12
with year-round public water 20 12 30 k 20 k 12 12
with year-round public water and sewer 20 5 t 30 k 20 k 6t 6t
Maximum Coverage (Impervious
Surface Ratio) 25% 100% 25% l 25% l 75% x 75%
Maximum Building and Structure Height
(Feet)
35 35 u 35 35 35
35
Maximum Building Footprint (Square Feet) N/A N/A
N/A N/A 7,000 7,000
AMENDED 12/29/1993, 11/05/1996, 05/22/2004, 11/06/2007, 11/04/2008,
05/21/2016
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
96
5.2 Schedule of Dimensional Regulations
5.2.3 Reserved. - AMENDED 11/04/2008
5.2.4 Route One Zoning Districts
ROUTE ONE
ZONING DISTRICTS ZONE 1 ZONE 2 ZONE 3 ZONE 4 ZONE 5 ZONE 6
Minimum Land Area 2 Acres 1 Acre 2 Acres 2 Acres 1 Acre 2 Acres
Minimum Street Frontage 200’ 150’ 200’ p 200’ 150’ 200’
Minimum Lot Depth NONE NONE NONE NONE NONE NONE
Minimum Front Setback
Non-Residential Use
All Parking Side & Rear 100’ f 50’ f,g 50’ f,g 50’ f,g 30’ f,g 100’ f
80% Parking Side & Rear NA 80’ f,h 80’ f,h 80’ f,h NA NA
Minimum Front Setback
Residential Use 100’ f,r 50’ f,r 50’ f,r 50’ f,r 30’ f,r 100’ f,r
Minimum Side Setback 50’ f 30’ f 30’ f 30’ f 20’ f 50’ f
Minimum Rear Setback 50’ f 30’ f,i 30’ f,i 30’ f,i 20’ f,i 50’ f
Maximum Lot Coverage
Impervious Surface Ratio 25% j 50% j 75% j 60% j 50% j 50% j
Maximum Building and Structure
Height
35’ 35’ 35’ 35’ 35’ 35’
NOTE: These dimensional regulations were adopted on 11/05/1996, AMENDED 05/22/2004
5.2 Schedule of Dimensional Regulations
Note: These footnotes apply to the Dimensional Regulation Tables identified in Sections 5.2.1, 5.2.2, 5.2.3 and 5.2.4
FOOTNOTES
a Reserved. - AMENDED 11/04/2008
b A Municipal Functionally Water Dependent Use in the RES-7 district that contains frontage on Long Beach Avenue and
has year-round public water and sewer shall not be required to meet minimum front yard setback requirements.
- AMENDED 05/17/2008, 11/03/2015
c Reserved. - AMENDED 11/06/2007
d Reserved. - AMENDED 05/09/1992, 11/05/1996, 11/04/2008
e Street Frontage Exemptions - New building lots located at the end of a cul-de-sac may be designed to have less street
frontage than is required in the underlying zoning district but shall comply with the following:
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
97
• Have no less than 50 feet of street frontage along the circumference of the cul-de-sac, provided lot width at the location
where the principal building is to be constructed is at least equal to the distance normally required for lot frontage in
that zoning district.
• The cul-de-sac is constructed to Town road acceptance standards (See Public Road Acceptance Ordinance for culde-
sac construction requirements); and
• All minimum lot line setbacks shall be met. - AMENDED 11/02/1994, 11/05/2019
f Lots of record existing as of March 13, 1982 which are less in area or frontage than the minimum size required shall satisfy
the required front, side and/or rear yard setbacks to the maximum extent possible, but in no case may any structures be
less than one-half the amount of minimum setback required. - AMENDED 11/06/1996
g Provided all parking spaces for a non-residential use are located to the side or rear of the structure, and no parking spaces
are located closer to the front lot line than the front setback of the structure occupied by a non-residential use. A nonresidential
use existing as of November 5, 1996 that does not meet this setback requirement shall not locate any new
parking closer to the front lot line than the existing structure occupied by the non-residential use. - AMENDED
11/05/1996
h A maximum of twenty percent, but no more than ten parking spaces, are permitted directly in front (across front of the
structure from side wall to side wall) of the structure occupied by a non-residential use if this structure is setback a minimum
of eighty feet from the front lot line. All other bulk/common parking spaces, the remaining eighty percent of spaces or
more than ten spaces, shall be located to the sides and rear of this structure and shall not be located closer than seventy
feet to the front lot line. A non-residential use existing as of November 5, 1996 that does not meet this setback requirement
shall not locate any new parking closer to the front lot line than the existing structure occupied by a non-residential use.
- AMENDED 11/05/1996
i A property occupied by a non-residential use that directly abuts a property occupied by a residential use at the time the
non-residential use was initially established, shall maintain a minimum rear setback of fifty feet. Reference standard 6.3.9.2.
The Planning Board, however, may allow the standard minimum rear setback established for the zoning district for an
existing non-residential use if the Board determines it is impractical for the non-residential use to satisfy the fifty foot
setback requirement and the lesser setback will not have a significant adverse impact on abutting uses. - AMENDED
11/05/1996
j Impervious surface ratio for a non-residential use shall be calculated by dividing the total area of all impervious surfaces
on a site by the net buildable site area. Impervious surface ratio for a residential use shall be calculated by dividing the total
area of all impervious surfaces on a site by the total amount of acreage. - AMENDED 11/05/1996
k Reserved. - AMENDED 05/17/2008
l Coverage requirement pertains to non-residential development only.
m See density provisions in Section 5.4.
n Deleted 11/06/01
o Reserved. - AMENDED 05/09/1992, 11/05/1996, 11/04/2008
p The minimum lot frontage for all parcels created after November 5, 1996 that are located from York Street to Raydon
Road shall be 400 feet.
q A structure which qualifies as an outdoor sport and amusement facility conducted for profit which requires a structure
height of greater than thirty-five feet as an operational necessity for the amusement shall be exempt from the thirty-five
foot building height limitation in accordance with Section 5.1.5.4.
r The minimum front setback shall apply only to new primary and accessory structures or expansions of such structures.
The setback does not apply to the location of parking spaces, unless the residence is used as a bed and breakfast or boarding
and rooming house. All parking for these two residential uses shall be set back a minimum of thirty feet from the front
lot line, unless it is a residence being used as a bed and breakfast or boarding house as of November 5, 1996 and the existing
parking area is located closer than thirty feet to the front lot line. All parking for these such uses shall be located no closer
to the front lot line than any existing parking spaces. - AMENDED 11/05/1996
s In the RES-1A base zone, the provisions for reduced lot size, street frontage and setback requirements where public water
and sewer are provided shall apply only within the Growth Area as designated in the Comprehensive Plan. - AMENDED
11/06/2007
t Where the owners of 2 adjoining buildings agree, in writing, to connect their buildings, the side yard setback requirement
may be waived by the Town, provided the Fire Chief with jurisdiction approves the request. The Fire Chief’s decision shall
be based on public safety standards, taking into account life-safety code requirements, ability to access the building inside
and out during an emergency, and other matters relevant to the situation. Lots within the YVC-1 and YVC-2 districts shall
have a minimum side yard setback of 6 feet except that this may be reduced to 0 feet on one side, provided the cumulative
side yard setbacks are not less than 12 feet. - AMENDED 11/04/2008; 05/21/2016
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
98
u The height limit for buildings shall be permitted to increase to 40’ in accordance with the following:
• The building must front on Railroad Avenue, Main Street, Beach Street, Bay Street or Ocean Avenue in the YBVC
District;
• The building must have a peaked (not flat) roof with a minimum pitch of 5:12 for at least 90% of the roof area;
and
• If the building is located in the 100-year floodplain and/or is located below elevation 12’ above mean sea level with
respect to NAVD 1988 (12’ MSL), the building must be floodproofed in accordance with National Flood Insurance
Standards. In such cases, building height shall be measured from the base flood elevation (or 12’ MSL in such
cases) rather than from the average ground elevation.
• Vertical expansion of commercial buildings above 35’ must be NFPA 1 and NFPA 101 compliant to ensure fire
prevention and fire containment are addressed. - AMENDED 11/04/2008
v The maximum front setback of 15 feet may be increased in the YVC-1 district if the space within the setback is devoted
to open air use for the public. Examples may include, but not be limited to, space for outdoor seating, gardens, pocket
parks, green space etc. as approved by the Planning Board. The minimum front setback in the YVC-2 district is 15 feet or
no more than the average depths of adjacent front lots, whichever is less. - AMENDED 05/21/2016
x The maximum lot coverage may be increased up to 100% if the owner provides innovative stormwater design using low
impact development (LID), public space, and/or innovative landscape design as approved by the Planning Board.
- AMENDED 05/21/2016
5.3 Minimum Floor Area
5.3.1 Provisions Applicable to RES-5, RES-6, RES-7, YBVC Districts - AMENDED 11/04/2008
5.3.1.1 The minimum square feet of ground floor living space of residential dwellings, not including porches, patios and
similar areas whether or not enclosed shall be 600 sq. ft. - AMENDED 11/07/1995
5.3.2 Provisions Applicable to RES-4, BUS-1, BUS-2 Districts
No new dwelling shall be built and no existing building shall be remodeled to create additional dwelling units with
less than seven hundred (700) square feet of ground floor living space per dwelling unit. Single dwelling unit
dwellings being remodeled as single dwelling units are exempt. Dwelling units being remodeled in existing
multiple unit buildings, so as not to increase the number of dwelling units, are exempt. No garage shall be built
with a total ground floor area of less than two hundred and forty (240) square feet.
5.3.3 Provisions Applicable to RES-1, RES-2, RES-3, GEN-1, GEN-2, GEN-3, YVC-1 and YVC-2 Districts
Each dwelling unit in a multi-family dwelling shall have at least 600 square feet of internal habitable floor space
including bathrooms. Six hundred thirty-six (636) gross square feet shall be deemed to be sufficient to support
exterior walls to encompass six hundred (600) square feet of internal floor space. Such dwelling units may be laid
out vertically on more than one floor within a building, but at least four hundred (400) square feet of internal
habitable floor space shall be provided on one of the stories. - AMENDED 05/21/2016
5.3.4 Minimum Floor Area Requirements for Transient Rental Accommodations in Hotels/Motels -
Applicable to All Districts
5.3.4.1 A rental accommodation constructed after November 8, 1995 in a hotel/motel shall have a minimum internal gross
floor area of 250 sq. ft.
5.3.4.2 A hotel/motel accommodation construction prior to November 8, 1995 which has a permitted compact kitchen or
kitchen as previously defined by the Zoning Ordinance which exceeds the maximum size permitted by this
Ordinance, may continue to use such compact kitchen or kitchen in the hotel/motel operation subject to all
requirements established by the Town. Such hotel/motel units shall not be converted to a residential use unless
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
99
such unit satisfies the density requirements for the zone in which the hotel/motel is located. - AMENDED
11/07/1995
5.4 Density
5.4.1 Provisions applicable to RES-1, RES-2, RES-3, GEN-1, GEN-2, GEN-3 Districts
If more than one dwelling unit is constructed on a single lot, the minimum lot size requirement shall be met separately
for each dwelling unit.
5.4.2 Provisions Applicable to RES-5, RES-6, RES-7, BUS-3 Districts
The minimum land area for each year-round and seasonal dwelling unit shall be no less than the area required by
Sections 5.4.2.1 and 5.4.2.2. below or such area as is specified by the Minimum Lot Size Requirement of Title 12
M.R.S.A., whichever is greater.
All lots which do not meet the minimum lot size as specified in the Dimensional Regulations (Section 5.2), and if
any building will be allowed on such lots, it shall be restricted to a one-family dwelling unit as the sole principal
structure.
5.4.2.1 Permanent Dwellings Serviced by both Year-round Public Water and Public Sewer in zones where permitted (see
Article 4):
a. One-family dwellings 12,000 sq. ft. for each dwelling unit
b. Two-family dwellings 9,000 sq. ft. for each dwelling unit
c. Multi-family dwellings 9,000 sq. ft. for each dwelling unit
Zone RES-7)
d. Multi-family dwellings 4,500 sq. ft. for each dwelling unit
(Zone BUS-3)
5.4.2.2 Permanent Dwellings NOT Serviced by Year-round Public Water OR Public Sewer OR Both, in zones where
permitted (see Article 4):
a. One-family dwellings 20,000 sq. ft. for each dwelling unit
b. Two-family dwellings 15,000 sq. ft. for each dwelling unit
c. Multi-family dwellings Prohibited
- AMENDED 11/07/1995
5.4.3 Principal Building or Structure -- Applicable to RES-4, RES-5, RES-6, RES- 7, BUS-1, BUS-2, and YBVC
- AMENDED 11/04/2008
If more than one principal building is constructed on a single lot, the minimum lot size requirement shall be met
separately for each such principal building.
5.4.4 Provisions Applicable to the BUS-1 District for Two-Family and Multi-Family Dwelling Unit Buildings.
Two-family and multi-family dwelling unit buildings shall be permitted only on lots served by public water and public
sewer. One building with two dwelling units shall be allowed on a lot of at least 43,560 sq. ft. (one acre) with frontage
on a street of at least 150 feet. One building with three dwelling units shall be allowed on a lot of at least 65,340 sq.
ft. (one and one-half acres) with frontage on a street of at least 175 feet. One building with four dwelling units shall
be allowed on a lot of at least 87,120 sq. ft. (2 acres) with a frontage on a street of at least 200 feet. Four dwelling
units per building is the maximum density allowed. - AMENDED 12/29/2009
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
100
5.4.5 Suitable Land Calculations - All Districts
No land located below the normal high water mark of coastal waters shall be included as “suitable land” in determining
net residential density for a single family, two-family, or multi-family dwellings or lot coverage for a non-residential
development. - AMENDED 11/07/1995
5.4.6 Reserved. - AMENDED 11/08/2005
5.4.7 Route One Zoning Districts
ZONE LOT SIZE DENSITY
Route One-1 Minimum 2 acre lot size Maximum 1 unit per 2 acres
Route One-2 Minimum 1 acre lot size Maximum 1 unit per acre
Route One-3 Minimum 2 acre lot size Maximum 1 unit per 2 acres
Route One-4 Minimum 2 acre lot size Maximum 1 unit per 2 acres
Route One-5 Minimum 1 acre lot size Maximum 1 unit per acre
Route One-6 Minimum 2 acre lot size Maximum 1 unit per 2 acres
5.4.8 In the Route One-5 Zone, all dwelling units shall satisfy the density provision identified in Section 5.4.7, except no
more than 2 units or a total of 4 bedrooms, whichever is less, are permitted above an approved commercial or office
use regardless of the size of the lot. All units located above an approved commercial use or office use shall be a
minimum of 600 sq. ft. in size.
5.4.9 Conversion to Residential Use – All Districts
Conversion of a property or building from a non-residential use to a residential use with more than one residential unit
shall be permitted only when the proposed residential use is permitted and is in full conformance with all applicable
density standards of the base and relevant overlay zoning districts. - AMENDED 05/17/2003
5.4.10 Possible Density Reduction for Subdivisions
When calculating the density for conventional design subdivisions, reference §7.6.1.A.3 for possible density
reduction. - AMENDED 11/08/2005
5.4.11 Provisions applicable to YBVC District
The following standards shall apply.
a. For mixed-use buildings, serviced by public water and public sewer, the maximum number of dwelling
units shall not be limited by lot size or density limits. The ground floor of mixed use buildings shall be
reserved for commercial use as allowed in the YBVC District.
b. Except as provided in subsection “a” above, if more than one dwelling unit is constructed on a single
lot, the minimum lot size requirement shall be provided for each unit.
c. With respect to applicability of the Town of York Well Ordinance, properties in the YBVC zone shall
be treated in an equivalent manner to properties in the former BUS-3 zone.
- AMENDED 11/04/2008, 05/16/2015
5.4.12 Reserved. - AMENDED 05/21/2016
5.4.13 Apartments Above Businesses in the Route One-2 Zone
In the Route One-2 Zone, for a property served by year-round public water and public sewer, the number of one- and
two-bedroom dwelling units permitted above a commercial use or office use shall not be limited by lot size or the
density limits specified in §5.4.7. The living area associated with all such units, except for areas used for vertical
circulation (stairwells, elevators, etc.), shall be located on the second floor or higher. - AMENDED 11/03/2009
5.4.14 Apartments Above Businesses in the Route One-3 Zone
In the Route One-3 Zone, for a property served by year-round public water and public sewer, the number of dwelling
units permitted above a commercial or office use shall not be limited by lot size or the density limits specified in §5.4.7.
The living area associated with all such units, except for areas used for vertical circulation (stairwells, elevators, etc.),
shall be located on the second floor or higher. - AMENDED 11/03/2009
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
101
5.5 Right-of-Way Standards -- Applicable to All Zoning Districts
5.5.1 New building lots which are created through exemptions in the State Sub-Subdivision Law (gifts to relative, etc.) over
which the Town has no subdivision review authority, shall meet all area and dimensional requirements of this ordinance
except that they may be laid out along private rights of way instead of streets. These rights of way shall be 50 feet wide
and shall meet the following requirements:
5.5.1.1 Roads constructed in rights of way serving one or two lots shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width, have a road base
containing at least 12" of sand and gravel, have a minimum side slope of 2:1 and have adequate culverts and drainage
for stormwater.
5.5.1.2 Roads constructed in rights of way serving three or four lots shall be a minimum of 18 feet in width, have a road base
containing at least 18" of sand and gravel, have a minimum side slope of 2:1 and have adequate culverts and drainage
for stormwater.
5.5.1.3 Roads constructed in rights of way serving five or more lots shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width, have a road base
containing at least 18" of sand and gravel, have a gravel surface of 3" of 3/4" sized crushed stone, have gravel shoulders
three feet wide on both sides, have a minimum side slope of 2:1 and have adequate culverts and drainage for
stormwater.
5.5.2 An existing lot which is not served by a road at the time a Building Permit application to construct a new dwelling unit
is submitted, and for which a recorded plan does not identify a specific road construction standard, or which fronts on
a road that does not meet the following standard, shall construct an access road that is a minimum of 12 feet in width,
has a road base containing at least 12 inches of clean sand and gravel, has a maximum side slope of 2:1 and has adequate
culverts and drainage to manage stormwater. It shall be the responsibility of the individual requesting the permit to
construct a new road or upgrade an existing road to these requirements. The section of road which must be constructed
to these standards is from the road’s point of origin to the driveway entrance along the frontage of the lot for which a
Building
Permit for a new dwelling unit is requested or a length of 600 feet, whichever is less. - AMENDED 11/04/1997
5.6 Amateur Radio Antennas:
5.6.1 Pursuant to this section, and notwithstanding section 21.2, the total height of the antenna and antenna support
structure, for use by FCC licensed amateur radio operators, shall be no greater than sixty-five (65) feet above grade.
- AMENDED 05/09/1992
5.6.2 The antenna support structure shall be located or constrained so that the antenna and antenna support structure
cannot fall outside of the owner's property.
5.6.3 The location of all antenna support structure footings, guys and braces shall meet all setback requirements.
5.6.4 Applications for the building permit shall include:
5.6.4.1 Manufacturer's specifications for the antenna support structure and details of all footings, guys and braces
required.
5.6.4.2 Assurance that the antenna support structure will withstand a wind velocity of at least fifty (50) miles per hour at
any time and a minimum of ninety (90) miles per hour (impact pressure of 32 pounds per square foot) with eight
(8) hours of advanced notice.
5.6.5 The Board of Appeals shall limit its consideration to the following:
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
102
5.6.5.1 The risk of personal injury.
5.6.5.2 The risk of physical damage to surrounding properties.
5.6.5.3 Whether the applicant is taking reasonable steps to minimize any adverse visual or aesthetic impact of the antenna
support structure.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
103
ARTICLE SIX
SUPPLEMENTAL USE REQUIREMENTS
6.1 Non-Residential Performance Standards -- Applicable to RES-1, RES-2, RES-3, YBVC, YVC-1, YVC-2, GEN-
1, GEN-2, and GEN-3 Districts
Any non-residential development and use shall meet or exceed the Performance Standards listed below to the
greatest extent practical. - AMENDED 11/04/2008, 11/03/2009, 05/21/2016
6.1.1 Traffic – See Article 15-A - AMENDED 05/22/2004
6.1.2 Noise. Noise shall be limited in a manner consistent with the Town Noise Ordinance.
6.1.3 Dust, Fumes, Vapors and Gases
Emission of dust, dirt, fly ash, fumes, vapors or gases which could damage human health, animals, vegetation, or
property, or which could soil or stain persons or property, at any point beyond the lot line of the commercial or
industrial establishment creating that emission shall be prohibited. All such activities shall also comply with applicable
Federal and State regulations.
6.1.4 Odor
No land use or establishment shall be permitted to produce offensive or harmful odors perceptible beyond their lot
lines, either at ground or habitable elevation.
6.1.5 Glare
No land use or establishment shall be permitted to produce a strong, dazzling light or reflection of that light beyond
its lot lines onto neighboring properties, or onto any town way so as to impair the vision of the driver of any vehicle
upon that town way. All such activities shall also comply with applicable Federal and State regulations.
6.1.6 Water Run-off
Water run-off shall be minimized and detained on-site if possible or practicable. If it is not possible to detain water onsite,
downstream improvements to the drainageway may be required of the developer to prevent flooding caused by
his project. The natural state of watercourses, swales, floodway, or rights-of-way shall be maintained as nearly as
possible. Design period is a 100 year storm. A Stormwater Management Plan shall be submitted for any application for
development that would increase impervious surface, or involve filling or earth moving activity of more than 10 cubic
yards. - AMENDED 11/04/2008
6.1.7 Erosion Control
Erosion of soil and sedimentation of watercourses and waterbodies shall be minimized by employing the following
"best management" practices:
6.1.7.1 Stripping of vegetation, soil removal, and regrading or other development shall be accomplished in such a way as to
minimize erosion.
6.1.7.2 The duration of exposure of the disturbed area shall be kept to a practical minimum.
6.1.7.3 Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect exposed critical areas during development.
6.1.7.4 Permanent (final) vegetation and mechanical erosion control measures shall be installed as soon as practicable after
construction ends.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
104
6.1.7.5 Until a disturbed area is stabilized, sediment in run-off water shall be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment
basins, silt traps, or other acceptable methods as determined by the Planning Board.
6.1.7.6 The top of a cut or bottom of a fill section shall not be closer than ten feet to an adjoining property, unless otherwise
specified by the Planning Board. Extraction operations (sandpits, etc.) shall not be permitted within 100' of any
property line, except as provided for elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance.
6.1.7.7 During grading operations, methods of dust control shall be employed, wherever practicable.
6.1.8 Setbacks and Screening
6.1.8.1 Exposed storage areas, exposed machinery installation, sand and gravel extraction operations, and areas used for the
storage or collection of discarded automobiles, auto parts metal or other articles of salvage or refuse, shall have
sufficient setbacks and screening to provide a visual buffer sufficient to minimize their adverse impact on other land
uses within the development area and surrounding properties; a minimum of a dense evergreen hedge 6 feet or more
in height.
6.1.8.2 Where a potential safety hazard to children would be likely to arise, physical screening sufficient to deter small
children from entering the premises shall be provided and be maintained in good condition.
6.1.8.3 Boundaries with existing residential properties shall be screened with a dense evergreen hedge 6 feet or more in
height. Non-residential developments shall have screening at least twenty (20) feet in depth along all side and rear
lot lines. Screening may include, but not be limited to, evergreen shrubs, trees, fences, earth or wall berms or any
combination thereof, forming a visual barrier not less than six (6) feet in height. (Except, chain-link fencing that
includes interwoven plastic or metallic slats or interwoven fabric shall be prohibited.) The Planning Board, by written
waiver, may reduce the depth of screening to eight (8) feet, if the Planning Board determines that the results of such
waiver will not be inconsistent with the purposes of this ordinance, that the public's health, safety and general welfare
will be adequately protected and that reduction will not significantly deprive neighboring properties of the
protections provided by this ordinance. YVC-1 and YVC-2 districts are exempt from this provision except for lots
within those districts that are adjacent to a residential district; or historic district, site or landmark as designated in
Article 12-Historic and Archeological Resources of this ordinance. - AMENDED 05/21/2016
6.1.8.4 Parking lots shall be landscaped with shrubbery along all lot lines. Large parking lots shall be provided with at least
one tree (of 2" caliper) for every 35 car spaces (4 trees per acre), to be located at representative points throughout
such lots.
6.1.8.5 All parking or storage areas shall be separated from any public street by a landscaped buffer strip at least 15 feet
wide, planted with shade trees (minimum 2" caliper, planted at least every 50 feet along the street frontage) and
dense medium height shrubs (three feet in height, to screen parked vehicles). In the YVC-1 and YVC-2 districts, this
provision shall only apply to storage areas. - AMENDED 05/21/2016
6.1.8.6 All plantings shall be maintained as an effective visual screen. Trees, shrubs, or plants which die shall be replaced
within one growing season.
6.1.9 Explosive Materials
No highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in bulk above ground, unless they are located
in anchored tanks at least seventy-five (75) feet from any lot line, town way, or interior roadway, or 40 feet from lot
line for underground tanks; plus all relevant Federal and State regulations shall also be met.
Propane gas tanks in 100 lb. cylinders (or smaller) shall be exempt from these safety regulations.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
105
6.1.10 Preservation of Landscape
The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar as practicable, by minimizing tree removal, and any grade
changes shall be in keeping with the general appearance of neighboring developed areas.
6.1.11 Chemical/Fuel Storage
All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, chemicals, chemical or industrial wastes, and potentially harmful raw materials,
shall be located on impervious pavement, and shall be completely enclosed by an impervious dike which shall be high
enough to contain the total volume of liquid kept within the storage area, plus the rain fall into this storage area during
a 50-year storm, so that such liquid shall not be able to spill onto or seep into the ground surrounding the paved storage
area. Storage tanks for "home heating oil" and diesel fuel, not exceeding 275 gallons in size, may be exempted from
this requirement, in situations where neither a high seasonal water table (within 15" of the surface) nor rapidly
permeable sandy soils are involved.
6.1.12 Relation of Proposed Building to Environment
Proposed structures shall be related harmoniously to the terrain and to existing buildings in the vicinity that have a
visual relationship to the proposed buildings. The achievement of such relationship may include the enclosure of space
in conjunction with other existing buildings or other proposed buildings and the creation of focal points with respect
to avenues of terrain features or other buildings. In areas with a high concentration of historic properties, the Board
may require new construction to utilize exterior building materials which harmonize with surrounding properties, and
to be designed so as not to be architecturally incompatible in terms of scale, height, window size, and roof pitch.
6.1.12.1 YVC-1 and YVC-2 Non-residential Performance Standards
The Planning Board shall give consideration to how any proposed project within the YVC-1 and YVC-2 districts
enhances the traditional northern New England village character of the York Village Center Districts, in a manner
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. Proposed buildings or other structures must be designed and constructed so
as to respect the historic architectural styles of existing buildings. All new buildings and major renovations will
complement the best village and architectural character in terms of scale, proportion, building height, window size,
roof pitch, and exterior building materials. For major renovations to existing buildings that trigger Planning Board
Review per Article 18.15-E, the removal of distinctive materials or alteration of features that represent the best
architectural character of a property shall be avoided. New buildings shall not diminish the prominence of existing
church steeples or historic markers. The following materials are expressly prohibited from building exteriors in YVC-
1 and YVC-2: vinyl siding, aluminum siding, Exterior Insulation and Finishing System (“EIFS”), foam or PVC
materials. - AMENDED 05/21/2016
6.1.13 Refuse Disposal
The applicant shall provide for the disposal of all solid and liquid wastes on a timely basis and in an environmentally
safe manner. The Board shall consider the impact of particular industrial or chemical wastes or by-products upon the
town's disposal method and/or disposal area (in terms of volume, flammability or toxicity) and may require the
applicant to dispose of such wastes elsewhere, in conformance with all applicable State and Federal regulations. The
Board may require the applicant to specify the amount and exact nature of all industrial or chemical wastes to be
generated by the proposed operation.
6.1.14 Refuse and Recycling Facilities.
For any property on which refuse or recycling containers, including but not limited to dumpsters, are located outside
the building, these shall be screened on all sides by a 6’ tall wooded stockade fence enclosure.
- AMENDED 11/04/2008
6.2 Commercial Development Requirements -- Applicable to RES-1, RES-2, RES-3, YBVC, YVC-1, YVC-2, GEN-
1, GEN-2, and GEN-3 Districts
No residential building may be altered or converted to a commercial use without the required density, setbacks, or
parking. - AMENDED 05/21/2016
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
106
6.3 Performance Standards Applicable to all Non-Residential and Multi-family uses in the Route One-1, Route One-
2, Route One-3, Route One-4, Route One-5 and Route One-6 Zoning Districts. - AMENDED 05/19/2012
All new uses shall meet or exceed all of the Performance Standards listed below. All existing and non-conforming uses
and expansions of existing and non-conforming uses shall meet or exceed all of the Performance Standards listed below
to the greatest extent practical. The York Planning Board shall be responsible for determining the greatest extent
practical.
6.3.1 Traffic and Traffic Routing Requirements – See Article 15-A - AMENDED 05/22/2004
6.3.2 Parking
A non-residential use shall provide an adequate amount of parking for the proposed use, reference Article 15, Town
Zoning Ordinance, to ensure public health, safety and welfare. The design and layout of the parking area shall be
harmonious to the use, structures and site and to abutting uses, structures and sites. The Planning Board encourages
creativity in the design of all parking areas to enhance site appearance, enhance how the site functions, reduce the
total amount of area devoted to parking, reduce the scale and bulk of parking areas, and encourage joint use parking
between adjacent sites. The design and layout shall conform to the following standards. The Planning Board may
allow exceptions to these standards to foster creativity and harmony in layout of the parking areas.
6.3.2.1 A non-residential use which obtains a Route One Use Permit after November 5, 1996 and which occupies a structure
constructed after November 5, 1996 shall strictly comply with parking requirements identified in Town Zoning
Ordinances, Section 5.2.4. - AMENDED 11/05/1996
6.3.2.2 A non-residential use which obtains a Route One Use Permit after November 5, 1996, and that occupies a structure
constructed prior to November 5, 1996 that proposes to expand the existing use or structure or change the use, that
cannot fully satisfy the parking layout requirements identified in Town Zoning Ordinances, Section 5.2.4, shall satisfy
these layout requirements to the greatest extent practical. The Planning Board shall determine when a use cannot
satisfy Section 5.2.4 requirements and any relaxation permitted to the standards identified in 5.2.4. The Planning
Board may require additional or larger plantings, fencing, walls, landscape berms, bufferyards, and similar measures
to compensate for the use not satisfying 5.2.4 requirements.
6.3.3 Noise. Noise shall be limited in a manner consistent with the Town Noise Ordinance.
6.3.4 Dust, Fumes, Vapors and Gases
Emission of dust, dirt, fly ash, fumes, vapors and gases which could endanger human health, animals, vegetation, or
property, or which could soil or stain persons or property, at any point beyond the lot line of the commercial or
industrial establishment creating that emission shall be prohibited. All such activities shall also comply with applicable
Federal and State regulations.
6.3.5 Odor
No land use or establishment shall be permitted to produce offensive or harmful odors perceptible beyond their lot
lines, either at ground or habitable elevation.
6.3.6 Glare/Lighting
No non-residential use shall be permitted to produce a strong, dazzling light or reflection of that light beyond its lot
lines onto neighboring properties, or onto any Town way so as to impair the vision of the driver of any vehicle upon
that Town way. All such activities shall comply with the following Standards:
6.3.6.1 No luminaries, except low intensity landscape lighting, shall be permitted to be located in the bufferyards identified
in 6.3.9.
6.3.6.2 When the light source or luminaries has no cut-off, its maximum permitted illumination shall not exceed .3, and the
maximum permitted height of the luminaries shall not exceed 20’. The maximum permitted illumination is measured
in foot-candles at the interior bufferyard line at ground level. Lighting levels must be measured in foot-candles with
a direct reading portable light meter. The equipment used must allow adequate measures, and all measurements
must be made after dark with the lights on and then again with the lights off. The difference between the two
readings must be compared to the standard for maximum permitted illumination. The method of measurement
shall also apply to Standards 6.3.6.3 and 6.3.6.4.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
107
6.3.6.3 When the light source or luminaries has total cut-off of light at an angle of 90o or greater, its maximum permitted
illumination shall not exceed .75, and the maximum permitted height of the luminaries is 25’.
6.3.6.4 When the light source or luminaries has total cutoff of light at an angle of less than 90o and is located so that the
bare light bulb lamp or light source is completely shielded from the direct view of an observer whose line of sight is
5’ above the ground at the point at which the cutoff angle intersects the ground, its maximum permitted illumination
is 1.0, and the maximum permitted height of the luminaries is 25’.
6.3.7 Water Run-off
Water run-off shall be minimized and detained on-site if possible or practicable. If it is not possible to detain water
on-site, downstream improvements to the drainageway may be required of the developer to prevent flooding caused
by his project. The natural state of watercourses, swales, floodway, or rights-of-way shall be maintained as nearly as
possible. Design period is a 100 year storm. A Stormwater Management Plan shall be submitted for any application
for development that would increase impervious surface, or involve filling or earth moving activity of more than 10
cubic yards. - AMENDED 11/05/1996, 11/04/2008
6.3.8 Erosion Control
Erosion of soil and sedimentation of watercourses and waterbodies shall be minimized by employing the following
“best management” practices:
6.3.8.1 Stripping of vegetation, soil removal, and regrading or other development shall be accomplished in such a way as to
minimize erosion.
6.3.8.2 The duration of exposure of the disturbed area shall be kept to a practical minimum.
6.3.8.3 Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect exposed critical areas during development.
6.3.8.4 Permanent (final) vegetation and mechanical erosion control measures shall be installed as soon as practicable after
construction ends.
6.3.8.5 Until a disturbed area is stabilized, sediment in run-off water shall be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment
basins, silt traps, or other acceptable methods as determined by the Planning Board.
6.3.8.6 The top of a cut or bottom of a fill section shall not be closer than ten feet to an adjoining property, unless otherwise
specified by the Planning Board. Extraction operations (sandpits, etc.) shall not be permitted within 100’ of any
property line, except as provided for elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance.
6.3.8.7 During grading operations, methods of dust control shall be employed, wherever practicable.
6.3.8.8 All applicants shall comply with requirements of the Town’s Addendum A policy for soil and erosion control unless
the Planning Board waives such requirement.
6.3.9. Bufferyards
6.3.9.1 A non-residential use shall maintain bufferyards to provide an undeveloped buffer area. The bufferyard shall be
provided and maintained for the entire length of the respective lot line. The only development permitted in the
bufferyards are: landscaping and fencing required to satisfy 6.3.10 and 6.3.11; landscape lighting; essential utilities
that cannot be located outside of the bufferyard because of site constraints; signage permitted by Article 16; and
points of egress and ingress authorized by the Planning Board.
6.3.9.2 A non-residential use which obtains a Route One Use Permit after November 5, 1996, and which occupies a structure
constructed after November 5, 1996, shall provide the minimum bufferyards identified in the following table:
- AMENDED 11/05/1996
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
108
MINIMUM BUFFERYARD REQUIREMENTS
FOR NON-RESIDENTIAL USES
FRONT SIDE REAR
Route One-1 35’ 1 20’ 1 50’ 1,6
Route One-2 35’ 1 20’ 1 30’ 1,6
Route One-3 35’ 3,4,5 20’ 3,4,5 30’ 3,4,5,6
Route One-4 35’ 20’ 30’ 6
Route One-5 20’ 2 20’ 2 30’ 2
Route One-6 50’ 20’ 50’
1 A minimum naturally vegetated bufferyard of one hundred feet shall be maintained for all frontage along the York
River. This does not apply to projects under municipal or school ownership or control.
2 A minimum naturally vegetated bufferyard of seventy-five feet shall be maintained for all frontage along the Cape
Neddick River. This does not apply to projects under municipal or school ownership or control.
3 A minimum bufferyard of 50’ shall be maintained for all frontage along Route 91 and the Spur Road. On the northeast
side of Route 91 and the Spur Road, this buffer shall remain naturally vegetated.
4 A non-residential use that directly abuts a residential use located on Plaisted Road, North Street, or South Street, shall
maintain a naturally vegetated bufferyard of 50’ for the entire length of the common lot line.
5 A non-residential use that directly abuts Raydon Road Extension shall maintain a natural vegetated buffer of 50’ for
their property line along Raydon Road Extension and all areas of the “duck pond”.
6 Any property which directly abuts Interstate 95 shall maintain a minimum naturally vegetated buffer of 50’ for the
entire length of the lot line which abuts Interstate 95.
6.3.9.3 A non-residential use that obtained a Route One Use Permit prior to November 5, 1996 or that occupies a structure
constructed prior to November 5, 1996, or a non-residential use that obtained a Route One Use Permit after
November 5, 1996 and that occupies a structure constructed prior to November 5, 1996, that proposes to expand
the use or structure or change the use, that cannot fully satisfy the minimum bufferyard standards identified in the
Minimum Bufferyard Requirements for Non-Residential Uses Table (Section 6.3.9.2) shall provide these respective
bufferyards to the greatest extent practical. The Planning Board shall be responsible for determining if the proposed
use or structure can satisfy the minimum bufferyard requirement, and the lesser amount of bufferyard that is
acceptable. The Planning Board may require additional plantings, fencing, increase in size of other bufferyards or
similar measures to compensate for the lack of required size for one or more required bufferyards. - AMENDED
11/05/1996
6.3.9.4 To encourage abutting non-residential developments to be harmoniously located to one another and to share
connecting street or on-site access or parking areas the Planning Board may reduce the required side bufferyard to
no less than 10 feet. Any reduction in the side bufferyard shall require approval of the abutting land owners.
6.3.10 Landscaping of Bufferyards
The required bufferyards shall be landscaped to present an attractive appearance to the site, particularly the site
entrance, and provide a vegetative screen for the site from abutting uses, particularly residential uses.
All side and rear bufferyards shall be preserved in their natural states, insofar as practical and appropriate, by minimizing
tree removal, and any grade changes shall be in keeping with the general appearance of neighboring developed areas.
The applicant shall submit a landscape plan for all bufferyards prepared by a landscape architect licensed in the State
of Maine. The Planning Board may require the submittal of alternative landscape plans if it determines that site
conditions warrant consideration of landscaping alternatives.
6.3.10.1 For purposes of this subsection, a “canopy tree” is a deciduous tree that reaches at least 35 feet in height at maturity
and at time of planting has a minimum 2” caliper six inches above the ground and a height of at least 8 feet. An
“evergreen tree” reaches 10 to 35 feet in height at maturity and at time of planting has a minimum of 1 and 1/2”
caliper six inches above the ground and a minimum height of at least six feet. A “small flowering tree” is a decorative
or ornamental tree (example, flowering crab) that reaches a height of greater than eight feet at maturity and at time
of planting has a minimum 1” caliper six inches above the ground and a height of at least 6 feet. A “shrub” reaches
2 to 10 feet in height at maturity and at planting shall be at least 18 inches in height.
6.3.10.2 Further, for purposes of this subsection, one “canopy tree” shall be equal to 10 plant units, one “evergreen tree”
shall be equal to 10 plant units in the rear bufferyard and 5 plant units in the front or side bufferyard and one “small
flowering tree” shall be equal to 5 plant units in the front or side bufferyard and no plant units in the rear bufferyard,
and one “shrub” shall be equal to 1 plant unit. Each mature “canopy or evergreen tree” existing in a bufferyard
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
109
prior to the development and retained in good condition shall be awarded double the plant units assigned to a newly
planted tree. All trees and other vegetation proposed for the bufferyard shall be of a species appropriate to
environmental conditions which exist on the site and in York, Maine and shall be appropriately positioned on the
property.
6.3.10.3 A non-residential use which obtains a Route One Use Permit after November 5, 1996 and which occupies a structure
constructed after November 5, 1996, shall provide the minimum amount of plant units for the bufferyards required
in 6.3.9 identified in the following plant units/one hundred feet table: - AMENDED 11/05/1996
PLANT UNITS/ONE HUNDRED FEET
FRONT SIDE REAR
Route One-1 100 50 Existing or 100 1
Route One-2 75 45 Existing or 100 1
Route One-3 75 45 Existing or 100 1
Route One-4 75 45 Existing or 100 1
Route One-5 50 35 75 2
Route One-6
(Industrial Use) Existing or 150 Existing or 150 Existing or 150
(Other than Industrial) Existing or 150 Existing or 50 Existing or 100
1 An existing site covered with natural vegetation shall retain such vegetation. Sites that do not have existing vegetation
that is equal to or greater than 100 plant units per one hundred feet of lot line or fraction thereof shall provide a
minimum of 100 plant units per one hundred lineal feet of lot line or fraction thereof.
2 An existing site covered with natural vegetation shall retain such vegetation. Sites that do not have existing vegetation
that is equal to or greater than 75 plant units per one hundred lineal feet of lot line or fraction thereof shall provide a
minimum of 75 plant units per one hundred lineal feet of lot line or fraction thereof.
6.3.10.4 The following shall serve as guidelines for the type of plant units that will generally be favored for the respective
bufferyards. These guidelines are intended to provide direction to the applicant and Planning Board. The Planning
Board recognizes sites are not the same and that a landscape plan and plantings may be unique to a respective site.
The Planning Board encourages flexibility in landscaping to ensure all plantings enhance site appearance and are
harmonious with all structures and uses on the site and with abutting sites and uses.
PLANT UNIT GUIDELINES/ONE HUNDRED LINEAL FEET OF LOT LINE
(NOTE: NUMBERS REFER TO NUMBER OF PLANT UNITS PER 6.3.10.2)
FRONT SIDE REAR
DISTRICT BUFFERYARD BUFFERYARD BUFFERYARD
Route One-1 75 or more canopy trees 40 or more canopy or 90 or more canopy or
Discourage evergreen evergreen trees. evergreen trees.
except existing mature Discourage small flowering Discourage small flowering
trees. trees. trees.
10 or less small flowering 10 or less shrubs. 10 or less shrubs.
trees.
25 or less shrubs.
Route One-2 40 or more canopy trees. 30 or more canopy or 90 or more canopy or
Route One-3 Discourage evergreen evergreen trees. evergreen trees.
Route One-4 except existing mature Discourage small flowering Discourage small flowering
trees. trees. trees.
Route One-2 15 or less small flowering 15 or less shrubs. 10 or less shrubs.
Route One-3 trees.
Route One-4 20 or less shrubs.
Route One-5 20 or more canopy trees 20 or more canopy or 60 or more canopy or
Discourage evergreen evergreen trees. evergreen trees.
except existing mature Discourage small flowering Discourage small flowering
trees. trees. trees.
10 or less small flowering 15 or less shrubs. 15 or less shrubs.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
110
trees.
20 or less shrubs.
Route One-6 130 or more canopy or 90 or more canopy or 140 or more canopy or
Industrial Use evergreen trees. evergreen trees. evergreen trees.
Discourage small flowering Discourage small flowering Discourage small flowering
trees. trees. trees.
10 or less shrubs. 10 or less shrubs.
Route One-6 80 or more canopy or 40 or more canopy or 90 or more canopy or
Other than evergreen trees. evergreen trees. evergreen trees.
Industrial Use 20 or less shrubs. Discourage flowering trees Discourage flowering trees
10 or less shrubs. 10 or less shrubs.
6.3.10.5 A non-residential use that obtained a Route One Use Permit prior to November 5, 1996, or that occupies a structure
constructed prior to November 5, 1996, that proposes to expand the use or structure or change the use, or a nonresidential
use that obtained a Route One Use Permit after November 5, 1996 and that occupies a structure
constructed prior to November 5, 1996, that proposes to expand the use or structure or change the use, that cannot
fully satisfy requirements of 6.3.10.1, 6.3.10.3 and 6.3.10.4 shall satisfy these landscaping of bufferyard requirements
to the greatest extent practical. The Planning Board shall determine if an existing use or structure cannot satisfy
these landscaping requirements and what constitutes greatest extent practical. The Planning Board may require
additional plantings, fencing, larger bufferyards, or similar measures to compensate for the applicant providing less
than the amount of landscaping required in 6.3.10.3 and 6.3.10.4.
6.3.10.6 If the Planning Board grants a reduction of forty percent or greater in the size of a side bufferyard per 6.3.9.4, the
amount of plant units per one hundred lineal feet required per 6.3.10.3 shall be reduced by fifty percent.
6.3.10.7 All landscaping materials planted in the bufferyard shall be maintained and any plants which die shall be replaced
within one growing season. Any mature tree which was used to satisfy the required number of plant units which
dies within 5 years of the issuance of the Route One Use Permit shall be replaced with 2 “canopy or evergreen trees”
within one growing season of the time the mature tree dies.
6.3.11 Landscaping Requirements for Parking Areas
Parking lots shall be effectively landscaping with trees and shrubs to reduce the visual impact of glare, headlights, and
parking lot lights from the public right-of-way and from adjoining properties, and to present an attractive appearance
to the site. The landscaping of all parking lots for a non-residential use shall satisfy the following standards.
- AMENDED 11/05/1996
6.3.11.1 Provide an 8’ side landscaped strip around the perimeter of all parking areas located to the side or rear of a structure
to be planted with deciduous “canopy trees” and low “shrubs”. A minimum of one “canopy” tree which is equal to
10 plant units shall be provided per every 40’ of lot perimeter. A minimum of 2 plant units of “shrubs” shall be
provided for every 10’ of lot perimeter. The vegetated bufferyards required in 6.3.10 may be used to satisfy the
landscape requirements for parking lots when the respective parking lot directly abuts the bufferyards on one or
more sides. The guidelines for determining plant units is defined in 6.3.10.1 and 6.3.10.2.
6.3.11.2 Provide a continuous landscape strip a minimum of 8 feet in width between every 4 rows of parking which contain
5 or more cars per row. A minimum of 1 “canopy tree” equal to 10 plant units shall be provided for each 40 feet of
length or fraction thereof of the landscape strip. A minimum of 2 plant units of “shrubs” shall be provided for each
10 feet of length of the landscape strip.
6.3.11.3 Planting islands which are a minimum of 200 square feet in size shall be provided at both ends of all parking rows
which contain 8 or more parking spaces. A planting island, a minimum of 100 sq. ft. in size, shall also be provided
in the interior of any parking row which is greater than 100 feet in length. One or more interior planting islands
shall be provided for each 100 feet or fraction thereof of the parking row. All planting islands shall include 1 “canopy
tree” equal to 10 plant units, and other appropriate landscaping material which accentuates the landscape appearance.
6.3.11.4 The Planning Board shall encourage and may require the use of a vegetated landscape berm to lessen the visual
impact of parking areas which are located to the front or side of a building. A landscape berm that is 30 inches or
more in height shall be equal to ten plant units per one hundred lineal feet or fraction thereof of berm. A landscape
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
111
berm that is 15 inches or more in height shall be equal to fifteen plant units per one hundred lineal feet or fraction
thereof of berm.
6.3.12 Utilities
A non-residential use which obtains a Route One Use Permit shall provide adequate utilities and services that comply
with requirements of this Section.
6.3.12.1 The use shall have a water supply of adequate quality and quantity. A water supply may be by private well, a central
water supply approved by the State Department of Human Services, or a public water supply approved by the
respective Water District. A non-residential use located within seven hundred fifty feet of a public water supply
shall connect to the public system unless the Planning Board determines the cost of the extension is prohibitive for
the use proposed, and a good quality and quantity private source of water can be provided.
6.3.12.2 The use shall have an approved method of sewage disposal. Private sewage disposal may be used provided the
system satisfies Town Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Ordinance and State of Maine requirements. No permanent
use may use portable toilets for sewage. Public sewage disposal may be used subject to approval of the respective
Sewer District. A non-residential use located within seven hundred fifty feet of a public sewer system shall connect
to the system unless the Planning Board determines the cost of the extension is prohibitive for the use proposed
and a good quality method of private sewage disposal can be provided.
6.3.12.3 All electric, telephone, television, and similar services shall be located underground, unless the Planning Board
determines the underground service is cost prohibitive, may adversely impact natural resource features on the site,
and there are well located existing overhead services to adjacent properties.
6.3.12.4 All satellite dishes, microwave dishes, and similar structures used for transmission or reception purposes shall be
located to minimize adverse visual impacts.
6.3.13 Buildings and Site Design Requirements
All non-residential structures which front on Route One and are not separated from Route One by a 50’ or greater
natural vegetated buffer shall satisfy the following design requirements to better ensure the buildings are attractive and
harmonize with the surrounding townscape and natural environment. The applicant shall demonstrate how a proposed
non-residential structure meets the building and site design requirements of this ordinance. The Planning Board may
grant waivers to these requirements if the applicant provides a building and site of equal or greater quality as determined
by the Planning Board. An elevation plan of the building shall be provided at a scale of 1/4” = 1 foot. This plan shall
identify all exterior facades of the proposed structure(s) and/or existing facades, plus addition(s), showing design
features and indicating the type and color of materials to be used. - AMENDED 11/03/2009
6.3.13.1 All buildings shall be “New England” in character, which includes buildings which incorporate the following
architectural styles in their design and construction: Colonial period, Federal period and Georgian period.
6.3.13.2 All non-residential structures which do not front on Route One or which are separated from Route One by a 50 feet
or greater natural vegetated buffer shall construct buildings which are well oriented to site characteristics, and which
satisfy the intent, but not necessarily the specific standards of 6.3.13.1.
6.3.13.3 If the site uses Route One as its access, all newly constructed buildings on site must show “best faces” toward Route
One or an internal circulation road, and be well oriented to the site’s characteristics. The main pedestrian entrance
must be on the “best face” of the building and be served by a sidewalk. This pedestrian entrance shall be open
during business hours. Pedestrian entrances are permitted on other sides of the building, and all pedestrian entrances
must be served by a sidewalk. No blank facades, service doors or loading areas are permitted on the side of the
building facing Route One. No long continuous walls for the building facade are permitted; all building facades
must be broken.
6.3.13.4 All new construction shall have a building exterior that is either wood clapboard, wood shingle, stone or brick. The
Planning Board will consider requests for waivers in accordance with the requirements of subparagraph 6.3.28 that
meet the following criteria:
1. The Applicant shall demonstrate through material submissions to the Planning Board that alternative
materials comply with the aesthetic intent of subparagraph 6.3.13 Buildings and Design Requirements, and
the Applicant shall:
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
112
a. Demonstrate that the intended use of an alternative material(s) is equal to or better then that which
is required, will appear in a manner that is the same as that which is required, will perform in a manner
that is the same or better than that which is required;
b. Submit samples and show detailed examples of how the alternative material will be used; and
c. Submit manufacturer’s Specification Data, and Safety Data Sheets.
2. For materials with which the Board is not familiar, the Planning Board may request that the Applicant submit
additional information, such as but not limited to life cycle cost and human health assessment data that
supports the request for waiver. - AMENDED 11/08/2005
6.3.13.5 All new construction shall have pitched roofs, which may include a gable roof, hip roof, mansard roof, or gambrel
roof. If a gable roof or hip roof is used, the roof pitch shall be at least four feet in twelve feet. Long continuous
roofs that are uniform in height shall not be permitted. Roofs designed for linear buildings shall use variations in
pitch and height, and utilize architectural elements to add visual interest especially when that portion of the building
is visible to the street or public (generally the front and sides of a building). Variations in roof lines are recommended
at least every twenty-five (25) linear feet. The use of cupolas, dormers, chimneys, and other roof projections is
encouraged, provided they are designed as integral parts of the structure and do not appear arbitrary or “paste-on.”
All roofs shall be peaked. - AMENDED 11/05/1996, 11/07/2017
6.3.13.6 Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves, and parapets, shall have good proportions and relationship to
one another.
6.3.14 Explosive Materials
No highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids, or gases shall be stored in bulk above ground, unless they are located
in anchored tanks at least seventy-five (75) feet from any lot line, town way, or interior roadway, or 40 feet from lot
line for underground tanks; plus all relevant Federal and State regulations shall also be met.
Propane gas tanks in 100 lb. cylinders (or smaller) shall be exempt from these safety regulations.
6.3.15 Chemical/Fuel Storage
All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, chemicals, chemical or industrial wastes, and potentially harmful raw materials,
shall be located on impervious pavement, and shall be completely enclosed by an impervious dike which shall be
high enough to contain the total volume of liquid kept within the storage area, plus the rain fall into this storage area
during a 50 year storm, so that such liquid shall not be able to spill onto or seep into the ground surrounding the
paved storage area. Storage tanks for “home heating oil” and diesel fuel, not exceeding 275 gallons in size, may be
exempted from this requirement, in situations where neither a high seasonal water table (within 15” of the surface)
nor rapidly permeable sandy soils are involved.
6.3.16 Refuse Disposal and Recycling of Solid Waste
A non-residential use shall provide adequate facilities to collect and dispose of refuse and recycle solid wastes on a
timely basis and in an environmentally friendly manner. All refuse and recycling facilities shall be screened from
view by a four sided solid enclosure. The fence shall be a minimum of six feet in height. A wooden stockade fence
is preferred; metal wire fence is prohibited as a screen.
6.3.17 Preservation of Landscape
Development of a site shall recognize existing topography and vegetation. The cutting or clearing of vegetation and
grading of a site shall not occur once a Route One Use Permit application is submitted to the Town until such
activity is permitted by the Planning Board. If a site was cut, cleared or extensively graded three or less years before
an application was submitted, the Planning Board can consider such activity in its decision to require landscaping,
screening or regrading to mitigate the impacts of the past action.
6.3.18 Open Space
The Planning Board may require the reservation of a maximum of ten percent of a property devoted to a nonresidential
use as open space to provide for the recreational needs of people who work or frequent the non-residential
use, or to maintain the scenic or natural beauty of the area or a significant natural feature. Bufferyards required in
6.3.9 shall not be used to satisfy the open space requirement, unless the open space proposed directly abuts a required
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
113
bufferyard, the bufferyard does not constitute more than fifty percent of the open space proposed, and use of the
bufferyard and open space form a contiguous undeveloped area that benefits the quality of open space provided.
Land reserved for open space purposes shall be of a character, configuration and location suitable for the particular
use intended. The applicant shall establish a legal arrangement acceptable to the Planning Board as a condition of
plan approval, to ensure the open space is regularly maintained and preserved for the purpose for which it is intended.
Acceptable legal arrangements include, but are not necessarily limited to: establishment of protective covenants in
perpetuity, dedication to a Land Trust or similar non-profit entity, dedication to a homeowner’s or condominium
association, or dedication to the Town, State, or federal government.
6.3.19 Construction of Off-Site Improvements
The Planning Board may require the construction of off-site improvements if the Board determines such
improvements are specifically required to address a public health, safety or welfare concern caused by the proposed
project.
6.3.20 Impact on Municipal Facilities and Services
The Planning Department may require the applicant to participate in municipal infrastructures and/or service system
improvements when it is demonstrated the applicant’s proposed development will result in a negative impact or
decline in level of service of any existing municipal infrastructure system or service. The Planning Board shall assess
and establish infrastructure or service system improvements the applicant may be required to undertake or pay for
to mitigate the amount of negative impact or decline in level of service.
6.3.20.1 Conducting the Assessment. In conducting the assessment, the Planning Board shall consider the following:
1. The status of the system and service in the Comprehensive Plan and Capital Improvement Program relative
to any planned improvements and scheduling.
2. The net effect of the proposed development on the capacity of the infrastructure or service system, indicating
the percentage share used by the development.
3. A cost estimate for improvement of this infrastructure or service system so as to meet the increased demand,
and a breakdown of the applicant’s share of that cost.
4. An assessment of public water and sewer system improvements provided or planned by the appropriate
agencies.
6.3.20.2 Improvement Responsibilities. When the applicant’s share of infrastructure and/or service system impact has
been established by the Planning Board, the Board shall select the method in which the applicant must participate
in the infrastructure and/or service system improvement. The following two alternatives are available:
1. The applicant must agree to make the necessary infrastructure and/or service system improvements,
establish a construction or service schedule, and post a performance guarantee to cover all associated
costs. The applicant may recover the improvement costs within 10 years after improvements are made. For
the applicant to recover these costs, subsequent developments must realize a benefit by using the
infrastructure and/or service system improvement financed by the applicant. Cost reimbursement for the
applicant shall be established as subsequent developments go through the site plan or subdivision review
process. In arriving at the appropriate cost share for subsequent development, the same process must be
used.
2. The Town must agree to complete the improvements. The applicant shall pay the required share of the cost
to the Town at the time of approval of the Route One Use Permit, which shall be held in a reserve fund until
the improvement is completed in accordance with the scheduled capital improvement program of the Town.
If the improvement is not completed within 10 years, the fee plus interest must be returned to the applicant.
6.3.21 Performance Guarantee for Required Improvements
The applicant shall post an acceptable performance guarantee with the Town to ensure all improvements required
as conditions of issuing the Route One Use Permit are constructed. The Planning Board shall determine the type
and amount of performance guarantee required. A performance guarantee shall be one or more of the following:
6.3.21.1 The applicant shall post an escrow account or Irrevocable Letter of Credit with the Town to pay estimated costs
equal to Town expenses to regrade, stabilize, reseed, or revegetate a site disturbed by construction activities if the
project is not completed. Escrow funds shall be deposited in an account established specifically for this project.
The Guarantee is subject to release by the Town upon a written finding from the Code Enforcement Officer or
Town Engineer that all plan requirements have been satisfied and an Occupancy Permit issued. The Town may
expend funds from the Guarantee upon a written determination from the Code Enforcement Officer or Town
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
114
Engineer that project activities such as site clearing and grading have been started, but no further construction
activity has occurred. A Town decision to expend funds will only be made sooner than one year after issuance of
the Building Permit if the Code Enforcement Officer or Town Engineer determines failure to restabilize the site
will result in significant adverse impact on the site or surrounding properties. - AMENDED 11/04/1997
6.3.21.2 The applicant shall enter a binding agreement with the Town such that a Building Permit shall not be obtained
until all public improvements and plan conditions are satisfied. The Code Enforcement Officer or Town Engineer
shall submit a statement in writing to the Town Planner certifying that all improvements have been completed.
The Town Planner, upon receipt of such certification, may determine that terms of the binding agreement have
been satisfied, and that the Guarantee should be released, and a Building Permit may be granted by the Code
Enforcement Officer. - AMENDED 11/04/1997
6.3.21.3 The applicant shall post an escrow account, performance bond, or Irrevocable Letter of Credit with the Town
Planning Department equal to one hundred twenty-five percent of the cost of all required improvements,
particularly public improvements. This guarantee shall not be released and no Occupancy Permit shall be issued
until the Code Enforcement Officer or Town Engineer submits a statement to the Town Planner certifying that
all improvements have been completed. The Town Planner, upon receipt of such certification, may determine
the terms of the Performance Guarantee have been satisfied, and that the Guarantee should be released, and an
Occupancy Permit may be granted by the Code Enforcement Officer. The Town may expend funds from the
escrow account, performance bond, or Irrevocable Letter of Credit upon a written declaration from the Code
Enforcement Officer or Town Engineer that the required improvements have not been satisfactorily completed.
The Town shall provide the applicant a minimum of fifteen days of advance notice in writing prior to any Town
expenditure of the performance guarantee. - AMENDED 11/04/1997
6.3.22 Standards for Road, Driveway, and Parking Area Construction
The Planning Board shall use standards identified in the Planning Board Subdivision and Site Plan Regulations and this
Ordinance as guidelines for road, driveway, and parking lot construction. The Board may grant waivers to these
standards to promote public safety and good quality site design.
6.3.23 Provision of Pedestrian Amenities
The applicant shall provide needed amenities to allow safe and good quality pedestrian use and circulation within the
site and between sites, when appropriate. In the Route One One-5 Zone, pedestrian amenities may include a sidewalk
along the frontage of all lots which directly abut Route One.
6.3.24 Handicap Accessibility
The applicant shall provide site improvements, such as but not limited to adequately sized and located parking and
curbing, to ensure handicap accessibility. The applicant shall be responsible for identifying, obtaining needed permits,
and constructing all facilities needed to satisfy State and Federal requirements regarding handicap accessibility.
6.3.25 Calculation of Net Buildable Site Acreage
A non-residential use shall be subject to net buildable site acreage requirements to determine the amount of permitted
lot coverage. Lot coverage is calculated by dividing the amount of impervious surface on a site by the amount of net
buildable site acreage. Net buildable site acreage shall be determined by the following table:
NOT ON
ON SEWER SEWER
? Excessively drained, well drained and moderately
drained soils 100% 100%
? Poorly and somewhat poorly drained soils 75% 50%
? Very poorly drained soils 50% 25%
? Slopes greater than 33% 50% 50%
? Borrow Pits 67% 50%
? Former Town dumps and sanitary landfills 0% 0%
? Land below the normal high water mark of
coastal waters, the York River, or Cape
Neddick River 0% 0%
- AMENDED 11/05/1996
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
115
6.3.26 Determination of Project Ownership and Mechanism to Construct and Maintain Required Improvements
The applicant shall identify the owner and developer of the project and who will assume responsibility for construction,
operation and maintenance of all required improvements. The Planning Board shall ensure the proposed ownership
has the technical and financial resources to successfully complete and maintain all required project improvements. All
proposals to establish a condominium form of ownership to manage the project shall require Planning Board review
and approval of the condominium documents.
6.3.27 Outside Display and Outside Storage for Nonresidential Users
6.3.27.1 Outside Storage. Outside storage shall mean the storage in an un-roofed area of products or materials associated
with a business activity, and to which access by customers is limited primarily to product or material pick-up only
(as opposed to shopping/browsing). In the Route One zones, outside storage shall be allowed as accessory to: any
use in the Commercial Use Category; or any use that customarily stores large volumes of loam, gravel, fill, mulch,
and other similar materials. The outside storage area shall meet the minimum setbacks of the zoning district, shall
not occur in the bufferyards required in Section 6.3.9, shall not be located closer to Route One than the primary
structure on the site, and shall not adversely impact vehicular or pedestrian safety or circulation. All outside storage
shall be screened by one or more of the following: a wooden stockade fence a minimum of 6 feet in height,
landscaping that provides a good quality visual buffer, or be located behind a building and screened from the view
of motorists traveling on Route One.
6.3.27.2 Outside Retail Display. Outside display of retail goods, in an un-roofed area where customers have ready access to
such products, shall be allowed as an accessory use to any business with a retail component as follows.
A. The total area allowed for outside retail display is:
1. for a property with 2,500 square feet or less of indoor retail space, 1,000 square feet of outside retail
display per property; or
2. for a property with more than 2,500 square feet of indoor retail space, 2,000 square feet of outside
retail display per property.
B. Outside retail display does not need to be screened from view, and parking is not required for such areas.
C. Up to 10% of the outside retail display area may be located within the required bufferyards. This area shall
be increased to 15% where the posted speed limit on the road in front of the business 50 MPH or faster.
This limitation shall not apply to live plants – see §6.3.27.5.
D. The outside retail display may not occur within or block designated parking spaces, traffic aisles, or
wheelchair-accessible pedestrian ways.
E. No component of the display shall be allowed if it would cause a safety risk to motorists, bicyclists or
pedestrians because of its size, shape or placement (such as but not limited to objects which block sight
distance, are sharp, or are large/immobile and located immediately adjacent to the road). Upon verbal
direction from a Code Enforcement Officer, any such problem item shall be removed or relocated
immediately.
F. Outside retail display shall not involve any substantive physical change to or development of the property.
It is simply an allowance to place product outside.
G. Such areas can straddle or cross onto a neighbor’s property with that owner’s permission.
H. Except for vehicle display (see §6.3.29), outside retail display which conforms to the standards of this section
shall be permitted and shall not require specific permits or approvals from the Town.
SUNSET CLAUSE: Reserved. - AMENDED 05/16/2015
6.3.27.3 Reserved.
6.3.27.4 Reserved.
6.3.27.5 A business that offers living plant material for sale may display or store any amount of this material outside. Living
plant material for sale may be located in the bufferyards required in Section 6.3.9, provided there is the required
amount of permanent landscaping identified in Section 6.3.10. - AMENDED 05/19/2012
6.3.27.6 A retail use is permitted to display goods for sale at special events, such as a sidewalk sale, tent sale, or similar event,
provided such events do not occur for more than a maximum of fifteen days during any calendar year. Sale of holiday
season trees, wreaths and boughs is permitted from November 20th through December 25th. All such outside display
areas shall adhere to setback requirements of this Ordinance to the greatest extent practical as determined by the
Code Enforcement Officer. - AMENDED 11/04/1997, 11/03/2009
6.3.28 Planning Board Waiver of Performance Standard Requirements
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
116
The Planning Board may waive the Section 6.3 Performance Standards for those projects under their review authority.
A request for waiver(s) shall be made by the applicant in writing, and shall specify, by chapter, section and paragraph
number, the provisions of the Ordinance for which a waiver is requested.
The Planning Board may waive requirements provided that the waiver does not result in:
a. Undue water or air pollution;
b. An inadequate water supply;
c. Unreasonable soil erosion;
d. Unreasonable traffic congestion or safety risk;
e. Inadequate sewage disposal capacity;
f. An adverse impact on scenic or natural beauty, aesthetics, historic sites, or rare or irreplaceable natural areas.
g. Substantial non-conformance with this Ordinance or the Comprehensive Plan.
Factors appropriate for waivers include, but are not limited to: Route One Use Permit submission requirements; design
standards for parking areas and streets; storm water management requirements; erosion and sedimentation
requirements; performance guarantees; public open space; and off-site development costs. Waivers are specifically
recognized for uses and structures existing prior to November 5, 1996 that propose to expand the use or structure, or
change the use, that were constructed or permitted in accordance with prior Ordinance requirements.
The applicant shall meet with the Town Planner to discuss potential waivers. The Town Planner shall make
recommendations to the Planning Board concerning any requested waiver. When the Board votes to approve or
conditionally approve a Route One Use Permit, it shall consider any requested waivers. - AMENDED 11/05/1996
6.3.29 Outside Display for Vehicular Sales
Vehicular sales conducted wholly or partly on open lots shall be a permitted activity as defined in Article 4, Use
Regulations. Vehicles displayed for sale on outside lots shall be subject to the following standards:
6.3.29.1 All new display of vehicles shall be located outside the bufferyards required in 6.3.29, and landscaping shall be
provided as required in 6.3.10.
6.3.29.2 A non-residential use located in the Route One-6 Zone that offered vehicles for sale and which used an outside
display area as of November 5, 1996 that does not comply with the requirements of 6.3.29.1, may continue to use
such area for display. If the use proposes an expansion, all new display areas shall satisfy the requirements of 6.3.29.1,
and all existing display areas shall satisfy the requirements of 6.3.29.1 to the greatest extent possible as determined
by the Planning Board.
6.3.29.3 A non-residential use located outside the Route One-6 Zone that offered vehicles for sale as a permitted activity on
or before November 5, 1996, may continue to use the existing area for outside display. Such outside display is
considered a non-conforming use and this display area may not be expanded. If there is any expansion of any nonresidential
use located on the property, all existing outside display areas used for the sale of vehicles shall satisfy the
requirements of 6.3.9.1 to the greatest extent possible as determined by the Planning Board. - AMENDED
11/04/1997
6.4 Additional Performance Standard Applicable to YBVC.
In a mixed-use building, residential uses shall be prohibited on the first floor except for required egress.
- AMENDED 11/04/2008
6.5 Performance Standard to Control Erosion
Eroded soil and resulting sedimentation degrades surface water quality by increasing turbidity, and often nutrients
attach to sediment during the erosion process thereby contributing to nutrient pollution. Sedimentation also reduces
the capacity of stormwater drainage systems and of the natural drainage of watersheds, which thereby worsens flooding.
To help protect water quality and to help prevent flooding, every property owner shall ensure that no man-made activity
causes water-borne eroded soil, silt or sediment to reach a waterbody, inland wetland, or man-made drainage facility. -
AMENDED 11/08/2011, 05/18/2013
6.6 Prohibition of Dumping into Waterbodies, Wetlands and Man-Made Drainage Facilities
Dumped materials can diminish the capacity and function of streams, ditches and stormwater infrastructure and thereby
worsens flooding risks throughout a watershed, and may degrade water quality as well. To help protect water quality
and to help prevent flooding, it shall be prohibited to dump any material other than water into a waterbody, inland
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
117
wetland or man-made drainage facility. This shall include, but not be limited to dumping of soil, yard wastes, brush,
trash, tires, and/or junk. Discharges into the Town’s storm sewer system are also regulated under the Non-Stormwater
Discharge Ordinance. - AMENDED 05/18/2013, 11/04/2014
6.7 Performance Standards for Maintenance of Stormwater Management Facilities
Following completion of construction, stormwater management facilities on a property require ongoing inspection and
maintenance in order to ensure their ongoing effectiveness in controlling both the quantity and quality of stormwater.
It shall be the responsibility of the property owner, or drainage easement holder if applicable, to inspect and maintain
all stormwater management facilities on their property. Such work shall be performed in accordance with the Maine
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. - AMENDED 11/04/2014
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
118
ARTICLE SEVEN
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
7.1 Temporary Use of Manufactured Housing Unit
Any person who can show good intentions of building a home may apply to the Board of Selectmen for a permit to
locate a manufactured housing unit or recreation vehicle on the proposed home site during the construction of said
home for a period of one year. If the applicant, at the end of one year, has not finished the proposed home to a livable
state, the applicant may re-apply to the Board of Selectmen for a maximum of twelve (12) months extension of said
permit. The Board of Selectmen, after being satisfied of good faith on the part of the applicant, may issue such permit
for one year and extend such permit not to exceed twelve (12) months beyond the initial year. This allowance shall
apply within the following zones:
A. RES 1-A, RES 1-B, RES-2, RES-3, YBVC, YVC-1, YVC-2, GEN-1, GEN-2 and GEN-3 base zoning districts;
B. Watershed Protection Overlay District; and
C. Shoreland Overlay District - Mixed Use subdistrict (Shoreland Permit from CEO also required), Limited
Residential Subdistrict (Shoreland Permit from CEO also required) and Resource Protection Subdistrict
(Special Use Permit from Planning Board per §18.2.7 also required), but prohibited in the Stream Protection
Subdistrict.
(This provision is not meant to exclude trailers used for the sole purpose of a "Construction Office" located at the
building site. "Construction Office" trailers shall not be equipped with sleeping accommodations and shall be removed
from the site within 30 days after occupancy of the principal use.) - AMENDED 11/04/2008, 05/19/12, 05/21/2016
7.1-A. Temporary Use of Recreation Vehicles
On any lot other than a campground, one recreation vehicle may be occupied overnight for not more than 1 week per
calendar year. Occupancy by more units or longer than 1 week shall be prohibited. - AMENDED 05/19/2012
7.2 Campgrounds
7.2.1 Provisions Applicable to BUS-2 District
Campgrounds shall be allowed only under the following conditions:
7.2.1.1 No building shall be used or erected to be used in connection with a campground within BUS-2, without a permit
therefore, issued by the Code Enforcement Officer. Such person shall file an application for said permit to erect
said structure, specifying the location of such buildings, the nature of their constructions, and the size and design
of said buildings. Upon the filing of such application, if the Code Enforcement Officer shall determine that said
structures are of adequate strength and are so located and constructed to be safe against fire, and have proper
sanitary and toilet facilities, then he may grant a permit for the erection and use of the same for a campground.
The word "building" as herein used, shall include an overnight bungalow, store, filling station, toilet, or other
structure which shall be used in connection with a camping ground.
7.2.1.2 No person keeping a campground shall permit an accumulation of offal, garbage, rubbish or waste of any kind
on or near said campgrounds. He shall, at all times keep said camping ground and the buildings thereon in a
sanitary and wholesome condition and shall at all times provide adequate sanitary toilet facilities for his patrons.
He shall not allow any patrons to remain on said campground who shall disturb the peace of the neighborhood
or annoy the residents of the town by trespassing upon their property or by other unlawful conduct.
7.2.2 Provisions Applicable to all zones other than the BUS-2 Zone - AMENDED 11/07/2006
7.2.2.1 No trailers other than such as are recreational vehicles as defined herein shall be permitted within any camper
park, temporarily or otherwise.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
119
7.2.2.2 A campground may not be constructed on less than 5 acres of land.
7.2.2.3 Tent sites and sites for recreational vehicles (RV's) shall be laid out so that the density on each developed acre of
land does not exceed the standards below (in terms of sites per acre of land, excluding circulation roads):
Within the Shoreland
Overlay District For Non-Shoreland Areas
Tent sites 8 per acre 14 per acre
RV Sites 7 per acre 11 per acre
Minimum frontage along any shoreline shall be 100 feet. Minimum setback from the shoreline shall be 75 feet
for all recreational vehicles, tents, or other vehicles and temporary or permanent structures.
7.2.2.4 Vehicular access shall be provided onto a hard-surfaced roadway adequate for the volume and type of traffic likely
to be generated. Grades and sight distances specified in the York Planning Board Subdivision and Site Plan
Regulations shall be observed in designing all intersections. Roadways shall be constructed of at least 12" of bankrun
(no stone larger than 4"), 2" of crushed gravel (1/2" chips) and two applications of liquid asphalt (1/2 gallon
per sq. yd. each application).
7.2.2.5 A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan meeting the standards of the York County Soil and Water
Conservation District or the Maine Soil and Water Conservation Commission shall be submitted.
7.2.2.6 A campground shall provide water and sewerage systems, sanitary stations, and convenience facilities in
accordance with the regulations of the State Plumbing Code and the State of Maine Department of Human
Services. In no case shall less than one toilet, lavatory and shower be provided for each sex for every ten (10)
camping and tent sites.
7.2.2.7 Recreational vehicles shall be so parked in spaces that:
a. There shall be a minimum of 15 feet between vehicles, and that
b. There shall be a minimum of 25 feet between all recreational vehicles and tents, and all public rights-of-way
located inside the boundaries of the trailer park or campground.
c. No camping unit or structure shall be located less than 200 feet from any residence (except residences
belonging to the campground owners).
7.2.2.8 No camping unit shall be stored or exhibited for sale for commercial purposes within the park.
7.2.2.9 Each campsite shall be provided with an area for refuse storage. Within a maximum of 150 feet from each
campsite, there shall be a container capable of storing the amount of refuse that the camping area for which it
was designed could generate in one week. The park management shall dispose of refuse from said containers by
transporting the refuse in a closed truck to an approved disposal area at least once a week.
7.2.2.10 Fire extinguishers capable of dealing with both electrical and wood fires shall be kept in all service buildings. A
suitable ingress and egress shall be provided so that every campground may be readily serviced in emergency
situations.
7.2.2.11 The management of campgrounds shall be responsible for operating their premises in accordance with all Town
codes and ordinances and all State laws and regulations. The maintenance of all open space areas, roadways, and
utilities in a park shall be the responsibility of the park management.
7.2.2.12 All relevant provisions of the York Planning Board Subdivision and Site Plan Regulations shall be applied by the
Planning Board in its review process. In addition to data on soils, slopes and drainage, a vegetation map showing
the following items may be required.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
120
7.2.2.13 Facilities shall be planned in accordance with the basic principles outlined below, and shall be shown on the
proposed plan which is submitted for review and approval.
a. A logical sequence of entry and circulation should be created: entrance, administration and storage, parking,
campsites, toilets and laundry, playing fields or shoreline.
b. Campsites should be clustered in groups according to intensity of use (low-density, medium density, etc.)
and also related to common support service areas (laundries, play area, etc.) serving a number of campsite
clusters. The purpose is to minimize roadway length, increase accessibility, and preserve open space.
c. Footpaths and roadways should follow "desire-lines" of pedestrian and vehicular movement between
campsites and all jointly-facilities. Parking areas may be grassed, reinforced with open concrete blocks.
7.2.2.14 Campsites shall be laid out or screened in such a manner that none are within view from public streets, navigable
rivers, existing residences, or approved subdivision lots. Any combination of evergreen planting, landscaped
earthen berms, or solid fencing may be used to achieve this screening standard, when campsites would otherwise
be visible from the locations described above.
7.3 Open Winter Storage of Vacant Camper/Trailer Vehicles - Applicable to YBVC, RES-5, RES-6, RES-7
Districts
All outdoor winter storage of vacant camper/trailer vehicles upon residential property must observe the lot line
setbacks. When lot size prohibits compliance, an application for storage must be made to the Planning Board. The
Board shall determine that the placement of the camper/trailer vehicle shall be as inoffensive to the neighborhood as
possible.
7.4 Home Occupations
7.4.1 Provisions Applicable to All Zoning Districts
Home occupations are subject to the following requirements:
7.4.1 Purpose. The purpose of this section is to permit home occupations in a manner that enhances economic
opportunities of residents, makes housing more affordable, and permits a diversity of uses throughout the
Town while it protects the quality of neighborhoods. This section follows the policy direction of the 1999
Comprehensive Plan, which recommends much tighter use restrictions, while off-setting this policy in part
by providing for more diverse and expanded home-based business opportunities.
7.4.2 Classes of Home Occupations. There shall be 3 classes of home occupations, as follows:
A. Class 1:
1. Located within the principal residential structure only.
2. Shall occupy 450 square feet or less of floor space. For a Day Care Home, this measure shall
include only areas accessible by the people being cared for and shall not include other interior
space dedicated for this use. - AMENDED 05/19/2012
3. Not more than one employee other than the home’s occupants may work on-site at any time,
and one additional on-site parking space shall be provided if there is such an employee.
4. No outdoor activity or storage of materials shall be permitted, except for a Day Care Home
where outdoor space must be provided for the people. - AMENDED 05/19/2012
5. Additional workers cannot gather even briefly on the property.
B. Class 2:
1. May be located in the principal residential structure or an accessory structure.
2. Shall occupy 800 square feet or less of floor space.
3. Not more than one employee other than the home’s occupants may work on-site at any time,
and one additional on-site parking space shall be provided if there is such an employee.
4. Outdoor activity or storage of materials shall be permitted in an area not to exceed 1,600
square feet, provided the area meets structure setbacks and the area is screened from roads
and abutters.
5. To the extent a home occupation involves off-site activity (landscaper, carpenter, etc.), up to
3 additional workers can gather, prepare briefly, load vehicles, unload vehicles associated with
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
121
the home occupation, provided that a minimum of ¾ of the work day for these other workers
is spent working off-site.
C. Class 3:
1. May be located in the principal residential structure or an accessory structure, and may also
include outdoor activities and storage.
2. Shall occupy 1,600 square feet or less of floor space for that portion of the use located in a
building.
3. Not more than 3 employees other than the home’s occupants may work on-site at any time,
and one additional on-site parking space shall be provided per employee if there are such
employees.
4. Outdoor activity or storage of materials shall be permitted in an area not to exceed 3,200
square feet, provided the area meets structure setbacks and the area is screened from roads
and abutters.
5. To the extent a home occupation involves off-site activity (landscaper, carpenter, etc.), up to
5 additional workers can gather, prepare briefly, load vehicles, unload vehicles associated with
the home occupation, provided that a minimum of ¾ of the work day for these other workers
is spent working off-site.
7.4.3 Types of Home Occupations Permitted. The following types of home occupation uses shall be
permitted: - AMENDED 05/19/2012
1. Professional Office: office space used for by professionals including, but not limited to architects,
brokers, counselors, clergy, draftspeople, cartographers, engineers, insurance agents, lawyers, real
estate agents, accountants, editors, publishers, journalists, psychologists, contract managers, graphic
designers, landscape designers, surveyors, salespeople, and travel agents. This shall exclude medical
and dental offices.
2. Personal Service: space used for personal services including, but not limited to barbershops, beauty
parlors, massage therapy, and manicure/pedicure shops.
3. Instructional Service: space used for instruction including, but not limited to music, dance, art, crafts,
and tutoring.
4. Repair Service: space used for repair work including, but not limited to watch and clocks, small
appliances, computers, electronic devices, small engines and lawnmowers.
5. Day Care Home: see definition in Article 2.
6. Studio: workshop of an artist or craftsperson, including, but not limited to artists, painters, sculptors,
musicians, photographers, authors, weavers, jewelers, cabinetmakers, and woodworkers.
7. Trade Shop: space used by tradespeople including, but not limited to carpenters, plumbers,
electricians and landscapers to store tools and materials and to prepare for off-site work.
7.4.4 Classes Permitted by Zone. The following shall apply:
A. Where the use of a lot is exclusively a single-family detached residence, a single home occupation
shall be permitted. The maximum class of such home occupation shall be limited in accordance
with the map, “York Zoning Ordinance: Home Occupation Classes” dated May 4, 2005, except
as provided in §7.4.4.D.
B. For residences that are not single-family detached units, a single Class 1 home occupations shall
be permitted in each residential unit in any base zoning district.
C. Overlay Zones. Some overlay zoning districts limit home occupations or impose standards that
affect home occupations. In all cases, the more restrictive requirements apply.
D. For a single-family home on a lot containing 4 or more acres of land that is not wetland, a larger
class of home occupation shall be permitted. In areas zoned for Class 1 home occupations, a Class
2 home occupation shall be permitted. In areas zoned for Class 2 home occupations, a Class 3
home occupation shall be permitted.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
122
7.4.5 General Standards. The following shall apply to all home occupations:
A. Visual Appearance. A home occupation shall be conducted in a manner that minimizes any
adverse visual impact on the neighborhood. The structure shall not be altered in a manner
inconsistent with its residential character. Outdoor illumination shall be limited to that normal
and customary for single family housing (such as a customary porch light, garage light or walkway
light).
B. Signs. One sign shall be permitted for a home occupation. The total area of the sign, including
all above-ground structural elements, shall not exceed 4 square feet. Such signs shall have no
artificial illumination.
C. Retail Activity. The following standards shall apply:
1. All home occupations shall be permitted on-site retail activity that is incidental and
subordinate to another use (e.g. a music teacher selling sheet music to one of the
students).
2. Class 2 and class 3 home occupations may include the selling of products, the major
portion of which is raised or produced on the premises.
3. All home occupations shall be permitted e-commerce (internet sales) provided any onsite
parcel shipping services are in keeping with a typical residential use.
D. Parking. In addition to the parking spaces required for the residence, a parking space shall be
provided for each employee that does not live in the residence. For home occupations that will
have customers visiting the home, sufficient parking shall be provided to prevent the need for onstreet
parking. The parking shall be adequately screened from the street and from adjacent lots,
for example with a dense screen of evergreens.
E. Impact Limits. Home occupations are to be limited as to be good neighbors. While there may be
some adverse effects, they shall be in keeping with the types of impacts typically associated with a
residence. In particular, home occupations shall limit their generation of vibrations, smoke, dust,
heat, glare, or odor to that typically associated with a residence without the home occupation.
Storage or use of hazardous or toxic materials in excess of that typically associated with a residence
shall be prohibited.
F. Water Quality. No person shall cause any liquid, gaseous, or solid materials to run-off, seep,
percolate, or wash into surface or ground waters such that any pollutant or constituent or
derivative thereof attains a concentration in ground or surface water that is above background
levels or current public health drinking water standards for Maine, whichever is most stringent.
(Note: Drinking water standards shall be obtained from current manuals, including, but not limited
to: State of Maine Rules of the Department of Human Services relating to Drinking Water;
"Drinking Water and Health", published by the National Academy of Sciences; "Suggested No-
Adverse Response Levels" as determined by the Environmental Protection Agency; "Ambient
Water Quality Criteria" manuals, published by the Environmental Protection Agency.)
G. Solid Waste. Business-related trash shall be disposed of separate from the residential trash, and
shall be paid for by the business, as required by the Town’s solid waste ordinances.
7.4.6 Permit Required. A Use Permit shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer prior to
establishment of a home occupation. - AMENDED 11/08/2005, 11/03/2009
7.5 Conversion of Historic Buildings
The provisions of §7.5 shall be available only for a building that is a contributing building in a Local Historic District
or that is listed in this Ordinance as an Historic Landmark. - AMENDED 11/07/2006
7.5.1 Provisions Applicable to RES-5, RES-6, RES-7, YBVC, YVC-1, and YVC-2 Districts
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
123
7.5.1.1 The Planning Board may review and authorize the conversion of an existing large single-family dwelling or other
building to accommodate more than one family (and commercial use in the YBVC, YVC-1 and YVC-2 zones)
provided that all the following conditions are met:
a. The house or building has at least 5,000 square feet of gross living area.
b. The house or building shall be located on a lot served by public water and public sewer.
c. The house or building has historical significance (in accordance with Section 7.5.1.2 below).
- AMENDED 05/21/2016
7.5.1.2 The Planning Board shall request an advisory letter from the Historic District Commission or the Maine Historic
Preservation Commission regarding the historical significance of the building under consideration. Within 60
days of any such request, the Historic District Commission shall evaluate the historical significance in accordance
with the qualifications outlined in Article 12, Section 12.4 and the Maine Historic Preservation Commission may
evaluate the historical significance in accordance with Article 12, Section 12.4.5.
7.5.1.3 If Improvements, as defined in Article 12, Local Historic District Regulations, or any exterior changes are to be
made or new structures or buildings erected in the process of or prior to conversion, the requirements of 7.5.1.4
of this Section shall also be met.
7.5.1.4 Applications for Improvements or Exterior Changes to Buildings Proposed for Conversion of Building Which
Have Already Been Converted Under this Section or for Construction of Additional Buildings or Structures.
a. If a building-owner proposes improvements, exterior changes or enlargements to a building converted or
proposed for conversion under this Section, or construction of any new building or structures partially or
completely on the same lot, he shall obtain approval from the Planning Board before a building permit is
issued. Such improvements, exterior changes, etc. shall be in accordance with the standards of Article 12,
Section 12.14 and 12.15. The Planning Board shall request an advisory letter from the Historic District
Commission or the Maine Historic Preservation Commission regarding the compatibility of the proposed
improvements, changes, etc. Within 60 days of any such request, the Historic District Commission shall and
the Maine Historic Preservation Commission may, evaluate the compatibility of the proposed improvements,
changes, etc. in accordance with Article 12, Sections 12.14 and 12.15.
b. Planning Board approval shall be sought and secured by the building-owner and submitted in writing to the
CEO prior to issuance of the building permit.
c. In reviewing such applications, the Planning Board shall refer to Sections 12.8 and 12.9 of Article 12.
d. Where the historic building is to be enlarged, increased residential density permitted under §7.5 shall be
allowed only in the historic portion of the building. - AMENDED 11/07/2006
e. Any conversion which does not receive an Advisory Letter from the Local Historic District Commission or
the Maine Historic Preservation Commission may be made only if the building shall be made to conform to
the current density requirements of the zone in which it is located.
7.5.1.5 Application Procedure
a. Applications for conversions shall include the information required by Article 12, Section 12.5.2.1., 12.5.2.2,
and 12.4.2.4.
b. Applications for improvements or exterior changes or enlargements as described Section 7.5.1.4 shall include
the information required by Article 12, Section 12.12.
c. Applications shall include a sealed letter from a licensed (civil or structural) professional engineer (under
Title 32 M.R.S.A., Chapter 19) in the State of Maine certifying that there is sufficient structural integrity in
the existing building to sustain the proposed conversion or that the plans as proposed will guarantee
sufficient structural integrity to sustain the proposed conversion.
d. Applications which also require review under the Functional Subdivision Site Plan Review Ordinance shall
meet all requirements of that Ordinance.
7.5.1.6 Restrictions
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
124
a. Each resulting dwelling unit shall contain not less than 600 square feet of floor area not including porches,
patios, stairways, common halls, storage, and similar areas whether or not enclosed.
b. Each resulting dwelling unit shall have complete cooking and sanitary facilities.
c. Notwithstanding Section 21.2, for conversions of historic buildings under this Section the density regulations
of this Section shall specifically supersede all other applicable density standards in the Town of York Zoning
Ordinance, the Town of York Planning Board Subdivision and Site Plan Regulations and the York
Functional Subdivision Site Plan Review Ordinance.
d. There shall be at least one off-street parking space for each new dwelling unit created by a large historic
building conversion subject to possible exception by the Planning Board granted in accordance with the
provisions of Article 15. - AMENDED 11/06/2007
7.5.1.7 Definitions
The definitions of terms of Article 12 shall be used in interpreting references to that Article.
7.5.2 Provisions Applicable to BUS-1 District
7.5.2.1 Purpose: The purpose of this section is to promote the preservation of significant historical buildings, thereby
enhancing the village's appearance and extending our common architectural legacy for future generations to enjoy.
It is recognized that changing patterns in family size, and sharply increasing maintenance costs, are influencing the
economic viability of large buildings designed in an earlier era. The intent of this section is to enable such buildings
to be adapted to new residential needs, while exerting strict control over the preservation of all exterior architectural
features.
7.5.2.2 Buildings listed in the National Register of Historic Places, which have been deemed to be historically significant in
the judgment of the State Historic Preservation Officer, in the BUS-1 Zone, may be converted to use for more than
one family, upon review and approval of the proposal by the Planning Board, according to the following conditions:
a. Fire-safety provisions shall conform to the standards set by the National 101 Life Safety Code.
b. All original exterior architectural trim, molding, and details (including doors and windows) shall be preserved,
and replacements shall faithfully resemble the originals. Trim and moldings shall also not be covered by any
new siding materials. No new building extensions shall be allowed. All exterior alterations shall be consistent
with the historical period and architectural style of the building. In evaluating such proposals, the Planning
Board may seek the assistance of recognized authorities in historic preservation. The above provisions are not
only standards for reviewing applications, they are also conditions or which thereafter protect any historic
building converted under this section.
c. Where the historic building is to be enlarged, increased residential density shall be permitted only in the historic
portion of the building, as controlled by paragraphs d. and e. below. - AMENDED 11/07/2006
d. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided on the basis of the following ratios:
One-bedroom units: 1.25 spaces each
Two (or more) bedroom units: 2 spaces each
Such spaces shall be located either on the premises or within 300 feet of the premises.
e. Dwelling units shall contain 700 sq. ft. of floor space, excluding common corridors, stairwells, and other
common spaces (such as laundry rooms, etc.).
f. All outdoor parking and circulation areas shall be buffered from adjacent residential properties by screening
consisting of either a landscaped solid wooden fence or dense evergreen shrubbery. The screen should be no
less than four feet in height. Any outdoor illumination for parking, circulation, or building security shall be
shielded or directed so that glare does not affect neighboring residential properties. The type, size, location,
and "direction" of all proposed outdoor illumination fixtures shall be specified in the application to the Planning
Board. New parking spaces may not be provided in front yards.
g. All electrical and plumbing systems shall be upgraded or replaced according to the applicable national and state
codes, where this is recommended to the Planning Board by the Code Enforcement Officer, including but not
limited to the 101 Life Safety Code, the National Electric Code, and the Maine State Plumbing Code.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
125
h. For conversions of historic buildings under this Section the density regulations of this Section shall specifically
supersede all other applicable density standards in the Town of York Zoning Ordinance, the Town of York
Planning Board Subdivision and Site Plan Regulations and the York Functional Subdivision Site Plan Review
Ordinance. To this end, Article 21.2 shall not pertain to these provisions.
7.6 Open Space Conservation Subdivision Application (formerly Cluster Housing Subdivision Application)
NOTE: Substantive revision to all of §7.6 was approved on November 5, 2013. All prior dates of amendment have
been removed in the November 5, 2013 printing of this Ordinance for the sake of clarity. Prior amendments are
identified by date in earlier printings.
Open space conservation subdivisions shall be permitted in all base zoning districts. Permissibility within overlay
districts is addressed as needed by district. The standards of this Section (§7.6) shall apply to all open space conservation
subdivisions.
7.6.1 Procedures
Open space conservation subdivisions require subdivision approval by the Planning Board.
A. Proposed residential subdivisions that are not created through exemptions in the State Subdivision law
are required to be designed as an open space conservation residential development based on the
requirements in this ordinance when any of the following exists:
1. The residential subdivision is proposed to contain a private or public road that provides access to
the lots/dwellings; or
2. The lot for which the residential subdivision is proposed abuts conservation land or land that can’t
be developed that is 10 acres or greater; or
3. The lot to be subdivided is partially or fully located within the Cape Neddick or York River
Watersheds (see the Natural Resources Chapter of the Comprehensive Plan for reference).
B. The Planning Board may waive the open space conservation subdivision requirement if the applicant
can demonstrate why the open space conservation subdivision is not a reasonable design option for the
parcel to be subdivided. When making this determination the Board shall consider the following:
1. Lot shape/configuration;
2. Protection of natural features such as slopes greater than 20%, wetlands, vernal pools, surface
waters and stream location(s) on the lot would not benefit from an open space conservation
design;
3. The open space conservation design would not meet the intended purposes specified in zoning
§1.3.12 - Concerning Open Space Conservation Subdivision.
C. The applicant shall be responsible for justifying the proposed open space design, and identify a primary
conservation theme, including but not limited to forest preservation, water quality preservation
protection, farmland preservation, or viewshed protection. The conservation theme shall guide the
location and use of the designated open space. For instance, if setting aside open space for agricultural
use, there should be a demonstration that the open space has good agricultural soils, or if setting aside
open space for protection of wildlife habitat, the design should be based on science and the expert
opinion of a qualified wildlife biologist. (See also §7.6.3.B)
D. The proposed holder of the open space shall be involved in the process of defining the open space and
drafting appropriate restrictions and controls.
E. The first meeting with the Planning Board shall be Conceptual Design Review, and shall precede
submission of a Preliminary Review application. During this stage in the review process the Board shall
consider waiving the requirement for open space conservation development if the applicant can justify
the open space conservation subdivision design option is not reasonable for the parcel based on letter
B above. The reasons for or against granting a waiver of this requirement shall be detailed in the
Planning Board application for preliminary and final approval and subsequent Findings of Fact if or
when final approval is granted.
F. Conceptual Design Review shall include the submission of an Existing Site Resources Map, identifying
both significant natural and cultural resources. It is not required that this be an engineered plan, and
widely available Town or State public data are acceptable data sources. It shall include wetland and
Shoreland areas, significant habitat corridors, rare or endangered habitat, roads and buildings within
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
126
100 feet of the property, indication of overall stormwater flow direction, species and sizes of significant
trees, copses of trees, historic and cultural resources such as existing barns, trails, cellar holes, stone
walls, and other noteworthy features unique to the property. It should be conveyed in a clear graphic
style that is easy to read. The Existing Site Resources Map shall not include road layouts, house
locations, or lot lines. The Planning Board may schedule a site walk to the property, using the Existing
Site Resources Map. The intent of this phase of review for there to be an opportunity to build greater
Planning Board, applicant, and open space holder consensus on critical resources and overall site design
early in the review process, before the applicant proceeds into formal design of the project.
G. It is intended that the open space shall be designed first, and the built environment shall be constructed
in the remaining area. During the Conceptual Design Review process, the Board shall determine
whether or not the open space layout, design and configuration is appropriate based on purposes stated
in §1.3.12. For sites with on-site septic, the Board shall balance the purposes to be achieved (as stated
in §1.3.12) with the need to locate the septic system(s) on the best available soils. Other development
considerations shall be of secondary importance.
The Board may require alteration of the open space configuration to maximize achievement of the
purposes of open space conservation subdivision design. The Board shall include in its Findings of
Fact the basis for its conclusions about the suitability of the open space conservation subdivision design
with respect to the specific site.
H. An application for an open space conservation subdivision shall submit a Yield Plan, a visual showing
the maximum number of lots that could reasonably be expected to be achieved through a conventional
layout given conventional subdivision dimensional requirements and site conditions, and utilizing the
net buildable area calculation used to determine maximum permitted density under Zoning 7.6.4.B, and
defined in Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations Article 3. The Yield Plan is prepared to determine the
base number of dwelling units to be permitted for the open space conservation subdivision proposal,
to be submitted in conjunction with the net developable acreage calculations.
I. The York Conservation Commission shall be solicited for feedback on the site design during
Conceptual Design Review.
7.6.2 Reserved - AMENDED 11/06/2018
7.6.3 Open Space Standards
A. Open space shall be required to meet 2 standards. First, the open space must contain at least 50% of
the total area of the property in order to comply with Comprehensive Plan policy #1.2.1. Second, the
open space must contain at least 50% of the net developable area (as defined in the Subdivision
Regulations) of the property in order to comply with Comprehensive Plan policy #6.2.1. These
standards shall be applied concurrently, not sequentially (e.g. a site with land that is entirely buildable
can place 50% of its land in open space and meet both standards simultaneously).
B. Design. The open space shall be designed to maximize achievement of the purposes described in
Zoning §1.3.12. The applicant shall present a plant and narrative description to illustrate how this is to
be accomplished. To the greatest extent possible, the open space should be in one large piece rather
than separate pieces or narrow buffer strips that have little conservation value. The Board may require
alteration of the layout and design of the subdivision open space to better achieve these purposes. The
Board may solicit input on the efficacy of the open space design as needed, including but not limited
to review by a third-party wildlife biologist, a landscape architect, or another professional qualified to
respond to the aspect of the application in question. Any technical assistance deemed necessary by the
Planning Board to conduct the review shall be paid for by the applicant in accordance with Zoning 18-
A.2.D.
C. Requirements. Any open space conservation subdivision open space area shall comply with all of the
following requirements:
1. Open Space.
a. The open space may be held in fee-simple ownership or as open space with a conservation
easement placed upon it. In the event the open space is held by a qualified conservation
organization, such as a land trust, the York Conservation Commission, or another body
the Planning Board deems capable of land stewardship, a separate conservation easement
may not be required if it can be demonstrated that the use, maintenance and other
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
127
requirements of the open space will be continued in perpetuity. Reference to open space
throughout §7.6 refers to either the fee-simple or conservation easement arrangement.
b. The open space land shall be owned by the homeowners, the Town, or other entity
acceptable to the Planning Board. In no case shall the homeowners association or private
property owner be the holder of the conservation easement, or the holder of the open
space if there is no approved, partnering conservation organization. In determining
whether or not a party is acceptable, the Board shall base its decision on the ability of the
owner to control, maintain, manage and protect the open space in a manner consistent with
the subdivision approval.
c. If the homeowners take ownership of the open space land, the following shall be provided
for:
1. the ownership shall pass with conveyance of the lots or residential units;
2. compulsory assessment of all related costs to each of the homeowners; and
3. a conservation easement shall be held by a qualified conservation organization.
d. Control of Open Space. There shall be some form of legal arrangement made to ensure:
1. there is a plan for the use, management, maintenance and protection of the open
space, and that specifies the responsibilities of the owner;
2. the owner is responsible for maintenance, taxes and insurance of the open space;
and
3. the terms of the legal arrangement cannot be changed without prior approval of the
Planning Board.
2. Open Space Holder. The Planning Board shall approve the open space, including terms,
conditions, purpose, and open space holder. The open space holder must have a demonstrated
capacity to fulfill the purposes of the open space. Capacity shall be determined by the ability of
the organization to:
a. produce baseline documentation of the property;
b. perform monitoring and maintenance of the property on an annual basis, or more
frequently, as needed;
c. have the capacity to seek remedies to violations of open space approval conditions, legally
or through other enforcement measures;
d. have staff with suitable professional capacity, which may include land stewardship, wildlife
biology, or other areas of expertise suitable to the primary purpose of the open space.
3. Open Space Conditions
a. The open space approval shall:
1. regulate the use, maintenance, management and protection of the open space land;
2. be established and remain with this land in perpetuity;
3. specify the method of management and maintenance;
4. establish responsibility for maintenance, taxes and insurance;
5. establish a mandatory inspection program for the open space, which may retain a
qualified neutral third party to perform this duty, and which may involve the
subdivision homeowners and the Conservation Commission, and which shall
require annual inspections at a minimum; and
6. address other requirements deemed necessary by the Planning Board to achieve the
purposes for which the open space is established.
4. The open space land shall be used and managed consistent with the purposes for which it was
established.
5. The Planning Board strongly encourages the allowance of public access to and/or through
designated open space. If access is to be provided the Board shall consider the following guidance:
a. The type of access shall be appropriate based on the plan for the open space, the clustered
homes, and the traditional uses of the land;
b. Reasonable limitations may be placed on public access, including but not limited to type of
access (pedestrian only, etc.), specific locations (along a trail or path, to the entire open
space, etc.), and timing controls (access during daylight only, no access near vernal pools in
the spring, etc.); and
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
128
c. The open space steward shall be permitted to temporarily restrict public access to prevent
abuse. No such restriction shall be in effect for more than 90 days without application to
and approval of the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall treat the matter as an
application to amend the Subdivision Approval.
d. The Board shall expressly review public access issues during the Conceptual Design Review
of any open space conservation subdivision application.
6. Where ownership of the open space is to be held by the homeowners, all the open space lands
shall be owned in common by a homeowners association.
7. Ownership of open space and, where applicable, the conservation easement, shall be transferred
from the developer in a timely manner. Where a third-party will hold an easement or ownership,
the transfer shall be made prior to the sale of any lot in the subdivision. Where a homeowners
association is to be the holder of the land, the transfer shall take place within 30 days of
establishment of the association.
7.6.4 Development Standards
A. Uses. Open space conservation subdivisions shall be limited to single-family, duplex and multifamily
residential development as permitted in the base and overlay district(s) in which the lot is located. Each
residential building shall be located on its own lot unless the proposed development is to be
condominiumized. Regardless of the form of ownership all standards within §7.6.4 shall be depicted
for adherence purposes.
B. Density.
1. The standard calculation of density shall be total net developable area divided by the minimum lot
size for the base and overlay zoning district(s) in which the lot is located. Open space conservation
subdivision applications also must submit a yield plan in accordance with 7.6.1.H to determine the
total number of lots and dwelling units permitted.
2. Within the Shoreland Overlay District, the following shall apply regardless of any other provisions
of this Ordinance:
a. On portions of the lot in Resource Protection and Stream Protection subdistricts, buildings
and building lots shall be prohibited consistent with Article 8.
b. On portions of the lot in Limited Residential and Mixed Use subdistricts that have frontage
on a Shoreland waterbody, and one or more dwelling units are proposed to be located in the
land area within the Limited Residential or Mixed Use Subdistrict, the parcel must have a
minimum of 200 linear feet of shore frontage to allow its development as an open space
conservation housing subdivision. The following standards shall also govern the lay-out of
such an open space conservation housing subdivision:
1. A minimum of 50% of the shore frontage shall be undeveloped and shall be dedicated
as open space.
2. The configuration of the dwelling units within the Limited Residential or Mixed Use
Subdistrict shall be staggered, and shall not be located in a row immediately adjacent to
the minimum setback from the Normal High Water Mark of the protected waterbody.
No more than 50% of the dwelling units located within the Limited Residential or
Mixed Use Subdistrict can be located within 50 feet of the standard Shoreland setback.
3. The maximum number of dwelling units permitted in the Shoreland Overlay District
shall not exceed the density standards of Zoning §5.2.3.
c. Buildable area within any area of the Shoreland Overlay District may be counted in the
calculation of net developable area. The density standards of Zoning §8.1 shall apply, or others
if more restrictive.
C. Density Bonus. A density bonus of twenty percent (20%) above that indicated by the yield plan shall
be allowed if at least twenty five percent (25%), rounded to the nearest whole number, of the proposed
dwelling units within a residential open space conservation subdivision development are defined as
“workforce affordable housing” as determined by the Planning Board. The following standards shall
also apply:
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
129
1. All dimensional, lot coverage, and open space standards as prescribed in this ordinance shall be
adhered to; and
2. Proposed workforce affordable housing units shall be integrated within the design of the
development and not be “stand alone” as determined by the Planning Board; and
3. The governance standards specified in §10-F.6 shall be followed for dwelling units
defined as “workforce affordable housing.” This requirement shall be noted in the approved plan
and Findings of Fact.
D. Dimensional Standards.
1. Lot Size. Building lots shall not be larger than the minimum lot size requirements specified in
Zoning §5.2.1, §5.2.2 and §5.2.4. However, lots not served by municipal sewer service shall not be
less than 20,000 square feet in total size.
2. Street Frontage. Building lots shall have frontage on streets sufficient to provide access to the lot,
but shall not be required to meet the frontage standards of Zoning §5.2.1, §5.2.2 and §5.2.4.
3. Setbacks from Lot Lines. Minimum structure setbacks specified in Zoning §5.2.1, §5.2.2, and
§5.2.4 shall be reduced to 1/3 of the measurements specified in those sections.
4. Lot Coverage. Lot coverage shall be evaluated in aggregate for the entire open space conservation
subdivision, and overall the open space conservation subdivision shall be required to comply with
the standard for the zone(s) in which it is located.
E. Access. Unless as required in §7.6.1-A above and if a road is to be developed, access to lots in an open
space conservation subdivision shall be from an internal road, not from existing road frontage.
F. Abutter Buffers. To protect neighborhood qualities outside the open space conservation subdivision,
the flowing shall apply:
1. Setback. No building within the open space conservation subdivision shall be located closer
than 50 feet to any property outside the open space conservation subdivision.
2. Buffers. On building lots, there shall be a 50 foot buffer along the property line of any abutting
lots outside the open space conservation subdivision. This buffer shall be left undisturbed with
natural vegetation, or at the direction of the Planning Board may be landscaped to enhance the
buffer function. Roads and utilities shall be allowed to cross through buffers to access the
subdivision, as well as to adjacent properties. - AMENDED 11/05/2013, 11/06/2018
7.7 Bed and Breakfast Operations
7.7.1 Purpose. The provisions that regulate bed & breakfast operations offer an opportunity for adaptive reuse
of older homes, help make housing more affordable for owners of such homes, and guide the development
and operations in order to prevent undue impacts on the surrounding neighborhoods.
7.7.2 Standards. The following standards shall apply.
A. Private Home. The operation shall be conducted only in conjunction with a single-family
residence, occupied either year-round or seasonally. The use is clearly incidental and subordinate
to the use of the home as a residence. The operation shall be conducted by the person or people
who live in the residence during its operation and at least one of whom is listed on the property
deed as a majority owner of the property. The intent of these requirements shall be that the
overnight accommodations function as a private home with guest accommodations.
B. Sole Principal Use on a Lot. The single-family residence in which the bed & breakfast is operated
shall be the sole residence and sole principal use on the lot.
C. Home Occupation. The home in which a bed & breakfast operates may also have a home
occupation as an accessory use to the residence.
D. Transient Rooms. One to seven sleeping rooms may be rented to the general public for transient
occupancy. Transient occupancy, as used here, shall mean that no guest stays in the same bed and
breakfast for more than 120 days in a calendar year.
E. Meals. A full or continental breakfast shall be provided to guests.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
130
F. Cooking Facilities. No cooking or kitchens are permitted in any of the rooms rented to the public.
G. Employees. Other than the home’s occupants, not more than one employee of the bed &
breakfast may work on-site at any time.
H. Age of Home. No new bed & breakfast shall be established in a residence that is less than 10
years old.
I. Exterior Alterations. No external alterations shall be permitted which would change the residential
character of the dwelling, except as may be required to make the building accessible.
J. Exterior Lighting. There shall be no artificial outdoor illumination of any kind for permitted home
occupations on the property, including off-street parking areas, the house or any accessory
structures, other than the normal and customary outdoor lighting for single-family houses, such
as a customary porch light or garage light or walk-way light.
K. Impacts. No noise vibration, smoke dust, odors, heat, glare, unsightliness or other nuisance shall
be is produced which is discernible from other properties.
L. Display. There is no public display of goods or wares, and there are no signs except as permitted
in Article 16.
M. Parking. One off-street parking space for each room accommodation in a Bed and Breakfast shall
be required. Additionally, such establishments shall provide sufficient off-street parking spaces
for the resident/owner and an employee. Such off-street parking shall be adequately screened
from the street and from adjacent lots (for example with dense evergreen plantings). Such offstreet
parking areas shall be set at least ten 10) feet from the side and rear lot lines, and sixteen
(16) feet from the front lot line.
N. Outside Storage Containers. Outside storage containers including, but not limited to; dumpsters
and recycling bins, shall be located at least ten (10) feet from the side and rear lot lines, and sixteen
(16) feet from the front lot line. Such containers shall be adequately screened from the street and
from adjacent lots (for example with dense evergreen plantings).
O. Smoke Alarms. A hard-wired smoke alarm with battery back-up shall be located in each sleeping
room within the house.
- AMENDED 11/02/1993
7.8 Elderly Housing Standards
7.8.1 Schedule of Dimensional Regulations
a. Minimum Land Area 43,560 sq. ft. or the minimum land area in the underlying zone if
this requirement is greater than 43,560 sq. ft.
b. Minimum Street Frontage Amount of lineal feet specified in the underlying
zone.
c. Minimum Shore Frontage Amount of lineal feet specified in the underlying
zone.
d. Minimum Lot Depth Amount of lineal feet specified in the underlying
zone.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
131
e. Minimum Front Yard Setback Any structure with 4 units of elderly housing or less shall have a
minimum setback of 50 feet. Any structure with 5 units to 12 units
of elderly housing shall have a minimum setback of 75 feet.
f. Minimum Rear Yard Setback A project with 15 or less units of elderly housing in which there is
no structure with more than 4 units of elderly housing shall have
the minimum setback specified in the underlying zone. A project
in which there are 16 or more elderly housing units or any structure
with 5 or more elderly housing units shall have a minimum setback
of 50 feet.
g. Minimum Side Yard Setback A project with 15 or less units of elderly housing in which there is
no structure with more than 4 units of elderly housing shall have
the minimum setback specified in the underlying zone. A project
in which there are 16 or more elderly housing units or any structure
with 5 or more elderly housing units shall have a minimum setback
of 50 feet.
h. Maximum Lot Coverage 25% of lot.
i. Maximum Building Height 35 feet.
- AMENDED 11/07/1995
j. Accessory Structures and Uses
Associated with the Elderly
Housing Units Setbacks All accessory structures associated with the elderly housing project
shall comply with all setback requirements established for such
units and structures.
k. Parking Area Setbacks No parking shall be located closer to the front lot line than any
structure containing elderly housing units or any accessory
structure or use associated with the elderly housing project. This
front lot line shall be the lot line which establishes minimum street
frontage for the parcel on which the elderly housing project is
located. Also, no parking areas shall be located within the side and
rear setback requirement.
7.8.1.2 Floor Area
Notwithstanding the terms of Section 5.4 of this Ordinance to the contrary, each elderly housing dwelling unit shall
have at least 450 gross square feet of living area.
7.8.1.3 Number of Units Per Structure
A structure shall have at least 1 and no more than 12 units of elderly housing.
7.8.1.4 Density
The minimum land area for each elderly housing dwelling unit shall be:
a. An elderly housing unit with 3 or Each elderly housing unit shall have the minimum
or more bedrooms land area specified in Section 5.2.
b. Structure with one unit of elderly Minimum land area specified in Section 5.2
housing
c. Structure with 2 units of 1 or 2 5,000 sq. ft. of suitable land area for each unit
bedroom elderly housing
d. Structure with 3 units of 1 or 2 4,000 sq. ft. of suitable land area for each unit
bedroom elderly housing units
e. Structure with 4 or more, but no 3,000 sq. ft. of suitable land area for each unit
greater than 12 units of 1 or 2
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
132
bedroom elderly housing units
7.8.1.5 Number of Units Per Development
No elderly housing project shall consist of less than 6 elderly housing units or more than 250 elderly housing units
on a single parcel of land.
7.8.2 Performance Standards
7.8.2.1 Sewer and Water Supply
All elderly housing units shall be connected to public sewer and public water supply. - AMENDED 11/07/1995
7.8.2.2 Architectural Appearance
All new construction of elderly housing shall have pitched roofs, which may include a gable roof, hip roof, mansard
roof, or gambrel roof. If a gable roof or hip roof is used, the roof pitch shall be at least four feet in twelve feet. All
new construction shall use exterior materials compatible with other structures in the surrounding area.
7.8.2.3 Buffers and Landscaping
Standard 7.8.2.3.1 is applicable to all projects and Standards 7.8.2.3.2, 7.8.2.3.3, 7.8.2.3.4 and 7.8.2.3.5 are applicable
to all large projects as defined by Standard 7.8.2.3.2.
7.8.2.3.1 Any elderly housing project, regardless of size, shall submit a landscape plan prepared by a landscape architect
licensed in the State of Maine, for the parking areas that serve the development, with adequate provision for
screening the parking areas from adjacent properties.
7.8.2.3.2 Any elderly housing project with 15 or more elderly housing units, shall comply with the Standards in paragraph
7.8.2.3.3 through 7.8.2.3.5.
7.8.2.3.3 The first 30 feet of the side or rear yard, measured from the property line, shall be retained in its natural vegetated
state to the maximum extent possible to provide a visual screen between the abutting lot and the project.
7.8.2.3.4 When the natural buffering does not exist, cannot be fully retained as a visual screen or in the sole judgment of the
Planning Board, is not sufficient to achieve an effective visual screen, the first 30 feet of the side or rear yard setback
shall be landscaped to create the visual screen, in accordance with the following procedure and standards:
a. For the purpose of this subsection a “canopy tree” is a deciduous tree that reaches at least 35 feet in height at
maturity and at the time of planting has a minimum 2 inch caliper six inches above the ground and a height of
at least 8 feet. An “understory tree” is a deciduous tree that reaches less than 35 feet in height at maturity and
at time of planting has a minimum 1-1 1/2 inch caliper six inches above the ground and a height of at least 6
feet. An “evergreen tree” reaches 10 to 35 feet in height at maturity and at time of planting has a minimum 1-
1 1/2 caliper six inches above the ground and a minimum height of at least 6 feet.
b. Further, for the purpose of this subsection, one canopy tree shall be equal to 10 “plant units”, one evergreen
shall be equal to 5 “plant units”, one understory tree shall be equal to 5 “plant units”, and one shrub shall be
equal to one “plant unit”.
c. In each rear or side yard, the required buffer shall include sufficient trees and shrubs to total a minimum of 80
“plant units” per 100 feet of length or fraction thereof of yard area, and at least 40 of these “plant units” shall
be achieved with canopy and evergreen trees. Each mature canopy or evergreen tree existing in the required
setback prior to the development and retained in good condition shall be awarded double the “plant units”
assigned to a newly planted tree. If any such retained tree dies within five years of the date of the building
permit issued for the development, it shall be replaced with two canopy or evergreen trees as described in this
Section. New plantings required by this Section that die shall be replaced within one growing season.
d. Because different sites will have different potential impacts on the abutting lots, the applicant shall submit at
least two alternative plans for the buffer yards prepared by a landscape architect licensed in the State of Maine.
The first plan shall demonstrate the means by which the landscaping will create a dense screen that blocks
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
133
virtually all visibility between the abutting lot and the applicant’s development. The second plan shall arrange
the landscaping in clusters of plantings or other suitable arrangement to allow filtered views of the development
from the abutting property. The Planning Board may ask for additional alternatives as it considers appropriate
and necessary. The decisions as to which plan or which combination of plans is appropriate for the site shall
be the Planning Board’s.
7.8.2.3.5 In addition to the landscaping of side and rear yards required to serve as buffers between the development and
abutting lots, the applicant shall submit a landscape plan, prepared by a landscape architect licensed in the State of
Maine, for other yard areas, parking areas, accessory use areas, public areas and site entrances, in accordance with
Section 7.17 of the Town of York Planning Board Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations.
7.8.2.4 Open Space Requirement
7.8.2.4.1 An elderly housing project shall provide open space according to the following formula. Open space may include,
at the sole judgment of the Planning Board, land which is not considered “suitable land” in accordance with Section
5.5.3. The purpose of this open space is to lessen the intensity of property development, preserve natural features,
provide scenic vistas, discourage development of geographically unsuitable land, and promote other similar uses
deemed appropriate by the Planning Board.
Amount of Land Area Percent of Open Space Required
a. An elderly housing project which requires No open space required
total suitable land area of less than 65,340 sq. ft.
b. An elderly housing project which requires a 10% required open space
minimum total suitable land area of 65,341 sq. ft.
(1 1/2 acres), but not more than 130,680 sq. ft.
(3 acres) of total suitable land area
c. An elderly housing project which requires a 15% required open space
minimum total suitable land area of 130,681 sq. ft.
(3 acres) but not more than 217,800 sq. ft.(5 acres)
of suitable land area
d. An elderly housing project which requires a 20% required open space
minimum total suitable land area of more than
217,801 sq. ft. (5 acres) of suitable land area. - AMENDED 11/07/1995
7.8.2.4.2. Any elderly housing open space area shall comply with all of the following:
a. The applicant or developer shall provide for the dedication of open space land to the Town or other suitable
agency established under Title 33 M.R.S.A., Section 476, or to its legal protection in perpetuity by a method
satisfactory to the Planning Board. The Planning Board must approve of the holder and its adequacy to protect
and maintain the values for which the open space land was established. If the land is conveyed to a corporation
or trust owned or to be owned by the owners of the lots or elderly housing units within the cluster housing
subdivision, ownership of the open space land shall pass with conveyance of the lots or elderly housing units.
b. Covenants or other legal arrangements which regulate the use of the open space land shall be established and
shall remain with this land in perpetuity. The covenants shall: specify ownership of the cluster open space;
method of management and maintenance; responsibility for maintenance; taxes and insurance; compulsory
membership and compulsory assessment provisions; guarantee that any association formed to own and
maintain cluster open space will not be dissolved without the consent of the Planning Board; and any other
specifications deemed necessary by the Planning Board to achieve the purposes for which the open space was
established. The Planning Board shall approve the regulatory covenants.
c. The uses permitted in the open space land shall be consistent with the purposes for which it was established.
Such uses shall consist of: land which remains in its natural state, such as open fields and meadowlands, wooded
areas, and wetlands and waterbodies; wildlife, waterfowl and bird habitat; passive recreation uses, such as nature
trails, pedestrian trails, cross-country skiing areas and horseback riding trails; agriculture uses, such as grazing
land, crop raising and hay fields; and similar uses deemed appropriate by the Planning Board. The preservation
of scenic vistas, particularly vistas from public ways and lands, shall be a consideration in the establishment and
use of open space land.
d. Elderly housing open space land shall only be made available for public use if either or both of the following
actions occur:
d-a. The applicant proposes to make the land available for public use and the Planning Board makes a
finding that the public use of this area is desirable. The Board, in making this finding, shall
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
134
consider the size, location, type of development, and cost of development or maintenance of such
elderly housing open space.
d-b. The Planning Board determines that a significant public benefit will be achieved by allowing public
use of the land. If such a finding is made, the Board shall request a transfer of such land to the
Town or other suitable agency. The applicant shall not be required to approve the request of the
Board. The Board determination that a significant public benefit will be achieved shall consider
the size, location, type of development, and cost of development or maintenance of such elderly
housing open space.
7.8.2.5 Access Requirement
An elderly housing project shall have a minimum of one means of ingress and egress to the site which provides safe
access to and from public and private streets. If the project has either fifty or more elderly housing units or there is
400 or more feet of depth from the street frontage to any unit, the applicant shall provide a divided entranceway for
this single means of ingress and egress for a minimum of 50 feet. The Planning Board shall use road standards
prescribed in the Planning Board Subdivision and Site Plan Regulations as guidelines for access design and construction.
7.8.3 Occupancy of Elderly Housing
An elderly housing unit shall only be used for occupancy by the following persons to allow issuance and continuance
of an Occupancy Permit.
a. All persons who reside in the unit are a minimum of 62 years of age or older.
b. An elderly family whose head or spouse is a minimum of 62 years of age or older.
c. For elderly housing units financed wholly or partially with federal funds, housing units occupied by elderly
persons or handicapped persons as defined in the funding program, provided the number of units available
for occupancy by handicapped persons who are not elderly shall be the minimum needed to establish
eligibility for the federal or state program and that the program has received the approval of the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development as one designed and operated to assist elderly
persons.
7.8.4 Conversion of Elderly Housing Units
An elderly housing unit shall not be converted to a residential dwelling unit unless the elderly housing unit satisfies the
minimum lot size and minimum floor space area requirements for the zoning district in which it is located.
- AMENDED 11/07/1995
7.9 Accessory Residential Unit
A. Purpose. The purpose of Accessory Residential Units shall be to help accommodate the need of residents
to care for relatives who are dealing with demonstrated illness, disability, or old age (person aged 62 years
old or older). To this end, accessory residential units shall be permitted only by special exception in
compliance with §7.9. See also Article 2 definitions of “residential unit” and “accessory residential unit.”
B. Special Exception. If granted a Special Exception, one accessory residential unit shall be permitted as an
accessory use to a single-family residence without being considered a subdivision or a change in density. The
Board of Appeals shall grant the Special Exception only when all of the following conditions are met:
1. Not more than 2 people shall occupy the accessory residential unit.
2. The floor area of the accessory residential unit shall not exceed 50% of the gross floor area of the
principal residence, or 750 square feet, whichever is less.
3. The accessory residential unit shall be created only when one or both of the occupants are related
by blood, marriage or adoption to the primary resident of the single-family residence. The
approval shall expressly identify the tenants of the accessory residential unit. Any subsequent
change in occupation of the unit, as may occur by marriage, institutionalization, death, or other
reasons, shall require re-application to the Board of Appeals. The Board shall follow the same
application review and decision-making process as for the original application.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
135
4. At least one of the people to occupy the accessory residential unit shall, at the time of application,
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Board of Appeals the need for some form of assistance
consistent with the purpose stated in §7.9.A.
5. The accessory residential unit shall be removed when the approved occupants no longer live in
the unit. Removal shall be defined, for this purpose, as removal of the kitchen, and by removal of
any lockable doors that would separate the main residence from the accessory residential unit if in
the same building.
6. As a subsequent condition of approval, the Board of Appeals shall require its written approval of
the Special Exception to be recorded in the York County Registry of Deeds to ensure that the
duration limit is included in the chain of title.
7. As a subsequent condition of approval, the Board of Appeals shall require the applicant to provide
annual certification to the Code Enforcement Officer that occupancy of the unit continues to
comply with the approval. The CEO may request evidence as they deem necessary to confirm
compliance.
C. Occupancy Permit. The Code Enforcement Officers shall not permit occupancy of the accessory
residential unit without receiving written verification of the recording of the Board of Appeals’ approval.
- AMENDED 11/02/2004
7.10 Restaurant as Accessory to Retail Use
For a restaurant use to be considered accessory to a principal retail use, the retail business may provide not more than
12 seats for customers to consume products on-premise. If more seating is provided, the restaurant use shall be
considered a principal use, no longer accessory to the retail use and therefore subject to all controls established for
restaurants in the zone in which it is located. - AMENDED 11/02/2004
7.11 Overboard Discharge Systems
New overboard discharge systems shall be prohibited in the Town of York. Systems currently in operation may be
maintained and operated indefinitely in compliance with all State requirements. Such systems shall not be expanded.
- AMENDED 11/06/2001
7.12 Propane Tanks
The Fire Chief with jurisdiction shall be required to approve any proposed propane tank installation prior to the
issuance of an Occupancy Permit for any building which will utilize propane. This standard shall apply to buildings on
lots located wholly or partially within the 100- year or 500-year floodplain, or within the YBVC base zoning district.
- AMENDED 11/07/2006, 11/04/2008
7.13 Conversion of Buildings to Affordable Apartments
A. Purpose. These standards are enacted to help the Town to comply with statutory requirements to encourage
the creation of new affordable housing units, but in a manner consistent with public sentiment expressed in
the affordable housing surveys. Units are for rent only, and changes are limited in scale to prevent excessive
neighborhood impacts.
B. Eligible Buildings. Any principal building which exists as of January 1, 2009, may be converted into
affordable apartments.
C. Percent of Units to be Affordable. When a building is converted, a minimum of 50% of the resulting
residential units shall be affordable apartments.
D. Maximum Units Per Building. For creation of new affordable apartment units, an eligible building may
be converted in accordance with the following:
1. into not more than two affordable apartments and two associated market-rate apartment units if
served by year-round public water and public sewer; or
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
136
2. into not more than one affordable apartment and one associated market-rate apartment unit in
other situations.
Where the units are not serviced by public sewer, density shall not exceed the standards of the State Minimum
Lot Size Law (Title 12 MRSA §4807 et seq.), and the septic system must be approved for the number of
units and bedrooms.
E. Conflicting Dimensional Standards. Where the dimensional provisions of this section (§7.13) are less
restrictive than the dimensional provisions of Article 5, these provisions shall prevail as follows:
1. Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage limits of §5.2 may be exceeded to the extent necessary
to provide the minimum number of required parking spaces as specified in §15.1.1.8. The
standards of §5.2 shall not be exceeded for other purposes, such as building expansion.
2. Density. The density provisions of this section specifically supersede the requirements of Article
5 for all base zoning districts, but do not supersede density limits in any applicable overlay districts,
except as follows: in the Shoreland Overlay District, an existing building which is served by public
water and public sewer and which will not be expanded during the conversion shall not be subject
to the density standards of §8.1.4.A.
3. Floor Area. Each affordable apartment unit shall have no less than 500 square feet and no more
than 1,500 square feet of living space, regardless of any conflicting standards of §5.3.
F. Maximum Number of Units Per Year. Not more than 6 affordable apartment units shall be created per
calendar year.
G. Governance. The following shall apply.
1. Income Limit. Only a household which qualifies as low income, as defined in Article Two, shall
be permitted to occupy an affordable apartment unit. In the event household income increases
above this threshold during the term of a lease, the tenant shall not be required to vacate the unit
until the end of the term of the lease, at which point they shall vacate the unit to make it available
for a qualifying household.
2. Rent Limit. At the time of initiating or renewing a lease for a tenant, the maximum rent for an
affordable apartment unit shall not exceed the standard for affordable housing, as defined in
Article Two, for the tenant.
3. Landlord. Any property owner shall be eligible to own and manage affordable apartments.
4. Qualification of Income and Maximum Rent. Prior to entering into a new lease or renewing a
lease of an affordable apartment, the landlord shall obtain from York Housing or another qualified
non-profit housing corporation as defined by 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 5002(13), a written statement
which verifies the household qualifies as low income, and which specifies a maximum rent the
tenant can be charged to keep the housing affordable in accordance with this Ordinance. The
landlord shall not lease to any household without this statement, and shall not charge a rent which
exceeds the stated limit for this household. The qualified non-profit housing corporation
providing this service may charge an administrative fee to cover the cost. - AMENDED
11/02/2010
5. Condominium Conversion Prohibited. On a property with affordable apartments, all residential
units shall be owned by a single party, and condominium ownership shall be prohibited.
6. Duration of Lease. The lease for an affordable apartment unit shall be for one year.
7. Right to Review Compliance. The Code Enforcement Officer shall expressly have the right to
periodically review compliance with these governance provisions with the property owner and the
applicable qualified non-profit housing corporation, and shall annually report to the Town
Manager about the number of affordable apartments and any compliance issues. - AMENDED
11/02/2010
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
137
H. Permit Authority. Authority to review and decide on an application for conversion to affordable
apartments shall rest with the Code Enforcement Officer, except the Planning Board shall have such
authority if the number of units being created constitutes a subdivision.
I. Abandonment of Use. In the future, if the affordable apartment use is abandoned and the building is
converted to other residential use, the new number of residential units shall comply with all Ordinance
requirements in effect at that time, and any additional lot coverage gained per §7.13.E.1 shall be restored to
pervious surface. - AMENDED 11/03/2009
7.14 Occupancy of Seasonal Dwellings
A seasonal dwelling shall be vacated for a minimum of 90 consecutive days annually. Because the 90-day period will
often occur during the winter, “annually” does not need to correspond to a calendar year. - AMENDED 11/03/2009
7.15 Cultural Facility Standards
7.15.1 Dimensional Regulations
In addition to the dimensional regulations of the Base Zone or Overlay District, the following regulations are applicable
to Cultural Facilities.
a. Minimum Land Area: Minimum 5 acres in size. Where Cultural Facilities share land area with residential
dwellings, the minimum lot size requirement shall be met separately for each dwelling unit for the base zone or
any applicable Overlay Districts, plus 5,000 square feet for each Artist Studio.
b. Front, Rear and Side Yard Setbacks: In no case shall new construction occur within 40 feet of any property
line. When there is a conflict between these setback requirements and the base zone or Overlay District, the
more restrictive shall prevail.
c. Number of Artist Studios per Structure: A structure shall have no more than 6 Artist Studios per structure.
7.15.2 Off-Street Parking
Off-street parking shall be provided on the lot with 1 space for each residential unit and .5 space per Artist Studio.
One visitor parking per 1,000 square feet of common use area shall be provided in addition to the parking required for
the other uses on the lot. The required parking can be reduced by up to 50% if documentation can be provided
showing that the required parking will not be needed to serve the facility. Parking Reductions can be granted by the
Planning Board, as outlined in §15.1.1.4.
7.15.3 Retail or Commercial Activity
No retail or commercial activity shall be permitted except for incidental sales of works made on site.
- AMENDED 5/22/2010
7.16 Commercial Functions on Residential Lots Accessory to Residential Use
Owners of parcels can host up to 12 commercial functions per calendar year on their property provided they obtain a
use permit from the Code Enforcement Office and meet all of the following criteria:
1. No more than 250 people present at the function.
2. Lot size is at least 5 acres.
3. Lot has 1 parking spot for every 3 people attending the function, or there is satellite parking and a shuttle
service. (To be determined by the Police Department)
4. Provide either portable toilets, or other toilet facilities if connected to public sewer. Provide at least 1 toilet
per 100 people (or fraction thereof) attending.
5. Function activities are at least 200 feet from the nearest abutter’s dwelling.
6. Noise Ordinance is adhered to.
7. Obtain a Special Event Permit from the Board of Selectmen.
8. There shall be no more than 3 functions in any calendar month.
9. All activities must end prior to 11pm.
10. All other applicable ordinances are adhered to.
- AMENDED 05/22/2010, 05/17/2014
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
138
7.17 Accessory Dwelling Units
7.17.1 Purpose Statement for Accessory Dwelling Units:
This ordinance is intended to increase the variety of housing opportunities for York’s diverse population, while
affording long-term residents tax relief potential through rental opportunities.
7.17.2 Performance Standards:
A. An accessory dwelling unit (ADU) is a small apartment which is part of an existing single family owner-occupied
home, in the same building as the principal dwelling unit or in a building accessory to the principal dwelling unit,
and which is clearly secondary to the single-family home. The ADU shall have living, sleeping, sanitary and kitchen
facilities for the exclusive use of the unit occupants. The ADU may be rented so that the owner-occupant may
benefit from the additional income. The owner may also elect to occupy the accessory dwelling unit and rent the
principal dwelling unit.
B. Owner-occupied means that either the principal dwelling unit or the accessory dwelling unit is occupied by a
person who has a legal or equitable ownership interest in the property and bears all or part of the economic risk
of decline in value of the property and who receives all or part of the remuneration, if any, derived from the lease
or rental of the dwelling unit.
C. An accessory dwelling unit may be permitted as an accessory use to a single-family home under the following
conditions:
1. Only one ADU is permitted per lot. The ADU shall be located in the same building as the principal dwelling
unit or in a building accessory to the principal dwelling unit. Any structure containing an ADU must meet
the minimum yard and setback requirements for the principal structure, and must meet all relevant sections
of the state and local Plumbing Codes. The ADU permit process shall be applicable to all zones town wide,
regardless of underlying base zone use requirements. All other Town of York Zoning requirements shall be
met. Within the Shoreland Overlay District and Watershed Protection Overlay District, each ADU shall be
considered an additional residential unit, and no permit shall be issued for a new ADU which would exceed
the residential density standards of these overlay districts.
2. A building permit for the proposed creation of a new ADU must be issued by the CEO. Planning board
approval is not required for an ADU.
3. This ADU ordinance is intended to create year-around housing. Therefore, the ADU may not be utilized for
short-term (less than 12 months) or seasonal rental.
4. The property owner must occupy either the principal dwelling unit or the ADU as his/her principal
residence, and at no time receive rent for the owner-occupied unit. Principal residence must be proven by
voter registration or other evidence acceptable to the CEO, such as but not limited to car registration, utility
bills and the like.
5. The total gross floor area of the ADU unit shall not exceed 50% of the total gross floor area of the principal
residence or 750 square feet, whichever is more restrictive. Calculation of total gross floor area for an ADU
shall not include: garage areas or unfinished attic space. Unfinished attic space shall not include electrical
receptacles, finished walls or finished flooring. Total floor area of an ADU shall be measured from the
interior faces of the inside walls.
6. A home occupation or home business may be conducted, subject to existing regulations, as an accessory use
to either the ADU or the principal dwelling unit, but not both.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
139
7. Any apartments existing on November 3, 2004, which lack specific zoning authorization shall not be
considered lawful non-conforming uses, unless the property owner applies for a building permit for the
ADU and brings the unit up to the health and safety provisions of the minimum housing code standards. A
grace period of one year from the adoption of this article will be allowed for homeowners to modify such
unlawful non-conforming units. Due to the fact that many older homes were built before any codes were
established, minor dimensional variances may be granted by the Board of Appeals as allowed under the
Town of York Zoning Ordinance within applicable health and safety requirements. On November 3, 2005,
all owners of unlawful non-conforming units who have not brought them up to the health and safety
standards of the minimum housing code will be in violation of this ordinance and subject to fines per Section
106.4 of the Town of York Building Code.
8. When any property containing an ADU is sold or transferred, the new owner must continue to meet the
requirements of this Section in order to continue the use of the ADU. Should the new owner not meet the
requirements of this Section, the use of the unit must be discontinued to the satisfaction of the CEO.
However, any lease in effect at the time of transfer may be continued until it expires or up to one year from
the date of the transfer, whichever is shorter. If the ADU is abandoned at any future date, the added
bedrooms shall be subject to the Residential Impact Fee Ordinance as if newly constructed.
9. To ensure continued compliance by current and subsequent owners, the applicant shall provide and record
in the York County Registry of Deeds a covenant in a form acceptable to the Town attorney that the
existence of the ADU is predicated upon the occupancy of either the ADU or the principal dwelling by a
person who owns the property. It is also required that any owner of the property must notify a prospective
buyer of the limitations of this section. Violations of the terms of this covenant shall result in the loss of the
ADU permit. Conformance to the conditions of the ADU permit and covenant shall be certified yearly by
the owner subject to inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer. Inspection shall be allowed by the owner
after 48 hours notice by certified mail from Town authorities such as the CEO office. This certification
process shall be subject to an appropriate fee as decided by the Board of Selectmen.
10. ADUs of either studio or one-bedroom configuration shall not be subject to the requirements of the Growth
Management Ordinance. Two-bedroom ADU permits shall be limited to ten (10) a year on a “first come
first serve” basis.
11. This provision shall not prohibit the conversion of a single family dwelling to a multifamily dwelling so long
as said conversion complies with all current zoning requirements. However, if such conversion is approved,
any ADU previously allowed under this section must be incorporated into and meet all the requirements for
one of the units of the multifamily dwelling. Multifamily dwellings shall not include ADUs as defined in this
section.
12. Design Criteria:
a. An ADU shall be designed to maintain the architectural design, style, appearance, and character of the
main building as a single-family residence. If an ADU extends beyond the existing footprint of the main
building, such an addition must be consistent with the existing façade, roof pitch, siding, and windows.
In the interest of energy efficiency and conservation, active and passive solar features are exempted
from this requirement.
b. Exterior stairs are restricted to the rear or sides of the structure wherever practicable.
c. Wherever practicable, no more than one curb cut per lot shall be permitted, unless the lot has multiple
curb cuts at the time of the application being filed.
d. A detached accessory structure housing an ADU must be designed and constructed in the style of a
barn, garage, carriage house, or similar structure customarily located on the same lot with a single family
residence.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
140
13. For residences with an ADU not on Town water, a test of the residential well water shall be performed
annually with the results reported to the Code Enforcement Office as part of the annual owner certification
process.
14. One off-street parking space must be provided for each vehicle registered to occupants of the ADU in onebedroom
units and two for two-bedroom units, in addition to the off-street parking required for the principal
dwelling unit. In general, new parking must comply with current parking standards.
15. An occupancy permit must be issued by the CEO prior to occupancy of an ADU created or modified
pursuant to this section.
16. The CEO shall prepare an annual report to the Board of Selectmen and Planning Board on ADUs which
will include: (a) the number of units established; (b) the geographic distribution of the units; and (c) the
average size of the units and other pertinent information as may be requested by the Board of Selectmen.
17. Reserved. -AMENDED 11/05/2019
18. A detached accessory structure containing an ADU shall be located no further than 150 feet from the nearest
point of the principal structure.
19. Non-conformities shall not be created or increased in the creation of an accessory unit.
20. The maximum density for any lot which is not serviced by public sewer shall not exceed the standards of the
State Minimum Lot Size Law (Title 12 M.R.S.A. §4807 et seq.).
D. If any part, section or clause is found to be unlawful these shall have no effect on the legality of the remaining. -
AMENDED 05/18/2013
7.18 Medical Marijuana
7.18.1 Purpose: The purpose of this Section and related provisions of this Ordinance is to control the cultivation,
processing, storage and distribution of medical marijuana by controlling land uses consistent with State law and in a
manner that prevents unintended consequences that could adversely impact the Town and its residents.
7.18.2 Exemptions: As an accessory use, Medical Marijuana Home Production shall be allowed in any qualifying patient’s
residence or any medical marijuana caregiver’s primary year-round residence in every base zone and overlay zone,
without any requirement for land use permitting. As part of a Medical Marijuana Home Production accessory use,
qualifying patients or medical marijuana caregivers may not be authorized to extract marijuana using inherently
hazardous substances per Title 22, Chapter 558-C: Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act, section 2423-F, subsection
3.
7.18.3 Approval Process: Any proposal to establish a new or alter an existing Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary or
Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facility shall require approval of the Planning Board, even if the Planning Board
was not required to grant the original local approval. The Planning Board shall follow the application procedures
established in Article 18-A. In addition to other public notification requirements, the Town shall notify the York
Police Department and the Maine Department of Health and Human Services, Division of Licensing and Regulatory
Services prior to the public hearing on any application.
7.18.4 Performance Standards: In addition to other requirements of this and other codes, including but not limited to
Article 6, the following shall apply to any application for a new or altered Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary
or a Medical Marijuana Manufacturing facility:
A. Limit. There shall be no more than one Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary in the Town of York.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
141
B. Proximity Limit. Only one Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary or Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facility
shall be permitted per lot. Additionally, no Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facility shall be located on a lot
that is within 250 feet of another lot on which a Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facility is located. This
separation requirement will prevent a concentration of these facilities and helps to ensure compliance with the
State prohibition against collectives.
C. Safe Zones. No Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary or Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facility shall be
permitted within any Safe Zones established by the Board of Selectmen. (Initially designated by the Board of
Selectmen on April 9, 2007, and as amended.)
D. Security. Before granting an approval, the Planning Board shall ensure the applicant has reviewed their property
and building security plans with the York Police Department and the Police Department finds the security
measures are consistent with State requirements.
E. Business License. As a condition of use, the operator of a Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary or a Medical
Marijuana Manufacturing Facility shall obtain and retain all required business licenses pursuant to the Town’s
Business Licensing Ordinance. The land use approval shall be considered abandoned if no license-holder occupies
the Facility for a period of 2 years of more.
F. A Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facility may contain within the facility, as an accessory use, a Medical
Marijuana Testing Facility. - AMENDED 11/04/2014, 11/05/2019
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
142
ARTICLE EIGHT
SHORELAND OVERLAY DISTRICT
NOTE: Major shoreland revisions were approved on November 4, 2008. All revisions denoted in this Article were made
subsequent to this date. For earlier legislative history, see the May 17, 2008 version of the Zoning Ordinance.
8.1 Dimensional Standards for lots.
8.1.1 Minimum Lot Size and Shore Frontage. The following minimum standards apply:
A. For a lot with residential use which is in the Shoreland Overlay District adjacent to Tidal Areas, a minimum
land area of 30,000 square feet and 150’ of shore frontage shall be required.
B. For a lot with residential use which is in the Shoreland Overlay District adjacent to Non-Tidal Areas, a
minimum land area of 40,000 square feet and 200’ of shore frontage shall be required.
C. For a lot with non-residential use which is in the Shoreland Overlay District adjacent to Tidal Areas, a
minimum land area of 40,000 square feet and 200’ of shore frontage shall be required.
D. For a lot with non-residential use which is in the Shoreland Overlay District adjacent to Non-Tidal Areas, a
minimum land area of 60,000 square feet and 300’ of shore frontage shall be required.
E. For a lot located within the BUS-3, RES-5, RES-6 or RES-7 base zoning district, with public sewer service,
a minimum land area of 12,000 square feet shall apply regardless of the requirements listed in subsections
“A” through “D” above. In the event the York Beach Village Center zone is established in November 2008,
the 12,000 square foot standard shall apply in this zone as well.
8.1.2 Minimum Lot Width. The minimum width of any portion of any lot within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high water mark of the Atlantic Ocean, tidal waters of the York River and its tributaries, tidal waters of the Cape
Neddick River and its tributaries, and any open body of water that is greater than four acres in size, such as a pond or
lake, shall be equal to the shore frontage requirement for a lot with the proposed use.
8.1.3 Maximum Lot Coverage. The total area of all structures and other non-vegetated surfaces, which includes but is not
limited to, driveways, parking areas and other areas from which vegetation has been removed within the Shoreland
Overlay District, shall not exceed the least restrictive of the following:
a. 70% of the land area of the lot, or portion thereof, located within the Mixed Use Subdistrict;
b. 20% of the land area of the lot, or portion thereof, located within any other subdistrict of the Shoreland
Overlay District; or
c. 30% of the land area of the lot, or portion thereof, for an existing lot of record with a total area less than
12,000 square feet.
d. Naturally occurring ledge and rock outcroppings are not counted as non-vegetative surfaces when calculating
lot coverage for existing lots of record as of March 24, 1990 and in continuous existence since that date. -
AMENDED 05/20/2017
8.1.4 Additional Standards.
A. Multiple Uses on a Lot. If more than one residential dwelling unit or principal non-residential use or
structure (or combination thereof), is constructed or established on a single parcel, all dimensional
requirements shall be met for each additional dwelling unit, principal structure, or use.
For purposes of the Shoreland Overlay District, “residential dwelling unit” shall be defined as: a room or
group of rooms designed and equipped exclusively for use as permanent, seasonal or temporary living
quarters for only one family at a time, and containing cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities. The term shall
include modular homes, manufactured housing units and rental units that contain cooking, sleeping, and
sanitary facilities regardless of the time-period rented. Recreational vehicles are not residential dwelling units.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
143
B. Minimum Land Area. Land below the normal high water mark of a water body or below the upland edge
of a wetland, and land beneath a road serving more than 2 lots shall not be included toward calculating
minimum lot size.
8.1.5 Open Space Conservation Subdivisions. Open space conservation subdivisions shall be controlled as follows:
1. By subdistrict, an open space conservation subdivision is:
a. allowed with Shoreland Approval from the Planning Board in the Mixed Use and Limited Residential
subdistricts.
b. prohibited in the Resource Protection and Stream Protection subdistricts.
2. An open space conservation subdivision shall be approved only upon demonstration that overall dimensional
requirements for the Overlay District, including shore frontage and lot area per dwelling unit, are met. When
determining whether dimensional requirements are met, only land area within the Shoreland Overlay District
shall be considered. - AMENDED 05/19/2012, 11/06/2018
8.2 Land Uses Permitted in the Shoreland Overlay District
8.2.1 Land uses permitted in the Shoreland Overlay District are limited to those indicated in Sections 8.2.1.A – D below.
However, additional limitations shall apply as follows. Within the Shoreland Overlay District adjacent to a Great Pond
or a stream which flows into a Great Pond, the following new commercial and industrial uses shall be prohibited:
- AMENDED: 11/08/2011
1. Auto washing facilities;
2. Auto or other vehicle service and/or repair operations, including body shops;
3. Chemical and bacteriological laboratories;
4. Storage of chemicals, including herbicides, pesticides or fertilizers, other than amounts normally
associated with individual households or farms;
5. Commercial painting, wood preserving and furniture stripping;
6. Dry cleaning establishments;
7. Electronic circuit assembly;
8. Laundromats;
9. Metal plating, finishing or polishing;
10. Petroleum or petroleum product storage and/or sale, except for storage on same property as the use
occurs;
11. Photographic processing; and
12. Printing.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
144
8.2.1.A Mixed Use Subdistrict
Residential Use Category (Mixed Use Shoreland) – Shoreland permits/approvals are required. Jurisdiction to issue
Shoreland permits/approvals is established by use as specified in §4.1.A, except where indicated below. - ENTIRE
CATEGORY AMENDED 05/19/2012
• Single-Family Dwelling
• Two-Family Dwelling
• Multi-Family Dwelling
• Boarding House
• Bed & Breakfast – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Elderly Housing
Commercial Use Category (Mixed Use Shoreland)
• Service Businesses Serving Local Needs such as, but not limited to, barber shops, shoe repair, self-service laundry
or dry-cleaning pick-up agency, tailoring, printing shop, caterer or other similar uses – Shoreland Permit from the
CEO is required.
• Small (under 2,500 square feet) Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise provided all display, storage and sale of
materials are conducted within a building and provided there is no manufacturing or assembly on premises –
Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Large Store, or Mall (group of stores under single roof) with total floor space over 2,500 square feet for Retail
Sale of Merchandise provided all display, storage, and sales of materials are conducted within a building and
provided there is no manufacturing or assembly on the premises – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Banks (with or without drive-through window) – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Antique Shops – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Laundries and Dry Cleaning Facilities (on public sewer) – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise such as but not limited to Lumber Yards and Building Supply Yards wherein
merchandise is stored in the open, provided that all merchandise so stored is screened from ground level view
from any abutting residential property – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Plumbing, Electrical or Carpentry Shop or Other Similar Service or Repair Establishment – Shoreland Permit
from the CEO is required.
• Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facility
• Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary
• Motels/Hotels – A transient rental accommodation with cooking facilities in a hotel/motel shall not be rented or
leased to the same person or persons for more than 90 days in any 120 consecutive day period. This length of
stay shall be considered as a rental or lease of any accommodation with cooking facilities in the same hotel/motel
and not only the rental of the same accommodation to the same person or persons. Also, Shoreland Permit from
the CEO is required.
• Lodging and Tourist Homes/Inns – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Restaurants – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Ice Cream Stands – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Marinas – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Florists – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Garden Centers – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Pet Shops – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Commercial Schools – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Day Care Facilities – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Fruit and Vegetable Produce Stores – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Artisanal Food and/or Beverage Facility (Not to exceed 5,000 square feet). Retail Sales of Merchandise as part of
this use shall not supersede 2,500 square feet of gross floor area.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Fast Food Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an accessory use;
Formula Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an accessory use; Truck Stops; Medical Marijuana
Registered Caregiver Retail Stores; Medical Marijuana Testing Facilities.
- AMENDED 11/04/2014, 11/05/2019
Office Use Category (Mixed Use Shoreland)
• Business, Financial, Professional or Government Offices, Except Town of York or York School District Offices
– Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Town of York or York School District Offices – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
145
• Offices and Clinics for Medical, Psychiatric, or Other Health Services for the Examination or Treatment of
Persons as Outpatients, including only Laboratories that are Part of Such Office or Clinic – Shoreland Permit
from the CEO is required.
• Laboratory or Research Facility – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Radio or Television Studio – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
Civic & Public Use Category (Mixed Use Shoreland) Shoreland permits/approvals are required. Jurisdiction to issue
Shoreland permits/approvals is established by use as specified in §4.1.A, except where indicated below.
• Cemeteries – All burial sites, fences, monuments, and related improvements associated with a cemetery shall
conform with the required Shoreland setbacks for structures. Also, a Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Civic Use - Only parks, playgrounds or recreation areas involving minimal structural development are allowed.
This shall include small non-residential facilities for educational, scientific or nature interpretation purposes -
Shoreland Permit from the Planning Board is required.
• Cultural Facility – Shoreland Permit from the Planning Board is required.
• Essential Services:
o Roadside Distribution and Sub-Transmission Lines (electric, telephone, cable) – Permit not required, but
must file a written “notice of intent to construct” with Code Enforcement Officer.
o Non-Roadside (Cross-Country) Distribution or Sub-Transmission Lines with 10 or less poles in the
Shoreland Overlay District – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
o Non-Roadside (Cross-Country) Distribution or Sub-Transmission Lines with more than 10 poles in the
Shoreland Overlay District – Shoreland Permit from the Planning Board required.
o Other Essential Services – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Hospitals – Shoreland Permit from the Planning Board required.
• Medical Facility - Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Membership Organization - Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Municipal Use - Excluding Department of Public Works facilities which involve the regular storage of heavy
equipment and construction materials - Shoreland Permit from the Planning Board is required.
• Nursing Homes – Shoreland Permit from the CEO Planning Board is required.
• Religious Use - Shoreland Permit from the Plannning Board is required.
• School - Shoreland Permit from the Planning Board is required.
• Utility District - Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
- AMENDED 11/06/2012
Industrial Use Category (Mixed Use Shoreland)
• Printing, Binding, Publishing and Related Arts and Trades – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Bottling of Beverages – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Machine Shop, Assembly, Packaging, or Manufacturing – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Wholesale Business and Storage in a Roofed Structure – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Wood Manufacturing and Fabrication – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Bulk Storage Collection Bin – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Waste Transfer Facility; Waste Processing or Disposal Facility; Bulk Fuel Storage;
Truck Terminals.
Vehicular Use Category (Mixed Use Shoreland)
• Vehicle Service Stations, Auto Repair Garages – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Auto Body Repair Shops – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Sale, Rental and Accessory Storage of Automobiles, Light Trucks, Motorcycles, and Mopeds Conducted Wholly
or Partially in Open Lots – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Sale of Pickup Coaches, Campers, Tent Trailers and Similar Equipment, Including Snowmobiles – Shoreland
Permit from the CEO is required.
• Place for Repair, Sale, Rent or Storage of Pleasure Boats – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Car Washing Establishment – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Salvage Yards, Junk Yards, Wrecking Yards.
Rural & Agricultural Use Category (Mixed Use Shoreland)
• Mineral Exploration – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Mineral Extraction – Shoreland Permit from the Planning Board required.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
146
• Soil and Water Conservation Practices – Conducted in accordance with the standards of the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service including but not limited to creation and maintenance of farm ponds for
agricultural purposes. Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Aquaculture – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• General Purpose Farm, Agriculture and Nurseries – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Timber Harvesting – Shoreland Permit notification to the CEO after review and approval from the Maine Bureau
of Forestry. - AMENDED 05/20/2017
• Forest Management Activities Except for Timber Harvesting
• Sale of Produce Raised on Same Premises
• Wildlife Management Practices
• Animal Breeding (Small Domestic Animals)
• Harvesting of Wild Crops
• Commercial Stables – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Veterinary Establishment, Kennel, or Similar Establishment – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: n.a.
Recreation & Amusement Use Category (Mixed Use Shoreland)
• Indoor Sports Facility (No Gambling) – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Fraternal Organization/Club/Lodge
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Campgrounds and Travel Trailer Parks; Amusement Arcades (as Primary or
Accessory Use); Indoor Amusement/Entertainment/Assembly Place (Enclosed); Outdoor Sport and
Amusement Facilities Conducted for Profit; Country Club; Open Air or Drive-In Theater or Other Open Air
Places of Entertainment; Bath House, for Non-Commercial Purposes.
Miscellaneous Use Category (Mixed Use Shoreland)
• Piers, Docks, Wharves, Breakwaters, Causeways, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or
Below the Normal High Water Line or Within a Wetland:
o Temporary – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
o Permanent in Non-Tidal Waters – Shoreland Permit from the Planning Board required, and subject to
conditions of §8.3.6.6.
o Permanent in Tidal Waters – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Mortuary, Undertaking or Funeral Establishment – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Place for Exhibition, Lettering or Sale of Gravestones – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Filling or Other Earthmoving Activities – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Road and Driveway Construction – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Medium-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System – Shoreland Permit from the Planning Board is required.
• Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System – Shoreland Permit from the Planning Board is required.
• Land Management Road – Shoreland Permit notification to the CEO after review and approval from the Maine
Bureau of Forestry. - AMENDED 05/20/2017
• Public Sewage Treatment Facility – Shoreland Permit from the Planning Board required.
• Structures Accessory to Permitted Use – If the principal structure or principal use is a dwelling unit, an accessory
structure shall not have cooking facilities and shall not have more than one of the following: living facilities,
sanitary facilities or sleeping facilities. Also, a Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Accessory Uses Customarily Incident to Allowed Uses – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Flea Markets; Casino; Head Shop; Obscene Exhibitions; Dumps; Billboards; All
Other Uses.
- AMENDED 11/06/2012, 11/06/2018
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
147
8.2.1.B Limited Residential Subdistrict
Residential Use Category (Limited Res. Shoreland) – Shoreland permits/approvals are required. Jurisdiction to issue
Shoreland permits/approvals is established by use as specified in §4.1.A, except where indicated below. - ENTIRE
CATEGORY AMENDED 05/19/2012
• Single-Family Dwelling
• Two-Family Dwelling
• Multi-Family Dwelling
• Bed & Breakfast – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Elderly Housing
Commercial Use Category (Limited Res. Shoreland)
• Antique Shops – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Motels/Hotels – A transient rental accommodation with cooking facilities in a hotel/motel shall not be rented or
leased to the same person or persons for more than 90 days in any 120 consecutive day period. This length of
stay shall be considered as a rental or lease of any accommodation with cooking facilities in the same hotel/motel
and not only the rental of the same accommodation to the same person or persons. Also, expansion is defined
as meaning: 1) construction of additions to existing facilities, buildings and structures, and 2) construction of new
free standing facilities, buildings and structures. Under definition 1 and 2 above, construction is limited to an
expansion, within lot lines existing as of November 7, 1995 of existing facilities, buildings and structures and other
facilities, buildings and structures reasonably or customarily associated with said existing facilities, buildings and
structures. All expansions, regardless of the amount of expansion, shall satisfy to the maximum extent practical,
as determined by the Planning Board, the requirements of the Town of York Planning Board Subdivision and
Site Plan Regulations.
• Restaurants – Expansion is defined as meaning: 1) construction of additions to existing facilities, buildings and
structures, and 2) construction of new free standing facilities, buildings and structures. Under definition 1 and 2
above, construction is limited to an expansion, within lot lines existing as of November 5, 1996, of existing
facilities, buildings and structures and other facilities, buildings and structures reasonably or customarily associated
with said existing facilities, buildings and structures. All expansions, regardless of the amount of expansion, shall
satisfy to the maximum extent practicable, as determined by the Planning Board, the requirements of the Town
of York Planning Board Subdivision and Site Plan Regulations. Also, a Shoreland Permit from the Planning
Board required.
• Ice Cream Stands – Expansion is defined as meaning: 1) construction of additions to existing facilities, buildings
and structures, and 2) construction of new free standing facilities, buildings and structures. Under definition 1
and 2 above, construction is limited to an expansion, within lot lines existing as of November 5, 1996, of existing
facilities, buildings and structures and other facilities, buildings and structures reasonably or customarily associated
with said existing facilities, buildings and structures. All expansions, regardless of the amount of expansion, shall
satisfy to the maximum extent practicable, as determined by the Planning Board, the requirements of the Town
of York Planning Board Subdivision and Site Plan Regulations. Also, a Shoreland Permit from the Planning
Board required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Service Businesses Serving Local Needs; Small (under 2,500 square feet) Store for
Retail Sale of Merchandise; Large Store or Mall (Group of Stores Under Single Roof) With Total Floor Space
Over 2,500 Square Feet for Retail Sale of Merchandise; Banks; Laundries and Dry Cleaning Facilities; Store for
Retail Sale of Merchandise such as but not limited to Lumber Yards and Building Supply Yards; Plumbing,
Electrical or Carpentry Shop or Other Similar Service or Repair Establishment; Lodging and Tourist Homes/Inns;
Fast Food Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an accessory use; Formula Restaurants, whether the
use is a principal use or an accessory use; Truck Stops; Marinas; Florists; Garden Centers; Pet Shops; Commercial
Schools; Day Care Facilities; Fruit and Vegetable Produce Stores; Medical Marijuana Registered Caregiver Retail
Stores; Medical Marijuana Manufacturing Facility; Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary; Medical Marijuana
Testing Facilities; Artisanal Food and/or Beverage Facility.
- AMENDED 11/04/2014, 05/16/2015, 05/20/2017, 11/05/2019
Office Use Category (Limited Res. Shoreland)
• Town of York or York School District Offices – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Business, Financial, Professional or Government Offices, Except Town of York
or York School District Offices; Offices and Clinics for Medical, Psychiatric, or Other Health Services for the
Examination or Treatment of Persons as Outpatients, including only Laboratories that are Part of Such Office or
Clinic; Laboratory or Research Facility; Radio or Television Studio.
Civic & Public Use Category (Limited Res. Shoreland) – Shoreland permits/approvals are required. Jurisdiction to
issue Shoreland permits/approvals is established by use as specified in §4.1.A, except where indicated below.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
148
• Cemeteries – All burial sites, fences, monuments, and related improvements associated with a cemetery shall
conform with the required Shoreland setbacks for structures. Also, a Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Civic Use - Only parks, playgrounds or recreation areas involving minimal structural development are allowed.
This shall include small non-residential facilities for educational, scientific or nature interpretation purposes -
Shoreland Permit from the Planning Board is required.
• Cultural Facility – Shoreland Permit from the CEO Planning Board is required.
• Essential Services:
o Roadside Distribution and Sub-Transmission Lines (electric, telephone, cable) – Permit not required, but
must file a written “notice of intent to construct” with Code Enforcement Officer.
o Non-Roadside (Cross-Country) Distribution or Sub-Transmission Lines with 10 or less poles in the
Shoreland Overlay District – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
o Non-Roadside (Cross-Country) Distribution or Sub-Transmission Lines with more than 10 poles in the
Shoreland Overlay District – Shoreland Permit from the Planning Board required.
o Other Essential Services – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Membership Organization - Shoreland Permit from the Planning Board is required.
• Municipal Use - Excluding Department of Public Works facilities which involve the regular storage of heavy
equipment and construction materials Shoreland Permit from the Planning Board is required.
• Religious Use - Shoreland Permit from the Planning Board is required.
• School - Shoreland Permit from the Planning Board is required.
• Utility District - Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
- AMENDED 11/06/2012
Industrial Use Category (Limited Res. Shoreland)
• Bulk Storage Collection Bin – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Printing, Binding, Publishing and Related Arts and Trades; Bottling of Beverages;
Machine Shop, Assembly, Packaging, or Manufacturing; Wholesale Business and Storage in a Roofed Structure;
Wood Manufacturing and Fabrication; Waste Transfer Facility; Waste Processing or Disposal Facility; Bulk Fuel
Storage; Truck Terminals.
Vehicular Use Category (Limited Res. Shoreland)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Vehicle Service Stations, Auto Repair Garages; Auto Body Repair Shops; Sale,
Rental and Accessory Storage of Automobiles, Light Trucks, Motorcycles, and Mopeds Conducted Wholly or
Partially in Open Lots; Sale of Pickup Coaches, Campers, Tent Trailers and Similar Equipment, Including
Snowmobiles; Place for Repair, Sale, Rent or Storage of Pleasure Boats; Salvage Yards, Junk Yards, Wrecking
Yards; Car Washing Establishment.
Rural & Agricultural Use Category (Limited Res. Shoreland)
• Mineral Exploration – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Mineral Extraction – Shoreland Permit from the Planning Board required.
• Soil and Water Conservation Practices – Conducted in accordance with the standards of the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service including but not limited to creation and maintenance of farm ponds for
agricultural purposes. Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Aquaculture – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• General Purpose Farm, Agriculture and Nurseries – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Timber Harvesting – Shoreland Permit notification to the CEO after review and approval from the Maine Bureau
of Forestry. – AMENDED 05/20/2017.
• Forest Management Activities Except for Timber Harvesting
• Sale of Produce Raised on Same Premises
• Wildlife Management Practices
• Harvesting of Wild Crops
• Commercial Stables – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Animal Breeding (Small Domestic Animals); Veterinary Establishment, Kennel,
or Similar Establishment.
Recreation & Amusement Use Category (Limited Res. Shoreland)
• Bath House, for Non-Commercial Purposes – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Campgrounds and Travel Trailer Parks; Amusement Arcades (as Primary or
Accessory Use); Indoor Amusement/Entertainment/Assembly Place (Enclosed); Indoor Sports Facility (No
Gambling); Outdoor Sport and Amusement Facilities Conducted for Profit; Country Club; Open Air or Drive-
In Theater or Other Open Air Places of Entertainment; Fraternal Organization/Club/Lodge.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
149
Miscellaneous Use Category (Limited Res. Shoreland)
• Piers, Docks, Wharves, Breakwaters, Causeways, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or
Below the Normal High Water Line or Within a Wetland:
o Temporary – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
o Permanent in Non-Tidal Waters – Shoreland Permit from the Planning Board required, and subject to
conditions of §8.3.6.6.
o Permanent in Tidal Waters – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Filling or Other Earthmoving Activities – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Road and Driveway Construction – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Land Management Road – Shoreland Permit notification to the CEO after review and approval from the Maine
Bureau of Forestry. - AMENDED 05/20/2017
• Public Sewage Treatment Facility – Shoreland Permit from the Planning Board required.
• Structures Accessory to Permitted Use – If the principal structure or principal use is a dwelling unit, an accessory
structure shall not have cooking facilities and shall not have more than one of the following: living facilities,
sanitary facilities or sleeping facilities. Also, a Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Accessory Uses Customarily Incident to Allowed Uses – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Flea Markets; Casino; Mortuary, Undertaking or Funeral Establishment; Place for
Exhibition, Lettering or Sale of Gravestones; Head Shop; Obscene Exhibitions; Dumps; Billboards; Medium-
Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System; Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System; All Other
Uses.
- AMENDED 11/06/2012, 11/06/2018
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
150
8.2.1.C Resource Protection Subdistrict
Residential Use Category (Res. Protection Shoreland) – Shoreland permits/approvals are required. Jurisdiction to
issue Shoreland permits/approvals is established by use as specified in §4.1.A, except where indicated below. - ENTIRE
CATEGORY AMENDED 05/19/2012
• Single-Family Dwelling – Requires a Special Use Permit per §18.2.7.
Commercial Use Category (Res. Protection Shoreland)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Service Businesses Serving Local Needs; Small (under 2,500 square feet) Store for
Retail Sale of Merchandise; Large Store or Mall (Group of Stores Under Single Roof) With Total Floor Space
Over 2,500 Square Feet for Retail Sale of Merchandise; Banks; Antique Shops; Laundries and Dry Cleaning
Facilities; Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise such as but not limited to Lumber Yards and Building Supply
Yards; Plumbing, Electrical or Carpentry Shop or Other Similar Service or Repair Establishment; Motels/Hotels;
Lodging and Tourist Homes/Inns; Restaurants; Fast Food Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an
accessory use; Formula Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an accessory use; Ice Cream Stands;
Truck Stops; Marinas; Florists; Garden Centers; Pet Shops; Commercial Schools; Day Care Facilities; Fruit and
Vegetable Produce Stores; Medical Marijuana Registered Caregiver Retail Stores; Medical Marijuana
Manufacturing Facility; Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary; Medical Marijuana Testing Facilities; Artisanal
Food and/or Beverage Facility.
- AMENDED 11/04/2014, 05/16/2015, 11/05/2019
Office Use Category (Res. Protection Shoreland)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Business, Financial, Professional or Government Offices, Except Town of York
or York School District Offices; Town of York or York School District Offices; Offices and Clinics for Medical,
Psychiatric, or Other Health Services for the Examination or Treatment of Persons as Outpatients, including only
Laboratories that are Part of Such Office or Clinic; Laboratory or Research Facility; Radio or Television Studio.
Civic & Public Use Category (Res. Protection Shoreland) – Shoreland permits/approvals are required. Jurisdiction to
issue Shoreland permits/approvals is established by use as specified in §4.1.A, except where indicated below.
• Civic Use - Only parks, playgrounds or recreation areas involving minimal structural development are allowed.
This shall include small non-residential facilities for educational, scientific or nature interpretation purposes -
Shoreland Permit from the Planning Board is required.
• Cultural Facility – Shoreland Permit from the Planning Board is required.
• Essential Services:
o Roadside Distribution and Sub-Transmission Lines (electric, telephone, cable) – Shoreland Permit from
the CEO is required.
o Non-Roadside (Cross-Country) Distribution or Sub-Transmission Lines with 10 or less poles in the
Shoreland Overlay District – Shoreland Permit from the Planning Board required.
o Non-Roadside (Cross-Country) Distribution or Sub-Transmission Lines with more than 10 poles in the
Shoreland Overlay District – Shoreland Permit from the Planning Board required.
o Other Essential Services – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Municipal Use - Excluding Department of Public Works facilities which involve the regular storage of heavy
equipment and construction materials Shoreland Permit from the Planning Board is required.
• Utility District - Treatment plants not permitted - Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
- AMENDED 11/06/2012
Industrial Use Category (Res. Protection Shoreland)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Printing, Binding, Publishing and Related Arts and Trades; Bottling of Beverages;
Machine Shop, Assembly, Packaging, or Manufacturing; Wholesale Business and Storage in a Roofed Structure;
Wood Manufacturing and Fabrication; Waste Transfer Facility; Waste Processing or Disposal Facility; Bulk Fuel
Storage; Truck Terminals; Bulk Storage Collection Bin.
Vehicular Use Category (Res. Protection Shoreland)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Vehicle Service Stations, Auto Repair Garages; Auto Body Repair Shops; Sale,
Rental and Accessory Storage of Automobiles, Light Trucks, Motorcycles, and Mopeds Conducted Wholly or
Partially in Open Lots; Sale of Pickup Coaches, Campers, Tent Trailers and Similar Equipment, Including
Snowmobiles; Place for Repair, Sale, Rent or Storage of Pleasure Boats; Salvage Yards, Junk Yards, Wrecking
Yards; Car Washing Establishment.
Rural & Agricultural Use Category (Res. Protection Shoreland)
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
151
• Soil and Water Conservation Practices – Conducted in accordance with the standards of the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service including but not limited to creation and maintenance of farm ponds for
agricultural purposes. Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Aquaculture – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• General Purpose Farm, Agriculture and Nurseries – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Timber Harvesting – Shoreland Permit notification to the CEO after review and approval from the Maine Bureau
of Forestry. - AMENDED 05/20/2017
• Forest Management Activities Except for Timber Harvesting
• Wildlife Management Practices
• Harvesting of Wild Crops
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Mineral Exploration; Mineral Extraction; Sale of Produce Raised on Same
Premises; Animal Breeding (Small Domestic Animals); Commercial Stables; Veterinary Establishment, Kennel,
or Similar Establishment.
Recreation & Amusement Use Category (Res. Protection Shoreland)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Campgrounds and Travel Trailer Parks; Amusement Arcades (as Primary or
Accessory Use); Indoor Amusement/Entertainment/Assembly Place (Enclosed); Indoor Sports Facility (No
Gambling); Outdoor Sport and Amusement Facilities Conducted for Profit; Country Club; Open Air or Drive-
In Theater or Other Open Air Places of Entertainment; Fraternal Organization/Club/Lodge; Bath House, for
Non-Commercial Purposes.
Miscellaneous Use Category (Res. Protection Shoreland)
• Filling or Other Earthmoving Activities – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Road and Driveway Construction – Permitted only as per provisions of §8.3.8.5.
• Land Management Road – Permitted only as per provisions of §8.3.8.5.
• Structures Accessory to Permitted Use – If the principal structure or principal use is a dwelling unit, an accessory
structure shall not have cooking facilities and shall not have more than one of the following: living facilities,
sanitary facilities or sleeping facilities. Also, requires a Special Use Permit per §18.2.7, except that only the
conditions of §18.2.7.c through §18.2.7.f shall apply.
• Accessory Uses Customarily Incident to Allowed Uses – Shoreland Permit from the Planning Board required.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Piers, Docks, Wharves, Breakwaters, Causeways, Bridges and Other Structures
and Uses Extending Over or Below the Normal High Water Line or Within a Wetland; Flea Markets; Casino;
Mortuary, Undertaking or Funeral Establishment; Place for Exhibition, Lettering or Sale of Gravestones; Head
Shop; Obscene Exhibitions; Dumps; Billboards; Medium-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System; Large-
Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System; All Other Uses.
- AMENDED 11/06/2012, 11/06/2018
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
152
8.2.1.D Stream Protection Subdistrict
Residential Use Category (Stream Protection Shoreland) – Shoreland permits/approvals are required. Jurisdiction to
issue Shoreland permits/approvals is established by use as specified in §4.1.A, except where indicated below. - ENTIRE
CATEGORY AMENDED 05/19/2012
• No uses in this Category are permitted in this Subdistrict.
Commercial Use Category (Stream Protection Shoreland)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Service Businesses Serving Local Needs; Small (under 2,500 square feet) Store for
Retail Sale of Merchandise; Large Store or Mall (Group of Stores Under Single Roof) With Total Floor Space
Over 2,500 Square Feet for Retail Sale of Merchandise; Banks; Antique Shops; Laundries and Dry Cleaning
Facilities; Store for Retail Sale of Merchandise such as but not limited to Lumber Yards and Building Supply
Yards; Plumbing, Electrical or Carpentry Shop or Other Similar Service or Repair Establishment; Motels/Hotels;
Lodging and Tourist Homes/Inns; Restaurants; Fast Food Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an
accessory use; Formula Restaurants, whether the use is a principal use or an accessory use; Ice Cream Stands;
Truck Stops; Marinas; Florists; Garden Centers; Pet Shops; Commercial Schools; Day Care Facilities; Fruit and
Vegetable Produce Stores; Medical Marijuana Production Facility; Medical Marijuana Registered Dispensary;
Artisanal Food and/or Beverage Facility.
- AMENDED 11/04/2014, 05/16/2015
Office Use Category (Stream Protection Shoreland)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Business, Financial, Professional or Government Offices, Except Town of York
or York School District Offices; Town of York or York School District Offices; Offices and Clinics for Medical,
Psychiatric, or Other Health Services for the Examination or Treatment of Persons as Outpatients, including only
Laboratories that are Part of Such Office or Clinic; Laboratory or Research Facility; Radio or Television Studio.
Civic & Public Use Category and Miscellaneous Use Category (Stream Protection Shoreland) – Shoreland
permits/approvals are required. Jurisdiction to issue Shoreland permits/approvals is established by use as specified in
§4.1.A, except where indicated below.
• Civic Use - Only parks, playgrounds or recreation areas involving minimal structural development are allowed.
This shall include small non-residential facilities for educational, scientific or nature interpretation purposes -
Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Cultural Facility – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Essential Services:
o Roadside Distribution and Sub-Transmission Lines (electric, telephone, cable) – Shoreland Permit from the
CEO is required.
o Non-Roadside (Cross-Country) Distribution or Sub-Transmission Lines with 10 or less poles in the
Shoreland Overlay District – Shoreland Permit from the Planning Board required.
o Non-Roadside (Cross-Country) Distribution or Sub-Transmission Lines with more than 10 poles in the
Shoreland Overlay District – Shoreland Permit from the Planning Board required.
o Other Essential Services – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Municipal Use - Excluding Department of Public Works facilities which involve the regular storage of heavy
equipment and construction materials; only parks, playgrounds or recreation areas involving minimal structural
development are allowed Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
- AMENDED 11/06/2012
Industrial Use Category (Stream Protection Shoreland)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Printing, Binding, Publishing and Related Arts and Trades; Bottling of Beverages;
Machine Shop, Assembly, Packaging, or Manufacturing; Wholesale Business and Storage in a Roofed Structure;
Wood Manufacturing and Fabrication; Waste Transfer Facility; Waste Processing or Disposal Facility; Bulk Fuel
Storage; Truck Terminals; Bulk Storage Collection Bin.
Vehicular Use Category (Stream Protection Shoreland)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Vehicle Service Stations, Auto Repair Garages; Auto Body Repair Shops; Sale,
Rental and Accessory Storage of Automobiles, Light Trucks, Motorcycles, and Mopeds Conducted Wholly or
Partially in Open Lots; Sale of Pickup Coaches, Campers, Tent Trailers and Similar Equipment, Including
Snowmobiles; Place for Repair, Sale, Rent or Storage of Pleasure Boats; Salvage Yards, Junk Yards, Wrecking
Yards; Car Washing Establishment.
Rural & Agricultural Use Category (Stream Protection Shoreland)
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
153
• Soil and Water Conservation Practices – Conducted in accordance with the standards of the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service including but not limited to creation and maintenance of farm ponds for
agricultural purposes. Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Aquaculture – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• General Purpose Farm, Agriculture and Nurseries – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Timber Harvesting – Shoreland Permit notification to the CEO after review and approval from the Maine Bureau
of Forestry. - AMENDED 05/20/2017.
• Forest Management Activities Except for Timber Harvesting
• Wildlife Management Practices
• Harvesting of Wild Crops
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Mineral Exploration; Mineral Extraction; Sale of Produce Raised on Same
Premises; Animal Breeding (Small Domestic Animals); Commercial Stables; Veterinary Establishment, Kennel,
or Similar Establishment.
Recreation & Amusement Use Category (Stream Protection Shoreland)
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Campgrounds and Travel Trailer Parks; Amusement Arcades (as Primary or
Accessory Use); Indoor Amusement/Entertainment/Assembly Place (Enclosed); Indoor Sports Facility (No
Gambling); Outdoor Sport and Amusement Facilities Conducted for Profit; Country Club; Open Air or Drive-
In Theater or Other Open Air Places of Entertainment; Fraternal Organization/Club/Lodge; Bath House, for
Non-Commercial Purposes.
Miscellaneous Use Category (Stream Protection Shoreland)
• Piers, Docks, Wharves, Breakwaters, Causeways, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or
Below the Normal High Water Line or Within a Wetland:
o Temporary – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
o Permanent in Non-Tidal Waters – Shoreland Permit from the Planning Board required, and subject to
conditions of §8.3.6.6.
o Permanent in Tidal Waters – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Filling or Other Earthmoving Activities – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Road and Driveway Construction – Shoreland Permit from the CEO is required.
• Land Management Road – Shoreland Permit notification to the CEO after review and approval from the Maine
Bureau of Forestry. - AMENDED 05/20/2017.
• EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED: Flea Markets; Casino; Mortuary, Undertaking or Funeral Establishment; Place for
Exhibition, Lettering or Sale of Gravestones; Head Shop; Obscene Exhibitions; Dumps; Billboards; Structures
Accessory to Permitted Use; Accessory Uses Customarily Incident to Allowed Uses; All Other Uses.
- AMENDED §8.2.1.A-D ADDED 11/08/2011, 11/06/2012
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
154
8.2.2 When there is a conflict between a use permitted in the Shoreland Overlay District and an underlying district, the
more restrictive of the two shall prevail.
8.2.3 All land uses permitted in the Shoreland Overlay District are subject to the Land Use Standards in Section 8.3 below.
8.2.4 Home Occupations. Home occupations shall be controlled as follows:
1. By subdistrict, home occupations are:
a. allowed with a Shoreland Permit from the CEO in the Mixed Use or Limited Residential subdistrict.
b. allowed with Shoreland Approval from the Planning Board in the Resource Protection Subdistrict.
c. prohibited in the Stream Protection Subdistrict.
2. Limits on the size of the home occupation shall follow the standards of §7.4. - AMENDED 05/19/2012
8.3 Land Use Standards
8.3.1 Agriculture
8.3.1.1 All spreading of manure shall be accomplished in conformance with the Manure Utilization Guidelines published
by the Maine Department of Agriculture on November 1, 2001, and the Nutrient Management Law (7 M.R.S.A.
§4201-4209).
8.3.1.2 There shall be no new tilling of soil within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high water mark of any great
pond, nor within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high water mark of other waterbodies and coastal
wetlands, nor within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of streams and inland wetlands of 4 or more acres. Operations in
existence on May 9, 1992 and not in conformance with this provision may continue.
8.3.1.3 Agricultural activities involving tillage of soil greater than 40,000 square feet in surface area within the Shoreland
Overlay District shall require a Conservation Plan to be filed with the Planning Board. Non-compliance with the
provisions of the Plan shall be considered to be a violation of this Ordinance.
8.3.1.4 Manure shall not be stored or stockpiled within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of a great pond, or within 75 feet,
horizontal distance, of other waterbodies, or wetlands of 4 or more acres. Within five years of the effective date of
this amendment (5-9-92), all manure storage within the Shoreland Overlay District must be constructed or modified
such that the facility produces no discharge of effluent or contaminated stormwater. Existing facilities which do not
meet the setback requirement may remain, but must meet the no discharge provision within the above five-year
period.
8.3.1.5 After May 9, 1992, newly established livestock grazing areas shall not be permitted within 100 feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high water mark of great ponds, nor within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of other waterbodies
and coastal wetlands, nor within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of streams and inland wetlands of 4 or more acres.
Existing livestock grazing associated with ongoing farm activities and which are not in conformance with the above
setback provisions may continue provided that such grazing is conducted in accordance with a Soil and Water
Conservation Plan.
8.3.2 Erosion and Sedimentation Control
8.3.2.1 All activities which involve filling, grading, excavation or other similar activities which result in unstabilized soil
conditions and which require a permit shall also require a written soil erosion and sedimentation control plan.
The plan shall be submitted to the permitting authority for approval and shall include, where applicable, provisions
for:
a. Mulching and revegetation of disturbed soil.
b. Temporary runoff control features such as hay bales, silt fencing or diversion ditches.
c. Permanent stabilization structures such as retaining walls or riprap.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
155
8.3.2.2 In order to create the least potential for erosion, development shall also be designed to fit with the topography
and soils of the site. Areas of steep slopes (slopes generally greater than 15%) where high cuts and fills may be
required shall be avoided wherever possible, and natural contours shall be followed as closely as possible.
8.3.2.3 Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall apply to all aspects of the proposed project involving land
disturbance, and shall be in operation during all stages of the activity. The amount of exposed soil at every phase
of construction shall be minimized to reduce the potential for erosion.
8.3.2.4 Any exposed ground area shall be temporarily or permanently stabilized within one (1) week from the time it was
last actively worked, by use of riprap, sod, seed, and mulch, or other effective measures. In all cases permanent
stabilization shall occur within nine (9) months of the initial date of exposure. In addition:
a. Where mulch is used, it shall be applied at a rate of at least one (1) bale per five hundred (500) square feet
and shall be maintained until a catch of vegetation is established.
b. Anchoring the mulch with netting, peg and twine or other suitable method may be required to maintain the
mulch cover.
c. Additional measures shall be taken where necessary in order to avoid siltation into the water. Such measures
may include the use of staked hay bales and/or silt fences.
8.3.2.5 Natural and man-made drainage ways and drainage outlets shall be protected from erosion from water flowing
through them. Drainage ways shall be designed and constructed in order to carry water from a twenty five (25)
year storm or greater, and shall be stabilized with vegetation or lined with rip-rap.
8.3.3 Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other Than Timber Harvesting
8.3.3.1 In a Resource Protection District abutting a great pond, there shall be no cutting of vegetation within the strip of
land extending 75 feet, horizontal distance, inland from the normal high-water mark, except to remove safety
hazards. Elsewhere, in any Resource Protection District the cutting or removal of vegetation shall be limited to
that which is necessary for uses expressly authorized in that district.
8.3.3.2 Except in areas as described in §8.3.3.1, above, and except to allow for the development of permitted uses, a
buffer strip of vegetation shall be preserved within a strip of land extending: 100 feet, horizontal distance, inland
from the normal high-water mark of a great pond; 100 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high water mark
of the tidal waters or upland edge of coastal wetlands along York River, Cape Neddick River, Brave Boat Harbor
and their tributaries; or 75 feet, horizontal distance, from any other waterbody or the upland edge of a wetland.
The following standards shall apply:
(a) There shall be no cleared opening greater than 250 square feet in the forest canopy (or other existing woody
vegetation if a forested canopy is not present) as measured from the outer limits of the tree or shrub crown.
However, a single footpath not to exceed six (6) feet in width as measured between tree trunks and/or shrub
stems is allowed for accessing the shoreline provided that a cleared line of sight to the water through the
buffer strip is not created. - AMENDED 05/20/2017
(b) Selective cutting of trees within the buffer strip is allowed provided that a well-distributed stand of trees and
other natural vegetation is maintained. For the purposes of §8.3.3.2(b) a "well-distributed stand of trees"
adjacent to a great pond or a stream flowing to a great pond, shall be defined as maintaining a rating score
of 24 or more in each 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular (1250 square feet) area as determined by the following
rating system.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
156
Diameter of Tree (in inches) at 4.5’ Above Ground Level Points
2 - < 4 in. 1
4 - <8 in. 2
8 - < 12 in. 4
12 in. or greater 8
Adjacent to other water bodies and wetlands, a "well-distributed stand of trees" is defined as maintaining a
minimum rating score of 16 per 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular area.
The following shall govern in applying this point system:
(i) The 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular plots must be established where the landowner or lessee
proposes clearing within the required buffer;
(ii) Each successive plot must be adjacent to, but not overlap a previous plot;
(iii) Any plot not containing the required points must have no vegetation removed except as otherwise
allowed by this Ordinance;
(iv) Any plot containing the required points may have vegetation removed down to the minimum
points required or as otherwise allowed by this Ordinance;
(v) Where conditions permit, no more than 50% of the points on any 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular
area may consist of trees greater than 12 inches in diameter.
For the purposes of §8.3.3.2(b) “other natural vegetation” is defined as retaining existing vegetation under 3
feet in height and other ground cover and retaining at least 5 saplings less than 2 inches in diameter at 4½
feet above ground level for each 25-foot by 50-foot rectangle area. If five saplings do not exist, no woody
stems less than 2 inches in diameter can be removed until 5 saplings have been recruited into the plot.
Notwithstanding the above provisions, no more than 40% of the total volume of trees 4 inches or more in
diameter, measured at 4½ feet above ground level may be removed in any 10 year period.
(c) In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitat, existing vegetation under 3 feet in height and other
ground cover, including leaf litter and the forest duff layer, shall not be cut, covered, or removed, except to
provide for a footpath or other permitted uses as described in §8.3.3.2 and §8.3.3.2(a) above.
(d) Pruning of tree branches, on the bottom 1/3 of the tree is allowed.
(e) In order to maintain a buffer strip of vegetation, when the removal of storm-damaged, dead or hazard trees
results in the creation of cleared openings, these openings shall be replanted with native tree species in
accordance with section 8.3.12.1 (Hazard Trees, Storm-Damaged Trees, and Dead Tree Removal) unless
existing new tree growth is present. – AMENDED 11/06/2018
(f) In order to maintain the vegetation in the shoreline buffer, clearing or removal of vegetation for allowed
activities, including associated construction and related equipment operation, within or outside the shoreline
buffer, must comply with the requirements of Section 8.3.3.2. – AMENDED 11/06/2018.
§8.3.3.2 does not apply to those portions of public recreational facilities adjacent to public swimming areas as long
as cleared areas are limited to the minimum area necessary.
8.3.3.3 Except in areas as described in §8.3.3.1, above, farther back from the shoreland resource than the buffer required
per §8.3.3.2, there shall be allowed on any lot, in any 10 year period, selective cutting of not more than 40% of
the volume of trees 4 inches or more in diameter, measured 4½ feet above ground level. Tree removal in
conjunction with the development of permitted uses shall be included in the 40% calculation. For the purposes
of these standards volume may be considered to be equivalent to basal area.
In no event shall cleared openings for any purpose, including but not limited to, principal and accessory structures,
driveways, lawns and sewage disposal areas, exceed in the aggregate, 25% of the lot area within the shoreland zone
or 10,000 square feet, whichever is greater, including land previously cleared. This provision shall not apply
wherever lot coverage in excess of 25% is permitted.
8.3.3.4 Cleared openings legally in existence as of 5-9-92 may be maintained but shall not be enlarged except as permitted
by this ordinance.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
157
8.3.3.5 Fields and other cleared openings which have reverted primarily to shrubs, trees or other woody vegetation shall
be regulated under the provisions of this §8.3.3.
8.3.3.6 Clearing operations shall be conducted in such a manner and at such a time that minimal soil disturbance results.
Adequate provision shall be made to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation of surface waters, pursuant to Section
8.3.2. Where natural vegetation is removed, it shall be replaced with other vegetation that is equally effective in
retarding erosion, maintaining or enhancing the value and functioning of the wetland and preserving natural
beauty.
8.3.3.7 The cutting or removal of vegetation within the wetland area that occurs in conjunction with a permitted filling
and earthmoving activity, reference 8.3.4.2, shall require the applicant to provide adequate mitigation for such
vegetation cutting or removal. The Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board shall be responsible for
determining the adequacy of all mitigation proposed by the applicant.
8.3.3.8 The Code Enforcement Officer may permit removal of invasive species, but is not obligated to approve such
requests. Removal of invasive species must not result in violation of any Shoreland standards. No roots of any
tree or shrub may be removed within a required buffer, unless this is associated with establishment of a permitted
use. For such clearing within a required buffer, the CEO shall consider the impact on all buffer functions and
shall approve a request only if it is reasonable to expect the changes will maintain or improve all buffer functions
within a two year timeframe. A Shoreland Permit shall be required.
8.3.4 Storm Water Runoff
8.3.4.1 All new construction and development shall be designed to minimize storm water runoff from the site in excess
of the natural predevelopment conditions. Where possible, existing natural runoff control features, such as berms,
swales, terraces and wooded areas, shall be retained in order to reduce runoff and encourage infiltration of
stormwaters. (See also Title 17 M.R.S.A. §2808 regarding adverse impact to neighbors from storm water runoff.)
8.3.4.2 Stormwater management facilities shall be maintained by the property owner, or drainage easement holder if
applicable, as necessary to ensure proper functioning. - AMENDED 11/04/2014
8.3.5 Mineral Exploration and Extraction
8.3.5.1 Mineral exploration to determine the nature or extent of mineral resources shall be accomplished by hand
sampling, test boring, or other methods which create minimal disturbance of less than 100 square feet of ground
surface. A permit from the Code Enforcement Officer shall be required for mineral exploration which exceeds
the above limitation. All excavations, including test pits and holes shall be immediately capped, filled or secured
by other equally effective measures, to restore disturbed areas and to protect the public health and safety.
8.3.5.2 Mineral extraction may be permitted under the following conditions:
a. A reclamation plan shall be filed with, and approved by, the Planning Board before a permit is
granted. Such plan shall describe in detail procedures to be undertaken to fulfill the requirements
of §8.3.5.2.c below.
b. No part of any extraction operation, including drainage and runoff control features, shall be
permitted within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a great pond, and
within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of any other waterbody or the
upland edge of a wetland. Extraction operations shall not be permitted within 50 feet, horizontal
distance, of any property line without written permission of the owner of such adjacent property.
c. Within 12 months following the completion of extraction operations at any extraction site, which
operations shall be deemed complete when less than 100 cubic yards of materials are removed in
any consecutive 12 month period, ground levels and grades shall be established in accordance with
the following:
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
158
1. All debris, stumps, and similar material shall be removed for disposal in an approved
location, or shall be buried on-site. Only materials generated on-site may be buried or
covered on-site.
2. The final graded slope shall be not more than one foot vertical per 2½ feet horizontal.
3. Top soil or loam shall be retained to cover all disturbed land areas, which shall be
reseeded and stabilized with vegetation native to the area. Additional topsoil or loam
shall be obtained from off-site sources if necessary to complete the stabilization project.
d. In keeping with the purposes of this Ordinance, the Planning Board may impose such conditions
as are necessary to minimize the adverse impacts associated with mineral extraction operations on
surrounding uses and resources.
8.3.6 Piers, Docks, Wharves, Breakwaters, Causeways, Marinas, Bridges, and uses extending over or beyond the
Normal High Water Mark of a Waterbody or within a Wetland, and Shoreline Stabilization. – AMENDED
05/20/2017
8.3.6.1 Access from shore shall be developed on soils appropriate for such use and constructed so as to control erosion.
8.3.6.2 The location of all structures and facilities subject to this paragraph shall not interfere with developed areas,
recreation areas, or natural beach or dune areas.
8.3.6.3 The structure or facility shall be so located as to minimize adverse effects on fisheries.
8.3.6.4 The facilities shall be no larger in dimension than necessary to carry on the activity and be consistent with the
surrounding character and uses of the area. A temporary pier, dock or wharf in non-tidal waters shall not be
wider than six feet for non-commercial uses.
8.3.6.5 No new structure other than those exempted below shall be built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock or other
structure extending below the normal high water mark of a waterbody. Exempted from this restriction are:
a. Structures which require direct access to the water as an operational necessity.
b. Small structures integral to water-borne activities, such as but not limited to, bait houses, hoists, or the
storage of boating equipment and gear for individual use. Such structures shall not, in total, exceed 10% of
the pier surface.
8.3.6.6 New permanent piers and docks on non-tidal waters shall not be permitted unless it is clearly demonstrated to
the Planning Board that a temporary pier or dock is not feasible, and a permit has been obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection, pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act.
8.3.6.7 No existing structures built on, over or abutting a pier, dock, wharf, or other structure extending beyond the
normal high water mark of a waterbody or within a wetland shall be converted to residential dwelling units in any
district. No provision of this Ordinance, including but not limited to the change of non-conforming use
provisions, shall be utilized to circumvent this standard.
8.3.6.8 New structures built on, over, or abutting a pier, wharf, dock or other structure extending beyond the normal
high water mark of a waterbody shall not exceed twelve feet in height above the pier, wharf, dock or other
structure.
8.3.6.9 A pier may be built only on a tract of land with river frontage on the York River existing as of March 5, 1977; and
only on a tract of land with river frontage on the Cape Neddick River or shore frontage on Brave Boat Harbor
existing as of May 20, 2017, provided that there is no pier presently on the land and that the following requirements
are met:
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
159
a. The total area of all floats associated with any single pier shall not exceed 200 square feet, except that
floats exceeding 200 square feet in place at a pier before March 6, 1977 shall be allowed to continue, be
maintained and repaired. This limitation shall not apply to any pier or wharf that is defined as a
municipal or commercial marina use. Commercial fishing uses, as defined in this ordinance, shall be
allowed a total float size area not to exceed 400 square feet with any single pier.
b. Piers shall not be constructed where uplands adjacent to the water body are in the Resource Protection
Subdistrict.
c. Approval pursuant to the Harbor Ordinance shall be required prior to approval of the Code
Enforcement Officer. - AMENDED 11/04/2014, 11/05/2019
8.3.6.10 In addition to any other local, state, or federal permitting and licensing requirements, prior written approval by
the York Harbor Board is a necessary precondition to the Code Enforcement Officer’s issuance of either:
a. a permit to build a new dock, float, moored float, pier, landing, or any other new structure within the
jurisdictional limits of the Town of York Harbor Ordinance; or
b. a permit to make additions, alterations, or changes to an existing dock, float, moored float, pier, landing,
or any other existing structure within the jurisdictional limits of the Town of York Harbor Ordinance.
No permit is required for routine repairs and/or maintenance to existing structures.
In addition to any other paperwork associated with the issuance of such permits, the CEO shall sign the plan
previously signed by the Harbor Board, and by the Chair of the Board of Selectmen as required. If the Board of
Selectmen is also required to approve the application, all 3 sign-offs on the plan shall be required before any work
commences.
EXPLANATORY NOTE: This language was inserted to ensure that the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance
and Harbor Ordinance match up. It reflects the Town’s intention that an applicant who wants to either build or
alter a pier, dock, wharf, or float must first secure the Harbor Board’s approval before the CEO can issue a permit.
- AMENDED 11/04/2014
8.3.6.11 No more than one pier, dock, wharf or similar structure extending or located beyond the normal high-water line
of a water body or within a wetland is allowed on a single lot. - AMENDED 05/20/2017
8.3.6.12 Vegetation may be removed in excess of the standards in Section 8.3.3 (Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for
Activities Other Than Timber Harvesting) of this ordinance in order to conduct shoreline stabilization of an
eroding shoreline, provided that a permit is obtained from the Planning Board. Construction equipment must
access the shoreline by barge when feasible as determined by the Planning Board.
a. When necessary, the removal of trees and other vegetation to allow for construction equipment access
to the stabilization site via land must be limited to no more than 12 feet in width. When the stabilization
project is complete the construction equipment access way must be restored.
b Revegetation must occur in accordance with Section 8.3.19 (Revegetation Requirements). -
AMENDED 11/06/2018
8.3.7 Archeological Site
The Maine Historic Preservation Commission (MHPC) has identified prehistoric and historic archeological sites
in York. The masked location of known archeological sites is shown on two maps: Prehistoric Archeology (York
Comprehensive Plan, Inventory & Analysis, Historic and Archeological Resources Chapter; November 6, 2007)
and Historic Archeology (York Comprehensive Plan, Inventory & Analysis, Historic and Archeological Resources
Chapter; November 6, 2007). The MHPC masks the location of known resources by placing a point at the site,
then randomly locating a square, ½ kilometer on each side, over the point. The actual resource location is
somewhere within the square. The maps also show areas of archeological sensitivity, which are areas where the
MHPC has determined that additional archeological sites are most likely to exist.
A. The following standard shall apply for any earth-disturbing activity wholly or partially within the
Shoreland Overlay District which is conducted with mechanized construction equipment
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
160
(bulldozers, excavators, backhoes, etc.) and which is wholly or partially within a masked area. Within
such areas, the applicant shall send a copy of the application to the MHPC, certified mail/return
receipt requested (receipt to be retained by the applicant and provided to the CEO if requested).
This shall include a photocopy of the applicable USGS quad sheet with a point showing the site
location. MHPC shall have 20 days from its receipt of the application to notify the Code
Enforcement Officer (CEO) if the proposed activity would impact a known archeological site. If the
MHPC fails to respond in a timely manner, or if the MHPC response indicates no known
archeological resources will be impacted, the Shoreland Permit may be issued. In the event MHPC
responds and informs the CEO that known archeological resources would be adversely impacted, a
Shoreland Permit may be issued only if the applicant and MHPC come to agreement about means
of conserving and/or documenting such resources prior to site disturbance.
B. Every Shoreland Permit which involves earth-disturbing activity with mechanized construction
equipment (bulldozers, excavators, backhoes, etc.) shall be issued with an anticipated discovery
clause, as follows: “If, during excavations, any archeological findings are uncovered, all work shall
stop and the State Archeologist be consulted, and may commence again only after conservation of
the resources is addressed to the satisfaction of the State Archeologist.” In areas of archeological
sensitivity, the CEO shall remind applicants to be watchful as they excavate.
8.3.8 Road and Driveway Construction
8.3.8.1 Road and driveway banks shall be no steeper than a slope of 2 horizontal to 1 vertical, and shall be graded and
stabilized in accordance with the provisions for erosion and sedimentation control contained in §8.3.2.
8.3.8.2 Roads and driveways shall be setback from the normal high water mark of any waterbody, or wetland by the same
distance required for structures under section 8.3.11, unless no reasonable alternative exists as determined by the
Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board. If no reasonable alternative exists, the Code Enforcement Officer
or Planning Board may reduce the road and/or driveway setback requirement by the minimum amount necessary
to allow necessary access, but shall not reduce the setback to less than 50’ in width. In such cases the applicant
shall employ appropriate techniques to prevent sedimentation of the waterbody or wetland. Such techniques may
include, but are not limited to, the installation of settling basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief
culverts and turnouts placed so as to avoid sedimentation of the waterbody or wetland.
On slopes of greater than 20%, the road and/or driveway setback shall be increased by 10 feet for each 5%
increase in slope above 20%.
§8.3.8.2 does not apply to approaches to water crossings nor to roads or driveways that provide access to permitted
structures, and facilities located nearer to the shoreline due to an operational necessity, excluding temporary docks
for recreational uses. Roads and driveways providing access to permitted structures within the setback area shall
comply fully with the requirements of §8.3.8.2 except for that portion of the road or driveway necessary for direct
access to the structure.
8.3.8.3 Existing public roads may be expanded within the legal road right-of-way regardless of their setback from a
waterbody or wetland.
8.3.8.4 Road and driveway grades shall be no greater than 10% except for segments of less than 200 feet.
8.3.8.5 New roads, land management roads, and driveways are prohibited in a Resource Protection District except that
the Planning Board may grant a permit to construct a road or driveway to provide access to permitted uses within
the district. A road, land management road, or driveway may also be approved by the Planning Board in a
Resource Protection District, upon a finding that no reasonable alternative route or location is available outside
the district. When a road, land management road, or driveway is allowed in a Resource Protection District it shall
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
161
be set back as far as practicable from the normal high-water line of a waterbody or upland edge of a wetland,
except for wetland or waterbody crossings and approaches.
8.3.8.6 Road crossings of wetlands and waterbodies shall be kept to the minimum number necessary.
8.3.8.7 In order to prevent road and driveway surface drainage from directly entering waterbodies or wetlands, roads and
driveways shall be designed, constructed, and maintained to empty onto an unscarified buffer strip which has a
width of at least 50 feet plus two times the average slope (measured as a percent) of the buffer strip, between the
outflow point of the ditch or culvert and the normal high-water line of a waterbody or upland edge of a wetland.
Surface drainage which is directed to an unscarified buffer strip shall be diffused or spread out to promote
infiltration of the runoff and to minimize channelized flow of the drainage through the buffer strip.
8.3.8.8 Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips and water turnouts shall be installed in a manner effective in
directing drainage onto unscarified buffer strips before the flow gains sufficient volume or head to erode the road,
driveway, or ditch. To accomplish this, the following shall apply:
(a) Ditch relief culverts, drainage dips and associated water turnouts shall be spaced along the road or
driveway at intervals no greater than indicated in the following table:
Grade Spacing
(Percent) (Feet)____
0-2 250
3-5 200-135
6-10 100-80
11-15 80-60
16-20 60-45
21 + 40
(b) Drainage dips may be used in place of ditch relief culverts only where the grade is 10% or less.
(c) On sections having slopes greater than 10%, ditch relief culverts shall be placed at approximately a 30
degree angle downslope from a line perpendicular to the centerline of the road or driveway.
(d) Ditch relief culverts shall be sufficiently sized and properly installed in order to allow for effective
functioning, and their inlet and outlet ends shall be stabilized with appropriate materials.
8.3.8.9 Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other storm water runoff control installations associated with
roads and driveways shall be maintained by the owner on a regular basis to assure effective functioning.
8.3.8.10 The Town may maintain an existing public road and associated drainage system without a Shoreland Permit. At
least 2 working days prior to commencement of work, the Public Works Department shall file a written “notice
of intent to construct” with the Code Enforcement Officer (to allow inspections to be scheduled). Compliance
with all applicable performance standards of the Shoreland Overlay District shall be required.
8.3.9 Subsurface Sewage Disposal Standards
8.3.9.1 Resource Protection Subdistrict Requirements. Existing sewage disposal systems may be replaced as needed. New
sewage disposal systems are permitted only pursuant to a Special Use Permit granted by the Planning Board per
§18.2.7.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
162
8.3.9.2 All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be installed in conformance with the State of Maine Subsurface Waste
Water Disposal Rules, and the Town of York Supplemental Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules, and the
following:
a) clearing or removal of woody vegetation necessary to site a new system and any associated fill
extensions, shall not extend closer than 75 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high water
mark of a water body or the upland edge of a wetland, and
b) a holding tank is not allowed for a first-time residential use in the Shoreland Overlay District.
8.3.9.3 Town approval for any new system variance shall be subject to the condition that the property owner grants
permission to the Local Plumbing Inspector to conduct periodic on-site inspections (not more than once a year)
as long as the system is in use to ensure continuing proper function.
8.3.10 Soils
All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which the proposed uses or structures can be established or
maintained without causing adverse environmental impacts, including severe erosion, mass soil movement,
improper drainage, and water pollution, whether during or after construction. When reviewing proposed uses
requiring subsurface waste disposal, and non-residential development of greater than 5,000 sq. ft., the Planning
Board may require a soils report, prepared by a State certified professional based on an on-site investigation.
Certified persons may include Maine Certified Soil Scientists, Maine Registered Professional Engineers, and Maine
State Certified Geologists. The report shall be based upon the analysis of the characteristics of the soil and
surrounding land and water areas, maximum groundwater elevation, presence of ledge, drainage conditions and
other pertinent data which the evaluator deems appropriate. The soils report shall include recommendations for
a proposed methodology to counteract soil limitations where they exist.
8.3.11 Structures
Setbacks from the normal high water mark of any waterbody or wetland shall be as follows. The waterbody or
wetland setback shall not apply to structures which require direct access to the water as an operational necessity,
such as piers, docks, and retaining walls, nor to other functionally water-dependent uses.
8.3.11.1 Resource Protection Subdistrict
Within the Resource Protection Subdistrict, all allowed principal or accessory structures and expansions of such
structures shall set back 100 feet from the normal high water mark of any waterbody, or from the upland edge of
any coastal wetland or of an inland wetland of 4 or more acres in size.
a. Within the Resource Protection Subdistrict, existing single family residences may expand, regardless of
their setback from the normal high water mark, provided all expansions comply with requirements of
8.3.11.4.
b. See §8.3.11.7 for additional setback requirements in proximity to coastal bluffs.
8.3.11.2 Limited Residential Subdistrict
Within the Limited Residential Subdistrict, all principal and accessory structures and expansions of such structures
shall set back 100 feet from the normal high water mark of any waterbody, or from the upland edge of any coastal
wetland or of an inland wetland of 10 or more acres in size. For Inland Wetlands with a contiguous area of 4 or
more acres but less than 10 acres, the setback shall be 75 feet.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
163
a. Within the Limited Residential Subdistrict, all principal and accessory structures that do not comply
with the above setback requirement may expand, provided all expansions comply with requirements of
8.3.11.4.
b. See §8.3.11.7 for additional setback requirements in proximity to coastal bluffs.
8.3.11.3 Mixed-Use Subdistrict
Within the Mixed Use Subdistrict, all principal and accessory structures and substantial expansions of such
structures shall set back 100 feet (but 35 feet on Harris Island only) from the normal high water mark of any
waterbody, or from the upland edge of any coastal wetland or of an inland wetland of 10 or more acres in size. For
Inland Wetlands with a contiguous area of 4 or more acres, but less than 10 acres, the setback shall be 75 feet.
a. Within the Mixed Use Subdistrict, all principal and accessory structures that do not comply with
the above setback requirement may expand, provided all expansions comply with requirements of
§8.3.11.4.
b. See §8.3.11.7 for additional setback requirements in proximity to coastal bluffs.
8.3.11.4 Expansions of Structures that Do Not Comply with Setback Requirements
In the Shoreland Overlay District, the portion of a principal structure that does not satisfy the required shoreland
setback may be expanded only in accordance with the following provisions:
Expansions. All new principal and accessory structures, excluding functionally water dependent uses, must meet
the water body, tributary stream, or wetland setback requirements contained in this ordinance. A non-conforming
structure may be added to or expanded after obtaining a permit from the authorized permitting authority, if such
addition or expansion does not increase the non-conformity of the structure and is in accordance with the
subparagraphs below.
a. Expansion of any portion of a principal structure within 25 feet of the normal high-water line of a water
body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland is prohibited, even if the expansion will not increase
nonconformity with the water body, tributary stream or wetland setback requirement. Expansion of an
accessory structure that is located closer to the normal high water mark of a water body, tributary stream, or
upland edge of a wetland than the principal structure is prohibited, even if the expansion will not increase
nonconformity with the water body, tributary stream, or wetland setback requirement.
b. Notwithstanding paragraph (a) above, if a legally existing nonconforming principal structure is entirely
located less than 25 feet from the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream or upland edge
of a wetland, that structure may be expanded as follows, as long as all other applicable municipal land use
standards are met and the expansion is not prohibited.
1. The maximum total footprint for the principal structure may not be expanded to a size greater
than 800 square feet or 30% larger than the footprint that existed on January 1, 1989, whichever
is greater. The maximum height of the principal structure may not be made greater than 15 feet
or the height of the existing structure, whichever is greater. – AMENDED 05/20/2017
c. All other legally existing non-conforming principal and accessory structures that do not meet the water body,
tributary stream, or wetland setback requirements may be expanded or altered as follows, as long as other
applicable municipal land use standards are met and the expansion is not prohibited by Section §8.3.11.4 or
§8.3.11.4.a above.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
164
1. For structures located less than 75 feet from the high water mark of a water body, tributary stream,
or upland edge of a wetland, the maximum combined total footprint for all structures may not be
expanded to a size greater than 1,000 square feet or 30% larger than the footprint that existed on
January 1, 1989, whichever is greater. The maximum height of any structure may not be made
greater than 20 feet or the height of the existing structure, whichever is greater. – AMENDED
05/20/2017
2. For structures located less than the required 100 foot setback specified in section 8.3.11 or less
than 100 feet from a great pond classified as GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified as
GPA, the maximum combined total footprint for all structures may not be expanded to a size
greater than 1,500 square feet or 30% larger than the footprint that existed on January 1, 1989,
whichever is greater. The maximum height of any structure may not be made greater than 25 feet
or the height of the existing structure, whichever is greater. Any portion of those structures located
less than 75 feet from the normal high water mark of a water body, tributary stream, or upland
edge of a wetland must meet the footprint and height limits in §8.3.11.4.b.1 and §8.3.11.4.c.1
above. – AMENDED 05/20/2017, 11/07/2017
3. In addition to the limitations in subparagraphs 1 and 2, for structures that are legally nonconforming
due to their location within the Resource Protection Overlay when located at less than
250 feet from the normal high water mark of a water body or upland edge of a wetland, the
maximum combined total footprint for all structures may not be expanded to a size greater than
1,500 square feet or 30% larger than the footprint that existed at the time the Resource Protection
Overlay was established on the lot, whichever is greater. The maximum height of any structure
may not be made greater than 25 feet or the height of the existing structure, whichever is greater,
except that any portion of those structures located less than 75 feet from the normal high water
mark of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland must meet the footprint and
height limits in §8.3.11.4.b.1 and §8.3.11.4.c.1 above. - AMENDED 05/20/2017, 11/07/2017
d. An approved plan for expansion of a non-conforming structure must be recorded by the applicant with the
York County Registry of Deeds, within 90 days of approval. The recorded plan must show the existing and
proposed footprint of the non-conforming structure, the existing and proposed structure height, the
footprint of any other structures on the parcel, the shoreland zone boundary and evidence of approval by
the municipal review authority.
e. No part of the addition that does not comply with a minimum setback requirement shall be closer to any
waterbody, tributary, stream, or wetland than any part of the existing structure.
f. Any non-conforming use of such structure shall not be expanded or intensified and;
g. For structures within the Resource Protection Subdistrict which are less than 100 feet, within the Limited
Residential Subdistrict which are less than 75 feet, within the Stream Protection Subdistrict which are less
than 50 feet, or within the Mixed Use Subdistrict which are less than 75 feet (but 35 feet on Harris Island
only) from the Normal High Water Mark or upland edge of the shoreland resource, the new addition must
be on the side of the structure located the furthest away from the high water mark or upland edge and the
direction of the expansion must be away from the water. The requirements of §8.3.11.4.g does not apply to
vertical expansion above existing interior enclosed living space for the principal building (not to include
screen porches, decks, patios and similar structures, but does include attached garages) which shall be
permitted so long as the expansion does not exceed the height of the building as it existed on January 1,
1989.
h. Foundations. Whenever a new, enlarged or replacement foundation is constructed under a non-conforming
structure, the structure and new foundation must be placed such that the setback requirement is met to the
greatest practicable extent as determined by the Planning Board or its designee, basing its decision on the
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
165
criteria specified in subsection “i” below. This section shall expressly supersede any conflicting provisions
of §17.2.
i. Relocation. A non-conforming structure may be relocated within the boundaries of the parcel on which the
structure is located provided that the site of relocation conforms to all setback requirements to the greatest
practicable extent as determined by the Planning Board or its designee, and provided that the applicant
demonstrates that the present subsurface sewage disposal system meets the requirements of State law and
the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules (Rules), or that a new system can be installed in
compliance with the law and said Rules. In no case shall a structure be relocated in a manner that causes the
structure to be more non-conforming. In no case shall relocation be required for a building which has been
determined by a qualified historic resources expert to be eligible for National Register listing.
In determining whether the building relocation meets the setback to the greatest practicable extent, the
Planning Board or its designee shall consider the size of the lot, the slope of the land, the potential for soil
erosion, the location of other structures on the property and on adjacent properties, the location of the septic
system and other on-site soils suitable for septic systems, and the type and amount of vegetation to be
removed to accomplish the relocation. When it is necessary to remove vegetation within the water or wetland
setback area in order to relocate a structure, the Planning Board shall require replanting of native vegetation
to compensate for the destroyed vegetation. In addition, the area from which the relocated structure was
removed must be replanted with vegetation. Replanting shall be required as follows:
1. Trees removed in order to relocate a structure must be replanted with at least one native tree, four
and one half (4.5) feet in height, for every tree removed. If more than five trees are planted, no
one species of tree shall make up more than 50% of the number of trees planted. Replaced trees
must be planted no further from the water or wetland than the trees that were removed.
Other woody and herbaceous vegetation, and ground cover, that are removed or destroyed in
order to relocate a structure must be re-established. An area at least the same size as the area
where vegetation and/or ground cover was disturbed, damaged, or removed must be reestablished
within the setback area. The vegetation and/or ground cover must consist of similar native
vegetation and/or ground cover that was disturbed, destroyed or removed.
2. Where feasible, when a structure is relocated on a parcel the original location of the structure shall
be replanted with vegetation which may consist of grasses, shrubs, trees, or a combination thereof.
j. Reconstruction or Replacement. Any non-conforming structure which is located less than the required
setback from a waterbody or wetland and which is removed, or damaged or destroyed, regardless of the
cause, by more than 50% of the market value of the structure before such damage, destruction or removal,
may be reconstructed or replaced provided that a permit is obtained within 18 months of the date of said
damage, destruction or removal, and provided that such reconstruction or replacement is in compliance with
the waterbody or wetland setback requirement to the greatest practicable extent as determined by the
Planning Board or its designee in accordance with the purposes of this Overlay District. In no case shall a
structure be reconstructed or replaced so as to increase its non-conformity. If the reconstructed or
replacement structure is less than the required setback it shall not be any larger than the original structure,
except as allowed pursuant to §8.3.11.4 above, as determined by the non-conforming footprint of the
reconstructed or replaced structure at its new location. If the total footprint of the original structure can be
relocated or reconstructed beyond the required setback area, no portion of the relocated or reconstructed
structure shall be replaced or reconstructed at less than the setback requirement for a new structure. When
it is necessary to remove vegetation in order to replace or reconstruct a structure, vegetation shall be
replanted in accordance with §8.3.11.4.i above.
Any non-conforming structure which is located less than the required setback from a waterbody or wetland
and which is removed by 50% or less of the market value, or damaged or destroyed by 50% or less of the
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
166
market value of the structure, excluding normal maintenance and repair, may be reconstructed in place if a
permit is obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer within one year of such damage, destruction or
removal.
In determining whether the building reconstruction or replacement meets the setback to the greatest
practicable extent the Planning Board or its designee shall consider, in addition to the criteria of §8.3.11.4.h
above, the physical condition and type of foundation present, if any. - AMENDED 05/20/2017
8.3.11.5 Stairways or similar structures may be allowed with a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning
Board to provide shoreline access in areas of steep slope or unstable soils provided:
a. that the structure is limited to a maximum of four (4) feet in width;
b. that the structure does not extend below or over the normal high-water mark of a waterbody or upland
edge of a wetland, and
c. that the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable access alternative exists on the property.
Stairways or similar structures that are under the ownership or control of the Town of York that are needed to
provide public access to a shoreline shall be exempt from requirements of a-c above. The Town must obtain a
permit from the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board for all stairways and similar structures and must
demonstrate the public need for the improvement and why there is no reasonable access alternative.
8.3.11.6 Structure and Building Height. Maximum structure height shall be 35 feet. Maximum building height shall be 35
feet.
8.3.11.7 Setback of Principal Structures from Coastal Bluffs. Where there is a coastal bluff identified on the Shoreland
Overlay District map, the setback for a principal structure shall be the more restrictive of: the standard setback
for the Shoreland subdistrict; or the required setback from the top of the coastal bluff. Regarding the required
setback for principal structures from the top of a coastal bluff, the following shall apply:
a. Along Dover Bluff on the Nubble, the required setback from the top of the coastal bluff shall be
20 feet.
b. Along the bluff which runs parallel to Harmon Park Road, the required setback from the top of
the coastal bluff shall be 25 feet.
c. Along all other coastal bluffs, the required setback from the top of the bluff shall be 75’.
If the applicant and the permitting official(s) are in disagreement as to the specific location of the bluff,
or where the top of the bluff is located, the applicant may at his or her expense, employ a Maine
Registered Professional Engineer, a Maine Certified Soil Scientist, a Maine State Geologist, or other
qualified individual to make a determination. If agreement is still not reached, the applicant may appeal
the matter to the Board of Appeals.
8.3.11.8 Retaining walls. Retaining walls that are not necessary for erosion control shall meet the structure setback
requirement, except for low retaining walls and associated fill provided all of the following conditions are met:
a. The site has been previously altered and an effective vegetated buffer does not exist;
b. The wall(s) is (are) at least 25 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of a water
body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland;
c. The site where the retaining wall will be constructed is legally existing lawn or is a site eroding
from lack of naturally occurring vegetation, and which cannot be stabilized with vegetative
plantings;
d. The total height of the wall(s), in the aggregate, are no more than 24 inches;
e. Retaining walls are located outside of the 100-year floodplain on rivers, streams, coastal wetlands,
and tributary streams, as designated on the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA)
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
167
Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, or the flood of record, or in the
absence of these, by soil types identified as recent flood plain soils;
f. The area behind the wall is revegetated with grass, shrubs, trees, or a combination thereof, and no
further structural development will occur within the setback area, including patios and decks; and
g. A vegetated buffer area is established within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water
line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland when a natural buffer area does
not exist. The buffer area must meet the following characteristics:
i. The buffer must include shrubs and other woody and herbaceous vegetation. Where
natural ground cover is lacking the area must be supplemented with leaf or bark mulch;
ii. Vegetation plantings must be in quantities sufficient to retard erosion and provide for
effective infiltration of stormwater runoff;
iii. Only native species may be used to establish the buffer area;
iv. A minimum buffer width of 15 feet, horizontal distance, is required, measured
perpendicularly to the normal high-water line or upland edge of a wetland;
v. A footpath not to exceed the standards in §8.3.3.2 (a), may traverse the buffer.
-Amended 11/05/2019
8.3.12 Timber Harvesting- All timber harvesting and forestry activities shall be administered by the Maine Bureau
of Forestry - AMENDED 05/20/2017
NOTE: This section pertains to timber harvesting only. For provisions regarding the clearing for approved
development, see section 8.3.3.
8.3.12.1 Hazard Trees, Storm-Damaged Trees, and Dead Tree Removal.
1. Hazard trees in the shoreland zone may be removed provided a shoreland permit is obtained from the Code
Enforcement Officer, and said removal complies with the following:
a. Within the shoreline buffer, if the removal of a hazard tree results in a cleared opening in the tree
canopy greater than two hundred and fifty (250) square feet, replacement with native tree species
is required, unless there is new tree growth already present. New tree growth must be as near as
practicable to where the hazard tree was removed and be at least two (2) inches in diameter,
measured at four and one half ( 4.5) feet above the ground level. If new growth is not present,
then replacement trees shall consist of native species and be at least four and one half (4.5) feet in
height, and be no less than two (2) inches in diameter. Stumps may not be removed.
b. Outside of the shoreline buffer, when the removal of hazard trees exceeds forty (40) percent of
the volume of trees four (4) inches or more in diameter, measured at four and one half ( 4.5) feet
above ground level in any ten (10) year period, and/or results in cleared openings exceeding
twenty-five (25) percent of the lot area within the shoreland zone, or ten thousand (10,000) square
feet, whichever is greater, replacement with native tree species is required, unless there is new tree
growth already present. New tree growth must be as near as practicable to where the hazard tree
was removed and be at least two (2) inches in diameter, measured at four and one half (4.5) feet
above the ground level. If new growth is not present, then replacement trees shall consist of native
species and be at least two (2) inches in diameter, measured at four and one half(4.5) feet above
the ground level.
c. The removal of standing dead trees, resulting from natural causes, is permissible without the need
for replanting or a permit, as long as the removal does not result in the creation of new lawn areas,
or other permanently cleared areas, and stumps are not removed. For the purposes of this
provision dead trees are those trees that contain no foliage during the growing season.
d. The Code Enforcement Officer shall require the property owner to submit an evaluation from a
licensed forester or arborist before any hazard tree can be removed within the shoreland zone.
e. The Code Enforcement Officer shall require more than a one-for-one replacement for hazard
trees removed that exceed eight (8) inches in diameter measured at four and one half (4.5) feet
above the ground level.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
168
2. Storm-damaged trees in the shoreland zone may be removed without a permit after consultation with the
Code Enforcement Officer if the following requirements are met:
a. Within the shoreline buffer, when the removal of storm-damaged trees results in a cleared opening
in the tree canopy greater than two hundred and fifty (250) square feet, replanting is not required,
but the area shall be required to naturally revegetate, and the following requirements must be met:
(i) The area from which a storm-damaged tree is removed does not result in
new lawn areas, or other permanently cleared areas;
(ii) Stumps from the storm-damaged trees may not be removed;
(iii) Limbs damaged from a storm event may be pruned even if they extend
beyond the bottom one-third (1/3) of the tree; and
(iv) If after one growing season, no natural regeneration or regrowth is present,
replanting of native tree seedlings or saplings is required at a density of one
seedling per every eighty (80) square feet of lost canopy.
b. Outside of the shoreline buffer, if the removal of storm damaged trees exceeds 40% of the volume
of trees four (4) inches or more in diameter, measured at four and one half (4.5) feet above the
ground level in any ten (10) year period, or results, in the aggregate, in cleared openings exceeding
25% of the lot area within the shoreland zone or ten thousand (10,000) square feet, whichever is
greater, and no natural regeneration occurs within one growing season, then native tree seedlings
or saplings shall be replanted on a one-for-one basis. The removal of standing dead trees, resulting
from natural causes, is permissible without the need for replanting, as long as the removal does
not result in the creation of new lawn, or other permanently cleared areas, and stumps are not
removed. For the purposes of this provision dead trees are those trees that contain no foliage
during the growing season. - AMENDED 05/20/2017
8.3.13 Water Quality Protection
No activity shall locate, store, discharge, or permit the discharge of any treated, untreated, or inadequately treated
liquid, gaseous, or solid materials of such nature, quantity, obnoxiousness, toxicity, or temperature that run off,
seep, percolate, or wash into surface or ground waters so as to contaminate, pollute, or harm such waters or cause
nuisances, such as objectionable shore deposits, floating or submerged debris, soil or scum, color, odor, taste, or
unsightliness or be harmful to human, animal, plant, or aquatic life.
8.3.14 Essential Services
8.3.14.1 Where feasible, the installation of essential services shall be limited to existing public ways and existing service
corridors.
8.3.14.2 The installation of essential services other than roadside distribution lines is not permitted in the Resource
Protection or Stream Protection Subdistricts, except to provide services to a permitted use within said district, or
except when the application demonstrates that no reasonable alternatives exists. Where permitted, such structures
and facilities shall be located so as to minimize such adverse impacts on surrounding uses and resources, including
visual impact.
8.3.14.3 Damaged or destroyed essential services lines and related infrastructure may be repaired, reconstructed or replaced
in kind without a permit.
8.3.15 Parking Areas
8.3.15.1 Parking areas shall meet the setback requirements for structures for the subdistrict in which such areas are located,
except that for Commercial Fishing parking areas shall be set back at least 25 feet, horizontal distance, from the
shoreline. The setback requirement for parking areas (other than on-street parking) serving public boat launching
facilities shall be no less than 50 feet, horizontal distance, from the shoreline if the Planning Board finds that no
other reasonable alternative exists.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
169
8.3.15.2 Parking areas shall be designed to prevent stormwater runoff from flowing directly into a waterbody or wetland
and where feasible, to retain all runoff on-site.
8.3.16 Commercial Fishing
A. Use. The Commercial fishing use shall be expressly permitted in the following areas, regardless of the
shoreland subdistrict or underlying base zone:
1. York River: waterfront lots downstream from Sewalls Bridge, but not along Barrells Mill Pond,
and on any other property used for commercial fishing during the year 2004.
2. Cape Neddick River: waterfront lots downstream from Clark Road Bridge, and on any other
property used for commercial fishing during the year 2004.
B. Lot Coverage. Any property used exclusively for commercial fishing use as defined herein, and included
within the areas identified in §8.3.16.A, shall be permitted a maximum lot coverage of 70%.
C. Boat and Equipment Storage. A person engaged in commercial fishing shall be permitted to store their own
boats and/or associated equipment on the lot on which they reside, or on any other lot which they own.
Such storage may be within a building or outside. If outside, such storage shall be set back 10’ from any lot
line, or permitted up to the lot line if screened by a solid fence or dense hedge.
D. Most Restrictive Provision. This section is intended to be permissive, to permit commercial fishing
consistent with State and Town policy, and therefore §8.3.16 expressly supersedes more restrictive controls
imposed elsewhere in this Ordinance as permitted in §21.2.
8.3.17 Shop for Building Small Boats
A. Use. The Shop for Building Small Boats use shall be expressly permitted on waterfront lots on the
York River downstream from Sewalls Bridge, but not along Barrells Mill Pond, regardless of the
shoreland subdistrict or underlying base zone.
B. Application. Establishment of a Shop for Building Small Boats shall require Site Plan Review approval
by the Planning Board. This shall apply whether or not the use meets the threshold criteria of §18.15.
C. Most Restrictive Provision. This section is intended to be permissive, permitting Shops for Building
Small Boats as detailed in §8.3.17.A, and therefore §8.3.17 expressly supersedes more restrictive controls
imposed elsewhere in this Ordinance as permitted in §21.2.
8.3.18 Campgrounds
In addition to standards of §7.2, campgrounds shall conform to the following minimum requirements within the
Shoreland Overlay District:
A. Campgrounds shall contain a minimum of 5,000 square feet of land, not including roads and driveways,
for each site. Land supporting wetland vegetation, and land below the normal high-water line of a
waterbody shall not be included in calculating land area per site.
B. The areas intended for placement of a recreational vehicle, tent or shelter, and utility and service
buildings shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line
of a great pond, and 75 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water mark of other waterbodies
or the upland edge of a wetland.
8.3.19 Revegetation Requirements
When revegetation is required in response to violations of the vegetation standards set forth in Section 8.3.3, to address
the removal of non-native invasive species of vegetation, or as a mechanism to allow for development that may
otherwise not be permissible due to the vegetation standards, including removal of vegetation in conjunction with a
shoreline stabilization project, the revegetation must comply with the following requirements:
A. The property owner must submit a revegetation plan, prepared with and signed by a qualified professional
that describes revegetation activities and maintenance. The plan must include a scaled site plan, depicting
where vegetation was, or is to be removed, where existing vegetation is to remain, and where vegetation is
to be planted, including a list of all vegetation to be planted.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
170
B. Revegetation must occur along the same segment of shoreline and in the same area where vegetation was
removed and at a density comparable to the pre-existing vegetation, except where a shoreline stabilization
activity does not allow revegetation to occur in the same area and at a density comparable to the pre-existing
vegetation, in which case revegetation must occur along the same segment of shoreline and as close as
possible to the area where vegetation was removed.
C. If part of a permitted activity, revegetation shall occur before the expiration of the permit. If the activity or
revegetation is not completed before the expiration of the permit, a new revegetation plan shall be submitted
with any renewal or new permit application.
D. Revegetation activities must meet the following requirements for trees and saplings:
1. All trees and saplings removed must be replaced with native noninvasive species;
2. Replacement vegetation must at a minimum consist of saplings;
3. If more than three (3) trees or saplings are planted, then at least three (3) different species shall be
used;
4. No one species shall make up 50% or more of the number of trees and saplings planted;
5. If revegetation is required for a shoreline stabilization project and it is not possible to plant trees
and saplings in the same area where trees or saplings were removed, then trees or saplings must
be planted in a location that effectively reestablishes the screening between the shoreline and
structures; and
6. A survival rate of at least eighty (80) percent of planted trees or saplings is required for a minimum
five (5) year period.
E. Revegetation activities must meet the following requirements for woody vegetation and other vegetation
under three (3) feet in height:
1. All woody vegetation and vegetation under three (3) feet in height must be replaced with native
noninvasive species of woody vegetation and vegetation under three (3) feet in height as
applicable;
2. Woody vegetation and vegetation under three (3) feet in height shall be planted in quantities and
variety sufficient to prevent erosion and provide for effective infiltration of stormwater;
3. If more than three (3) woody vegetation plants are to be planted, then at least three (3) different
species shall be planted;
4. No one species shall make up 50% or more of the number of planted woody vegetation plants;
and
5. Survival of planted woody vegetation and vegetation under three feet in height must be sufficient
to remain in compliance with the standards contained within this chapter for minimum of five (5)
years.
F. Revegetation activities must meet the following requirements for ground vegetation and ground cover:
1. All ground vegetation and ground cover removed must be replaced with native herbaceous
vegetation, in quantities and variety sufficient to prevent erosion and provide for effective
infiltration of stormwater;
2. Where necessary due to a lack of sufficient ground cover, an area must be supplemented with a
minimum four (4) inch depth of leaf mulch and/or bark mulch to prevent erosion and provide
for effective infiltration of stormwater; and
3. Survival and functionality of ground vegetation and ground cover must be sufficient to remain in
compliance with the standards contained within this chapter for a minimum of five (5) years.
- AMENDED 05/20/2017
8.3.20 Exemption to Clearing and Vegetation Removal Requirements
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
171
The following activities are exempt from the clearing and vegetation removal standards set forth in Section 8.3.3,
provided that all other applicable requirements of this ordinance are complied with, and the removal of vegetation is
limited to that which is necessary:
1. The removal of vegetation that occurs at least once every two (2) years for the maintenance of legally existing
areas that do not comply with the vegetation standards in this chapter, such as but not limited to cleared
openings in the canopy or fields. Such areas shall not be enlarged, except as allowed by this section. If any
of these areas, due to lack of removal of vegetation every two (2) years, reverts back to primarily woody
vegetation, the requirements of Section 8.3.3 apply;
2. The removal of vegetation from the location of allowed structures or allowed uses, when the shoreline
setback requirements are not applicable;
3. The removal of vegetation from the location of public swimming areas associated with an allowed public
recreational facility;
4. The removal of vegetation associated with allowed agricultural uses, provided best management practices
are utilized, and provided all requirements of section 8.3.1 are complied with;
5. The removal of vegetation associated with brownfields or Voluntary Response Action Program (VRAP)
projects provided that the removal of vegetation is necessary for remediation activities to clean-up
contamination on a site in a general development district, commercial fisheries and maritime activities district
or other equivalent zoning district approved by the Commissioner that is part of a state or federal brownfields
program or a voluntary response action program pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A section 343-E, and that is located
along:
(a) A coastal wetland; or
(b) A river that does not flow to a great pond classified as GPA pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A section 465-
A.
6. The removal of non-native invasive vegetation species, provided the following minimum requirements are
met:
(a) If removal of vegetation occurs via wheeled or tracked motorized equipment, the wheeled or
tracked motorized equipment is operated and stored at least twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal
distance, from the shoreline, except that wheeled or tracked equipment may be operated or stored
on existing structural surfaces, such as pavement or gravel;
(b) Removal of vegetation within twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal distance, from the shoreline occurs
via hand tools; and
(c) If applicable clearing and vegetation removal standards are exceeded due to the removal of nonnative
invasive species vegetation, the area shall be revegetated with native species to achieve
compliance.
7. The removal of vegetation associated with emergency response activities conducted by the Department of
Environmental Protection, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Coast Guard, and their
agents.
- AMENDED 11/06/2018
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
172
ARTICLE NINE
Sustainable Energy Efficient Buildings
9.1 Purpose
The purpose of the Sustainable Energy Efficient Buildings Article is to promote sustainable building practices through
resource conservation, reduction of waste generated in building construction, increases in energy efficiency, and
promotion of the health of residents, employees and visitors to the Town of York.
9.2 Standards for New Municipal Buildings.
A. Any new building or new addition to an existing building funded in whole by the Town of York, or in part
if the portion funded by the Town is 75% or greater of total construction costs, shall be certified by an
established third-party green or sustainable energy efficient building performance rating organization or shall
be designed to conform to a nationally-recognized green or sustainable energy efficient building standard
model code, unless exempted in §9.2.B. Acceptable systems include, but are not limited to: Efficiency Maine’s
Maine Advanced Building Program; the Green Buildings Initiatives’ Green Globes Certification; the
International Code Council’s 2012 International Green Construction Code (IgCC); or the U.S. Green
Building Council’s Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) Certification. All buildings or
additions shall be designed to be at least 30% more energy-efficient than the minimum standards found in
the latest version of the Maine Universal Building and Energy Code (MUBEC).
B. The following types of new municipal buildings shall not be required to address green building elements or
design standards:
a. A building or addition designed and used exclusively for storage; or
b. A building or addition that has less than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area.
C. Energy efficiency that is at least 30% better than the minimum standards found in the latest version of the
Maine Universal Building and Energy Code (MUBEC) shall be a required element in Requests for Proposals
for design and/or construction of any new municipal building or addition covered by this article.
9.3 Standards for Private Buildings
Privately funded buildings do not require sustainable energy efficient building standards at this time. The Town
recommends private construction to include as many sustainable energy efficient building standards as are feasible.
- AMENDED 05/17/2008, 05/20/2017
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
173
ARTICLE NINE-A
SMALL WINDMILLS
9-A.1 Purpose
The purpose of the Small Wind Article is to allow for Small Windmills, producers of alternative, renewable energy, to
be erected in the Town of York, with rigorous provisions for their potential impacts on abutters and the surrounding
environment.
9-A.2 Capacity
A Small Windmill shall have a maximum rated capacity of 20 kW, except in the case of a Small Windmill on a
municipally owned lot equal to or greater than 5 acres in size, which shall have a maximum rated capacity of 50 kW.
9-A.3 Location and Dimensional Standards
Applicable as an accessory use in all base Zoning Districts. Small Windmills shall not be permitted in Local or National
Historic Districts, or in the Wetland Protection Overlay District. In all other Overlay Districts, Small Windmills are
subject to standards regulating accessory structures.
9-A.3.1 Lot Requirement
A Small Windmill shall be the permitted only on a conforming lot.
9-A.3.2 Setbacks
A Small Windmill shall be set back a minimum horizontal distance of 1.1 times its total height from:
A. all surrounding property lines, except when the adjacent lot is held in common ownership;
B. overhead utility lines (these do not include a Small Windmill’s associated electrical collection and
supply equipment); and
C. public roads.
9-A.3.3 Height
A. Tower height shall not exceed 80 feet to the center of the turbine on lots under 3 acres in size.
B. Tower height shall not exceed 100 feet to the center of the turbine on lots equal to or greater than
3 acres in size.
C. The allowed total height shall be reduced if necessary to comply with Federal Aviation
Administration Requirements (FAA).
D. The height limits of this Section supersede other building and structure height standards in the
Town of York Zoning Ordinance.
9-A.4 Performance Standards
9-A.4.1 Noise
A Small Windmill shall not exceed 50 dBA, as measured at the neighboring property lines. The sound level,
however, may be exceeded during short-term events such as severe windstorms. In the event of a conflict
between this standard and the Town of York Noise Ordinance, the more restrictive of the two shall prevail.
9-A.4.2 Color
To minimize visual disruption, the Small Windmill’s tower and blades shall be a non-reflective color that
blends into the surrounding environment to the greatest extent possible.
9-A.4.3 Signs
Small Windmills shall not display any signs. Writing, symbols, logos, or graphic representation of any kind
shall not be visible beyond the lot on which it is located.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
174
9-A.4.4 Lighting
Small Windmills shall not be lighted unless required by the FAA.
9-A.4.5 Preservation of Landscape
Placement of a Small Windmill shall recognize existing topography and vegetation. Clearing of natural
vegetation and grade changes to the site shall be limited to the minimum necessary for the construction and
maintenance of the Small Windmill.
9-A.4.6 Safety
A. All ground mounted electrical and control equipment shall be labeled and secured to prevent
unauthorized access.
B. Horizontal axis small windmill towers shall be designed and installed such that public access via
step bolts or a ladder is prevented for a minimum of 12 feet above the ground.
C. Vertical axis small windmill towers shall be designed and installed such that public access via step
bolts or a ladder is prevented for a minimum of 9 feet above the ground.
D. Blade clearance. For all horizontal axis small windmills the minimum distance between the ground
and any protruding blades shall be 15 feet as measured at the lowest point of the arc of the blades.
9-A.4.7 Negative Visual Impact
Efforts shall be made to minimize visual prominence of Small Windmills. A Small Windmill shall not be
placed in a location that would substantially detract from or block the view of a designated Scenic Resource,
as listed in the Town of York Comprehensive Plan (see Natural Resources Chapter for listing), as viewed from
any public road right-of-way within the Town. Visual dominance and extreme contrast in scale of the
proposed Small Windmill in relation to the affected Scenic Resources shall be considered when determining
whether there is a negative visual impact. A substantial detraction from or blocking of the view of a designated
Scenic Resource, as determined by the Planning Board, shall constitute a basis for application denial.
9-A.4.8 Shadow Flicker
Small Windmills shall be sited and designed in a manner that minimizes shadow flicker impacts.
9-A.4.9 Structural Integrity
A Professional Engineer (PE) shall certify structural integrity of design before any Small Windmill is
constructed. The property owner shall be responsible for having structural integrity of the system reevaluated
a minimum of every 5 years, and shall retain records of such as long as the Small Windmill in
standing.
9-A.4.10 Structure Type
A Small Windmill shall be designed as a self-supporting structure without guyed supports.
9-A.4.11 Other Uses
A Small Windmill shall be used exclusively for the production of electrical power, and shall not include
mounting of equipment for any other use, including but not limited to the collocation of Wireless
Communication Facilities equipment.
9-A.4.12 Number Per Lot
There shall be no more than one Small Windmill per lot.
9-A.4.13 Off-site Consumption
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
175
Excess electrical power generated and not immediately needed for on-site use may be used by the utility
company.
9-A.5 Abandonment of Use
A Small Windmill which is not generating electricity for 18 consecutive months shall be deemed abandoned and shall
be dismantled and removed from the property at the expense of the property owner within 3 months of determination
of abandonment. Determination of abandonment shall be made by the Code Enforcement Office.
- AMENDED 05/29/2009
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
176
ARTICLE NINE-B
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
9-B.1 Purpose
The Town of York finds that it is in the public interest to encourage the development and use of Solar Energy Systems
as a clean, renewable energy source and to help promote sustainable initiatives in town. The purpose of this Article is
to facilitate the effective and efficient use of Solar Energy Systems while protecting the public health, safety and welfare
of York citizens.
9-B.2 Applicability
a) The requirements of this Ordinance shall apply to all small, medium, and large-scale Solar Energy Systems
modified or installed after November 6, 2018.
b) All Solar Energy Systems shall be designed, erected, and installed in accordance with all applicable local, state
and federal codes, regulations and standards.
c) Any modification, upgrade, or structural change that materially alters the size, placement or output of an
existing Solar Energy System shall comply with this ordinance.
9-B.3 Permitting
a) Solar Energy Systems or devices shall be installed or operated in York in compliance with this ordinance and
any other applicable local, state and federal regulations or codes.
b) Solar thermal, building-integrated photovoltaic, building mounted photovoltaic, roof mounted, and smallscale
ground mounted Solar Energy Systems shall obtain a building permit through the Code Enforcement
Department and are permitted in all zoning districts referenced in Article 4 - Use Regulations.
c) Medium and large-scale ground-mounted Solar Energy Systems are permitted per Article 4 - Use Regulations,
Article 8 - Shoreland Overlay District, and section 18.15 - Delegation of Site Plan Review Authority as well
as other sections of this ordinance. Such Solar Energy Systems shall obtain a building permit through the
Code Enforcement Department following Planning Board site plan approval.
d) Historic districts, sites, or landmarks. All Solar Energy Systems proposed to be within a historic district, site
or landmark require a Certificate of Appropriateness from the Historic District Commission prior to receiving
a building permit from the Code Enforcement Officer (See Article 12 - Historic and Archeological
Resources).
9-B.4 Dimensional Requirements
a) Height
1) Building-integrated photovoltaic systems and roof-mounted Solar Energy Systems shall not
exceed the maximum allowed building height or peak of the roof, whichever is greater, in the
district they are proposed to be located. Regarding non-residential uses, roof-mounted Solar
Energy Systems shall be considered comparable to a building appurtenance and, for purposes of
height measurement, shall be consistent with other building-mounted mechanical devices or
similar building appurtenances as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning
Board.
2) Small-scale ground-mounted Solar Energy Systems in all residential districts specified in §4.1.1-
Residential Districts. Small-scale ground-mounted Solar Energy Systems shall not exceed twelve
(12) feet in height when oriented at minimum tilt to the vertical.
3) Ground-mounted Solar Energy Systems in all other zoning districts shall conform to the
building/structure height requirements of the zoning district(s) in which they are permitted in.
b) Setbacks
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
177
1) All ground-mounted Solar Energy Systems shall be regulated by the dimensional setback
regulations stipulated in Article 5 - Dimensional Regulations, Article 8 - Shoreland Overlay
District, or as prescribed in other sections of this ordinance.
2) Ground-mounted Solar Energy Systems shall not be located in front yards in residential zoning
districts specified in §4.1.1 - Residential Districts, unless they are sited at least fifty (50) feet from
the front property line(s).
c) Lot Coverage/Calculating Small, Medium or Large Solar Energy Systems Surface Area
Regarding small, medium or large scale Solar Energy Systems, lot coverage and surface area square
footage (or solar collector coverage/horizontal projected area) shall be calculated by measuring the
total surface area of the solar collector at maximum tilt to the vertical that occupies a given space
or mounting surface. See figure 9-B.1 below.
Figure: 9-B.1
9-B.5 Standards for building integrated, building-mounted photovoltaic, roof-mounted and small-scale groundmounted
Solar Energy Systems.
a) All wiring must comply with the National Electrical Code, most recent edition, as amended and adopted by
the town of York.
b) Prior to operation, electrical connections must be inspected by the Code Enforcement Officer or their
designee.
c) Any connection to the public utility grid must be inspected by the appropriate public utility unless waived by
the public utility.
d) Roof-mounted and building-mounted solar collectors shall meet all applicable fire safety and building code
standards.
9-B.6 Standards for Medium and Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy Systems.
In addition to the standards above, medium and large-scale ground-mounted Solar Energy Systems shall
comply with the following:
a) Utility Connections – Reasonable efforts, as determined by the Planning Board, shall be made to place all
utility connections from the solar photovoltaic installation underground, depending on appropriate soil
conditions, shape, and topography of the site and any requirements of the utility provider.
b) Safety – The Solar Energy System owner shall provide a copy of the site plan review application to the Fire
Chief for their comment. All means of shutting down the Solar Energy System shall be clearly marked on the
plan.
c) Visual Impact – Reasonable efforts, as determined by the Planning Board, shall be made to minimize visual
impacts by preserving natural vegetation, screening abutting properties, and protecting scenic resources.
d) Glare – Solar panel placement shall be prioritized to minimize or negate any solar glare onto nearby
properties, public gathering places or roadways without unduly impacting the functionality or efficiency of
the Solar Energy System.
e) Natural resources – Reasonable efforts, as determined by the Planning Board, shall be made to protect
wetlands, watersheds, working agricultural lands, surface waters, slopes greater than twenty percent (20%), as
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
178
well as Undeveloped Habitat Blocks, High Value Plant and Animal Habitats and Focus Areas of Ecological
Significance as mapped by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife’s Beginning with Habitat
Program.
f) Additional Standards for Large-Scale Solar Energy Systems
1) Operations & Maintenance Plan - as part of a large-scale ground-mounted Solar Energy System
site plan the project applicant shall include an operation and maintenance plan, which shall include
measures for maintaining safe access to the installation as well as other general procedures for
operational maintenance of the installation.
2) Signage - Signs on large-scale ground-mounted Solar Energy Systems shall comply with all
applicable standards in this zoning ordinance and shall be required, at minimum, to identify the
owner and provide a 24-hour emergency contact phone number.
3) Emergency Services - The owner or operator of a large-scale ground-mounted Solar Energy
System shall provide a copy of the project summary, electrical schematic, and site plan to the Fire
Chief. Upon request the owner or operator shall cooperate with the Fire Department in
developing an emergency response plan. All means of shutting down the system shall be clearly
marked on the plan. The owner or operator shall identify a responsible person for public inquiries
throughout the life of the installation.
4) Installation Conditions - The owner or operator of a large-scale ground-mounted Solar Energy
System shall maintain the facility in good condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited
to, painting, structural repairs, and integrity of security measures. Site access shall be maintained
to a level acceptable to the Fire Chief. The owner or operator shall be responsible for the cost of
maintaining the access road(s), unless the road(s) is accepted as a public way.
5) Removal - Any large-scale ground-mounted Solar Energy System which has reached the end of its
useful life or has been abandoned consistent with this ordinance shall be removed. The owner or
operator shall physically remove the installation no more than one year after the date of
discontinued operations. The owner or operator shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer by
certified mail of the proposed date of discontinued operations and plans for removal.
Decommissioning shall consist of:
i. Physical removal of all Solar Energy Systems, structures, equipment, security barriers
and transmission lines from the site.
ii. Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with local, state, and federal
waste disposal regulations.
iii. Stabilization or re-vegetation of the site as necessary to minimize erosion. The Code
Enforcement Officer may allow the owner or operator to leave landscaping or
designated below-grade foundations in order to minimize erosion and disruption to
vegetation.
6) Abandonment.
i. Absent notice of a proposed date of decommissioning or written notice of extenuating
circumstances, a large-scale ground-mounted Solar Energy System shall be considered
abandoned when it fails to generate electricity for more than one year without having
first obtained the written consent of the Code Enforcement Officer. Determination of
abandonment shall be made by the Code Enforcement Office.
ii. If the owner or operator of the large scale ground mounted Solar Energy System fails
to remove the installation in accordance with the requirements of this section within
one year of abandonment or the proposed date of decommissioning, the Town retains
the right to use any and all legal or available means necessary to cause an abandoned,
hazardous, or decommissioned large-scale ground-mounted Solar Energy System to be
removed.
- AMENDED 11/06/2018
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
179
ARTICLE TEN
WATERSHED PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT
10.1 Watershed Protection District
The provisions of this article pertain to the Watershed Protection District as described in Section 3.9.
10.2 Land Uses
10.2.1 The Watershed Protection District shall be an overlay district whose provisions shall be applied in addition to those
of underlying zones. Where the provisions of this district conflict with the provisions of the underlying zone, the
more restrictive shall apply.
10.2.2 The following uses are permitted, provided all necessary state and local permits have been obtained and the use
meets all applicable performance standards:
Agriculture, excluding Animal Husbandry Single-family dwellings
Open Space Uses accessory to the foregoing
Timber harvesting
10.2.3 A conditional use permit is required for the following uses:
Expansion of uses Home occupations
Public utility facilities Road construction (except for logging roads)
- AMENDED 11/05/1996, 11/07/2000, 05/22/2004
10.2.4 All other uses are prohibited. - AMENDED 11/07/2000
10.3 Performance Standards
10.3.1 Buffer Strips
10.3.1.1 Buffer strips shall be retained within 100 feet of the normal high water mark of a public water supply or 75 feet
of all streams, including tributary streams.
10.3.1.2 Buffer strips shall remain un-disturbed, except as follows:
a. individual trees may be cut in accordance with a timber harvest management plan; and
b. the buffer may be crossed where required to access land outside the buffer, provided the crossing is avoided
where possible, and minimized where unavoidable.
10.3.2 Agriculture
10.3.2.1 Land application of sludge and other process wastes is prohibited in the Watershed Protection District. Spray
irrigation of industrial wastewater or sewage is prohibited in the Watershed Protection District.
10.3.2.2 The spreading, storage, or disposal of manure in the Watershed Protection District requires the written approval
of the Water District. Land application of manure is prohibited within 500 feet of a public water supply and 250
feet of all streams, including tributary streams. All manure handling shall be carried out in conformance with a
Conservation Plan approved by the York County Soil and Water Conservation District.
10.3.2.3 Use of chemical pesticides and herbicides is prohibited.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
180
10.3.3 Drainage
10.3.3.1 The development or other alteration of a site shall not cause an increase in the volume of peak run-off above that
occurring in its undeveloped state, nor shall it reduce the water quality of the receiving waters.
10.3.3.2 Stormwater run-off shall be provided for by on-site recharge through vegetative surfaces, unless such recharge is
unfeasible due to site conditions or uncontrollable risks to water quality.
10.3.4 Erosion and Sedimentation Control
10.3.4.1 When the vegetative cover is to be changed or removed on over five (5) acres, a soil erosion and sedimentation
control plan for the activity must be approved by the Water District.
10.3.4.2 The Planning Board shall adopt Standard Erosion and Sediment Control Measures. All earth disturbing activities
shall comply with such standards to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation of watercourses and waterbodies.
10.3.5 Home Occupations
Home occupations involving the use or storage of hazardous materials in excess of normal residential use are not
permitted.
10.3.6 Storage of Petroleum and Hazardous Materials
All storage facilities for petroleum and hazardous materials shall be above-ground. These facilities shall be located
on impervious pavement and shall be completely enclosed by an impervious dike which is tall enough to contain the
total volume of liquid kept within the storage area plus the rain which would fall on the area during a 50-year storm.
This section shall apply for any modification of pre-existing facilities because new facilities are prohibited.
10.3.7 Steep Slopes
Earthwork or site disturbance on slopes of 12% or more shall be designed by a Maine Licensed professional Engineer
specializing in civil engineering and shall be approved in advance by the Water District to ensure that proper erosion
control measures are taken.
10.3.8 Timber Harvesting
10.3.8.1 Timber harvesting operations shall be conducted in such a way as to minimize soil erosion and sedimentation of
surface waters.
10.3.8.2 Skid trails and ruts deeper than one foot shall be smoothed over as soon as practicable, but no later than
November 1 in any given 12-month period.
10.3.8.3 Logging yards, skid trails, landings, and other sites where the operation of logging machinery results in the
exposure of substantial areas of mineral soil shall be located entirely outside of the buffer strips.
10.3.8.4 All harvesting activities on more than five (5) acres shall be reported to the Water District at least one (1) week
prior to the commencement of operations.
10.3.8.5 Timber harvesting, excluding harvesting for personal use such as firewood, shall not be allowed until a timber
harvest management plan that demonstrates compliance with Town and State codes, prepared by a Maine-
Licensed Professional Forester or the property owner, is placed on file with the Code & Planning Department
and the appropriate water district. Such timber harvest activity shall comply with the management plan.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
181
10.3.9 Wastewater Disposal Systems
10.3.9.1 Not less than 24 (twenty-four) inches of original soil shall be present between the bottom of the subsurface
disposal area and the most limiting factor (seasonal high groundwater table, bedrock, or other restrictive layer).
10.3.9.2 All septic tanks installed shall be pumped every three years to ensure proper functioning of the system.
10.3.9.3 Sewage collection, treatment, and disposal systems which discharge effluent directly into any waterbody or
watercourse are prohibited in the Watershed Protection District.
10.3.9.4 The Water District shall have the right to inspect any system within the Watershed Protection District during its
construction or operation for compliance with these provisions and the requirements of the Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules. Defects or malfunctions shall be reported to the Department of Human Services,
Division of Health Engineering or the Plumbing Code for enforcement action.
10.3.10 Water Quality
No person shall cause any liquid, gaseous, or solid materials to run-off, seep, percolate, or wash into surface or
ground waters such that any pollutant or constituent or derivative thereof attains a concentration in ground or
surface water that is above background levels or current public health drinking water standards for Maine,
whichever is most stringent. (Note: Drinking water standards shall be obtained from current manuals, including,
but not limited to: State of Maine Rules of the Department of Human Services relating to Drinking Water;
"Drinking Water and Health", published by the National Academy of Sciences; "Suggested No-Adverse Response
Levels" as determined by the Environmental Protection Agency; "Ambient Water Quality Criteria" manuals,
published by the Environmental Protection Agency.)
10.3.11 Wetlands
Filling of any wetland is prohibited unless the applicant can prove that the filling will not, individually or
cumulatively with other activities, adversely affect those wetland functions which maintain water quality, including:
1) the ability to serve as a sedimentation and filtration basin for silt, organic matter, and heavy metals; and, 2) the
ability to control erosion by retaining and slowly releasing water. - AMENDED 11/07/2000
10.4 Dimensional Standards
10.4.1 Minimum Lot Size. No lot shall be less than 10 acres in size in this Overlay District. No lot shall contain more than
one (1) principal dwelling unit and one (1) accessory dwelling unit with a combined total maximum of 5,000 square
feet. Additional Town requirements regarding net buildable area shall not be applied to this lot size measure, but may
apply to the minimum land area requirement in the underlying zoning district. An open space conservation subdivision
with the same density ratio shall be allowed within this Overlay District. - AMENDED 05/19/2012, 05/16/2015,
11/06/2018
10.4.2 Setbacks. All buildings and wastewater disposal systems shall be set back a minimum of 500 feet from the normal
high water mark of a public water supply and 250 feet from all streams, including tributary streams.
10.4.3 Vegetation Removal. No more than 25% of the total lot area shall be stripped of existing vegetation.
10.4.4 Lot Coverage. The area of a lot covered by impervious surfaces shall not exceed 15% or 10,000 square feet, whichever
is more restrictive. - AMENDED 11/07/2000
10.5 Administration and Enforcement
10.5.1 An application for a use permitted in §10.2.2 shall be decided by the Code Enforcement Officer. An application for
a Conditional Use Permit per §10.2.3 shall be decided by the Planning Board. In either case, the applicant shall
submit a complete second copy of the application to the water district in whose watershed the property is located.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
182
The water district shall be considered an abutter for purposes of both notice and testimony, may submit comments
and/or recommendations, and shall have the right to appeal the decision. - AMENDED 11/03/2009
10.5.2 The Code Enforcement Officer or a representative of the Water District may, with the permission of the landowner
or their authorized agent, enter on and inspect any property within the Watershed Protection District to determine
whether all land uses and activities conducted on the property are in compliance with the provisions of the Watershed
Protection District.
10.5.3 Appeals. The procedure for appeals from decisions made under the provisions of this Article can be found in Section
18.8.
10.6 Submissions
10.6.1 Applications to conduct a permitted use requiring Water District approval shall be submitted to both the Code
Enforcement Officer and the Water District with the following information:
10.6.1.1 A map showing the location of the property and the location of the proposed activity on a USGS topographic
map at a scale of 1:24,000 (1" = 2,000') or larger;
10.6.1.2 A written description of the proposed activity and how all applicable performance standards shall be met;
10.6.1.3 If applicable, a copy of the soil evaluation form required under the State of Maine Plumbing Code, as submitted
to the local plumbing inspector (form HHE-200);
10.6.2 Applications to conduct a Conditional Use shall be submitted to both the Code Enforcement Officer and the
Water District, accompanied by a fee to be set by the Board of Selectmen, payable to the Town of York, and the
following information:
10.6.2.1 A map showing location of the property and location of the proposed activity on a USGS topographic map at a
scale of 1:24,000 (1" = 2,000') or larger;
10.6.2.2 A written description of the proposed activity and how all applicable performance standards shall be met;
10.6.2.3 A site plan showing: boundaries of the property on which the use is proposed, topography, location of all
buildings, storage areas, subsurface waste disposal systems, and public water supplies and tributaries within 1,000
feet;
10.6.2.4 A complete list of all petroleum and hazardous materials to be used or stored on the premises in quantities greater
than those associated with normal household use;
10.6.2.5 If an on-site septic system is to be used, a copy of the soil evaluation report submitted to the local plumbing
inspector (form HHE-200);
10.6.2.6 Any other information deemed necessary by the Planning Board to determine whether the use will adversely affect
water quality.
10.7 Nonconformities
10.7.1 Replacement of existing structures, including on-site septic systems, is permitted even though such structure does
not conform to the provisions of this District. Replacement septic systems shall comply with the Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Rules and shall comply to the greatest extent possible with all local ordinances currently in
place.
10.7.2 Expansion of uses and structures existing prior to April 14, 1987, is permitted as a conditional use, provided
structures within the Shoreland Overlay District are not expanded toward the water. When construction of a
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
183
structure accessory to a use existing prior to April 14, 1987, is proposed, and the structure cannot reasonably meet
the setback requirement of this District, the Planning Board may waive the setback requirement, notwithstanding
the provisions of Section 18.8, provided adequate provisions are made to minimize impact on water quality in public
water supplies and provided the structure meets the setback requirements of the Shoreland Overlay District.
10.7.3 An existing, non-conforming use may be changed to another non-conforming use provided the proposed use is
equally or more appropriate to the District than the existing, non-conforming use as determined by the Planning
Board. The determination of appropriateness shall include consideration of the probable changes in traffic,
generation of litter, wastes, or by-products, or other changes which might affect water quality. - AMENDED
05/22/2010
10.7.4 Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 18.8, any single lot of record legally existing as of 4-14-87 and lying totally
within 500 feet of a public water supply or within 250 feet of a tributary of a public water supply or rendered
unbuildable by the wastewater disposal provisions of Section 10.3.12 may have one single-family dwelling and
subsurface wastewater disposal system located on it, provided the use conforms with all other applicable state and
local laws. The Planning Board shall review applications which meet this criteria and may impose reasonable
conditions upon the proposed use to ensure that the purposes of this District are met to the greatest extent possible.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
184
ARTICLE TEN-A
ELDERLY CONGREGATE HOUSING STANDARDS
TITLE AMENDED 05/19/2012
10-A.1 Applicability
The provisions of this Article pertain to Elderly Congregate Housing. - AMENDED 05/19/2012
10-A.2 General Standards
10-A.2.1 Where the provisions of this Article are less restrictive than other provisions applicable to the base zoning district
in which the elderly congregate housing use is located, the standards of this Article shall supersede those of the base
zone. - AMENDED 05/19/2012
10-A.2.2 A nursing home, when not allowed in the base zoning district, shall be permitted as an accessory component to the
elderly congregate housing use, subject to the limits of this Section. The nursing home shall contain no more than
50% of the total square footage of the elderly congregate housing component of the project. Kitchens, dining
rooms, and other shared community space necessary to serve the elderly congregate housing shall be counted as part
of the square footage of the elderly congregate housing even if they also will serve the nursing home.
- AMENDED 05/19/2012
10-A.3 Dimensional Regulations
10-A.3.1 Schedule of Dimensional Regulations
Minimum land area (sq. ft.) 43,560 sq. ft., provided that if a nursing home is part of the project,
the minimum land area shall be 43,560 sq. ft. plus the minimum land
area required for locating a use in the underlying zone.
- AMENDED 04/10/1993
Minimum street frontage (ft.) As specified in the underlying zone.
Minimum shore frontage (ft.) As specified in the underlying zone.
Minimum lot depth (ft.) As specified in the underlying zone.
Minimum front yard setback (ft.) As specified in the underlying zone.
Minimum side and rear yard setback (ft.)
A. Buildings with a building height of 20’ or less shall be set back
a minimum of 50 feet.
B. Buildings with a building height in excess of 20’ shall be set
back a minimum of 65 feet. - AMENDED 11/08/2005
Maximum coverage (percent) 25%
Maximum building height (ft.) 35
10-A.3.2 Floor Area
Notwithstanding the terms of Section 5.4 of this Ordinance to the contrary, each dwelling unit in elderly congregate
housing shall have at least 500 gross square feet, and each unit designated as a residential care unit shall contain less
than 500 gross square feet.
10-A.3.3 Density
The minimum land area for each dwelling unit and each residential care unit, as defined in this Ordinance, in elderly
congregate housing shall be:
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
185
Dwelling units 3,000 sq. ft. of suitable land
Residential care units 1,500 sq. ft. of suitable land
"Suitable land" is defined in the same manner as for cluster housing developments in §5.4.6, Table 2, of this
Ordinance. These density standards do not apply to those portions of any proposed projects which lie in the
Shoreland Overlay District. Those areas of proposed projects which lie in the respective Shoreland Overlay
District(s) shall be governed by the density standards of the Shoreland Overlay District. - AMENDED 04/10/1993,
05/17/2003
10-A.4 Performance Standards
10-A.4.1 Sewer and Water Supply
Elderly congregate housing shall be connected to public sewer and public water supply.
- AMENDED 04/10/1993
10-A.4.2 Architectural Appearance
All new construction of elderly congregate housing and related nursing homes, if any, shall have pitched roofs, which
may include a gable roof, hip roof, mansard roof, or gambrel roof. If a gable roof or hip roof is used, the roof pitch
shall be at least four feet in twelve feet. All new construction shall use exterior materials compatible with other
structures in the surrounding area.
10-A.4.3 Buffers and Landscaping
Standard 10-A.4.3.1 is applicable to all projects, and standards 10-A.4.3.2, 10-A.4.3.3, 10-A.4.3.4, and 10-A.4.3.5, are
applicable to all large projects as defined by standard 10-A.4.3.2.
10-A.4.3.1 Any elderly congregate housing project, regardless of size, shall submit a landscape plan prepared by a landscape
architect licensed in the State of Maine, for the parking areas that serve the development, with adequate provision
for screening the parking areas from adjacent properties.
10-A.4.3.2 In addition, any elderly congregate housing project with more than 15 dwelling units, residential care units, and/or
nursing home beds and that abuts a lot in a residential district, or in residential use shall comply with the standards
in paragraphs 10-A.4.3.3 through 10-A.4.3.5.
10-A.4.3.3 The first 30 feet of the side or rear year, measured from the property line, shall be retained in its natural
vegetated state to the maximum extent possible to provide a visual screen between the abutting lot and the
project. Any place a building with a building height in excess of 20’ is adjacent to abutting property, the
minimum required buffer width shall be increased to 45 feet. - AMENDED 11/08/2005
10-A.4.3.4 When the natural buffering does not exist, cannot be fully retained as a visual screen or, in the sole judgment of
the Planning Board, is not sufficient to achieve an effective visual screen, the first 30 feet of the side or rear yard
setback shall be landscaped to create the visual screen (or where a building with a building height in excess of 20’
is adjacent to abutting property, the minimum buffer width shall be increased to 45 feet), in accordance with the
following procedure and standards: - AMENDED 11/08/2005
a. For the purpose of this subsection, a "canopy tree" is a deciduous tree that reaches at least 35 feet in
height at maturity and at the time of planting has a minimum 2-inch caliper six inches above the ground
and a height of at least 8 feet. An "evergreen tree" reaches 10 to 35 feet in height at maturity and at time
of planting has a minimum 1-1/2-inch caliper six inches above the ground and a minimum height of at
least 6 feet. A "shrub" reaches 2 to 10 feet in height and at planting shall be at least 18 inches in height.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
186
b. Further, for the purpose of this subsection, one canopy tree shall be equal to 10 "plant units", one
evergreen tree shall be equal to 5 "plant units", one understory tree shall be equal to 5 "plant units", and
one shrub shall be equal to 1 "plant unit".
c. In each rear or side yard abutting a lot in a residential district or residential use, the required buffer shall
include sufficient trees and shrubs to total a minimum of 120 "plant units" per 100 feet of length of
yard area, and at least 60 of these "plant units" shall be achieved with canopy and evergreen trees. Each
mature canopy or evergreen tree existing in the required setback prior to the development and retained in
good condition shall be awarded double the "plant units" assigned to a newly planted tree. If any such
retained tree dies within five years of the date of the building permit issued for the development, it shall
be replaced with two canopy or evergreen trees as described in this section. New plantings required by
this section that die shall be replaced within one growing season. - AMENDED 04/10/1993
d. Because different sites will have different potential impacts on the abutting lots, the applicant shall submit
at least two alternative plans for the bufferyards prepared by a landscape architect licensed in the State of
Maine. The first plan shall demonstrate the means by which the landscaping will create a dense screen
that blocks virtually all visibility between the abutting lot and the applicant's development. The second
plan shall arrange the landscaping in clusters of plantings or other suitable arrangement to allow filtered
views of the development from the abutting property. The Planning Board may ask for additional
alternatives as it considers appropriate and necessary. The decisions as to which plan or which
combination of plans is appropriate for the site shall be the Planning Board's.
10-A.4.3.5 In addition to the landscaping of side and rear yards required to serve as buffers between the development and
abutting lots in residential districts or residential use, the applicant shall submit a landscape plan, prepared by a
landscape architect licensed in the State of Maine, for other yard areas, parking areas, public areas and site
entrances, in accordance with Section 7.17 of the Town of York Planning Board Subdivision and Site Plan
Regulations.
10-A.4.4 Off-Street Parking and Loading Areas
Elderly congregate housing developments shall comply with the off-street parking and loading area standards
contained in Article 15, Section 15.4, of this Ordinance. If uses in addition to elderly congregate housing are
included in the plan, the number of parking spaces required shall be the sum of the spaces required for each use
individually. - AMENDED 04/10/1993
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
187
ARTICLE TEN-B
YORK VILLAGE HOSPITAL OVERLAY DISTRICT
10-B.1 Purpose
A hospital is an important community institution, with unique needs regarding its site development. The purpose of
this section shall be to offer certain flexibility so that the hospital in York Village can expand, but require good-quality
performance standards.
10-B.2 Design Standards
This section establishes design standards for this overlay district that shall supersede conflicting dimensional and
performance standards applicable in the underlying base zoning districts. The following standards shall apply to a
hospital use within this overlay district:
A. Lot Coverage. On all contiguous lots under common ownership of a hospital, the amount of lot coverage
allowed shall be calculated for each lot, and the maximum permitted lot coverage for the entire site shall be
the sum of that required for the individual lots. The total amount of lot coverage may be distributed among
the lots in any pattern, considering the lots in the aggregate rather than individually.
B. Internal Setbacks and Buffers. Where adjacent lots are under common ownership of a hospital, the setbacks
from lot lines shared with other hospital-owned lots shall be eliminated. To the extent that this affects
buffers, any requirements for buffers along these interior lot boundaries shall also be eliminated.
C. Perimeter Setbacks and Buffers. Setbacks and buffers around the perimeter of this Overlay District shall
satisfy all Site Plan and Subdivision Regulation requirements at a minimum. At its discretion, the Planning
Board may impose additional, more restrictive setback and buffer requirements to prevent undue impact to
the neighborhood.
D. Mitigation. In zones where the requirement is more restrictive, the Planning Board may increase the
maximum permitted lot coverage for a hospital use to 75 percent in exchange for increased buffers and/or
other impact mitigation, as determined appropriate by the Planning Board.
E. Structure Height. The principal hospital structure that provides in-patient care shall be exempt from the
height limitations of §5.2.1 and §5.2.2 as provided for in §21.2. For this building only, building height shall
not exceed a maximum of 60 feet from the average grade of the ground adjoining the building to the ridge
of the peaked roof. A peaked roof shall be required.
F. Parking Garage. A parking garage shall be a permitted accessory structure for a hospital. NEW ARTICLE
AS OF 05/17/2003
G. Building Footprint. Maximum Building Footprint requirements shall not apply within this overlay district.
H. Building Appearance. The Planning Board may consider alternative approaches to building design and
materials in this overlay district but shall ensure structures are related harmoniously to the terrain and to
existing buildings in the vicinity that have a visual relationship to the proposed buildings. – AMENDED
05/21/2016
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
188
ARTICLE TEN-C
YORK VILLAGE AFFORDABLE ELDERLY HOUSING OVERLAY DISTRICT
10-C.1 Purpose
In York there is a great social and economic need for more affordable elderly housing. Consistent with the growth
management laws of the State, the Town seeks to provide this housing within its designated growth area, in close
proximity to York Village’s amenities, York Hospital, and emergency services facilities. To help accomplish this goal,
increased density and larger building sizes are permitted within this Overlay District consistent with this Article.
10-C.2 Standards
To facilitate the economic provision of affordable elderly housing, the following shall be permitted:
A. The maximum number of elderly housing units per building shall not exceed 40 units.
B. Elderly housing shall require 3,000 square feet of suitable land per unit.
C. The development of the site shall not be approved unless the design includes enhanced stormwater
management controls to protect water quality. At post-development, there shall be no reduction in the
quality of stormwater runoff compared to the pre-development condition. Standard requirements pertaining
to stormwater quantity shall remain in effect.
D. Eligibility for occupancy of units shall be based on income. Only households which meet the criteria of low
or moderate income are eligible for occupancy, and the rent charged shall be such that the unit constitutes
affordable housing, as defined in Article Two, for the household. - AMENDED 11/03/2009
10-C.3. Conflict
Where specific provisions of this Article supersede other requirements of this Ordinance, this section shall prevail as
allowed in §21.2. This shall include, but not be limited to, the Schedule of Dimensional Regulations for elderly housing
in §7.8.1, and residential density limits of the Shoreland Overlay District in §5.2.3. NEW ARTICLE AS OF
05/17/2003
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
189
ARTICLE TEN-D
YORK RIVER WATERSHED OVERLAY DISTRICT
Reserved. - AMENDED 11/02/2004
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
190
ARTICLE TEN-E
YORK VILLAGE CENTER OVERLAY DISTRICT
Reserved. - AMENDED 05/20/2006; 05/19/2007; 05/21/2016
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
191
ARTICLE TEN-F
WORKFORCE AFFORDABLE HOUSING OVERLAY DISTRICT
10-F.1 Workforce Affordable Housing Overlay District
The provisions of this Article pertain to the Workforce Affordable Housing Overlay District as described in
section 3.16.
10-F.2 Land Uses
10-F.2.1 This Workforce Affordable Housing Overlay District is established to permit residential zoning at higher density
than what is presently allowed in the underlying base zoning district. The provisions of the overlay district apply
specifically to Workforce Affordable Housing, as defined in this ordinance. Unless otherwise specified, all other
uses shall comply with the standards of the underlying zoning district and any applicable overlay districts.
10-F.2.2 Use of this Workforce Affordable Housing Overlay District shall require the owner or renter be qualified by York
Housing or another qualified non-profit housing corporation as defined by 30-A M.R.S.A., Section 5002(13). -
AMENDED 11/02/2010, 11/05/2019
10-F.2.3 Reserved. -AMENDED 11/05/2019
10-F.2.4 Supplemental Uses. For each 10 units of newly constructed Workforce Affordable Housing in a single project, a
portion of the project may be developed for one or more uses which supplement the project. Only supplemental
uses which the Planning Board finds will complement the livability of the project for its residents without unduly
impacting the surrounding neighborhood shall be allowed. Such use may include, but is not limited to a place of
worship, community center, neighborhood convenience store, and coffee shop, provided the use is permitted in
the base zoning district in which it is located. The maximum floor area shall be limited to 200 square feet per unit
of Workforce Affordable Housing. - AMENDED 11/03/2009
10-F.3 Dimensional Regulations
10-F.3.1 Schedule of Dimensional Regulations For All Newly Constructed Workforce Affordable Housing
Minimum land area (sq. ft.) per site: 3/4 acre or as specified in the underlying zone, regardless of the
number of units, whichever is less restrictive.
Minimum street frontage (ft.): As specified in the underlying zone.
Minimum front yard setback (ft.): As specified in the underlying zone.
Minimum side and rear yard setback (ft): Buildings shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet. Where this
standard conflicts with §5.2 the less restrictive standard shall apply.
Maximum coverage (percent): 50%, or that specified in the underlying base zoning district,
whichever is less restrictive.
Maximum building height: 35 feet
- AMENDED 11/03/2009, 11/05/2019
10-F.3.2 Schedule of Dimensional Regulations for Conversion of Existing Buildings
Any existing building(s), whether conforming or non-conforming, may be converted to Workforce Affordable
Housing within the footprint of the existing building or buildings.
10-F.3.3 Floor Area
Each dwelling unit in Workforce Affordable Housing shall have no less than 500 square feet and no more than
1,500 square feet of living space. Where this standard conflicts with §5.3, the less restrictive standard shall apply.
10-F.3.4 Density
A. The minimum land area for each newly constructed Workforce Affordable Housing dwelling unit for
purchase, as defined in this Ordinance, shall be:
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
192
1) 8,000 sq. ft. of suitable land, if the land is serviced by both public sewer and public water; or
2) 20,000 sq. ft. of suitable land if the land is serviced by either public sewer or public water, but not
by both; or
3) 30,000 sq. ft. of suitable land if the land is not serviced by either public sewer or public water.
Where this standard conflicts with §5.2 or §5.4, the less restrictive standard shall apply. - Amended
11/05/2019
B. The minimum land area for each Workforce Affordable Housing dwelling unit for rent shall be 3,000
sq. ft. of suitable land, except that, if a building to be used for such housing is in existence at the time
this ordinance is enacted, the minimum land area of 3,000 sq. ft per unit is not applicable and that
building may be converted into Workforce Affordable Housing rental units within the footprint of the
existing building.
C. In all cases, the maximum density for Workforce Affordable Housing which is not serviced by public
sewer shall not exceed the standards of the State Minimum Lot Size Law (Title 12 M.R.S.A. §4807 et
seq.).
“Suitable land” is land that does not include: any areas of wetland; land in the Resource Protection Subdistrict of
the Shoreland Overlay District; or slopes in excess of 30%. The increased density standards described in this
section do not apply to any portions of a proposed Workforce Affordable Housing site that lie in the Shoreland
Overlay District. Such portions shall be governed by the density standards of the Shoreland Overlay District.
10-F.4 Performance Standards
10-F.4.1 Sewer and Water Supply
All Workforce Affordable Housing dwelling units shall be connected to public sewer when there is a public sewer
line capable of servicing the development within 750 feet of the proposed development at its nearest point or to
a public water supply if an existing public water system line with adequate supply is within 750 feet of the site, or
both. - Amended 11/05/2019
10-F.4.2 Architectural Appearance
For all new construction of Workforce Affordable Housing, the applicant shall demonstrate compliance with the
following standards, and the permit-issuing authority shall not unreasonably withhold its approval based on these
issues:
A. Buildings Which Will Front on an Existing Street. For all newly constructed buildings which will
front on an existing street adjacent to the property, the following standards shall apply:
1. Rhythm of Building Spacing. The pattern of building fascades and adjacent open spaces between
buildings shall be compatible with those other structures which are visually related.
2. Relationship of Materials, Textures and Colors. The materials, textures and colors of the building’s
exterior shall be compatible with those other structures which are visually related.
3. Roof Shape. The proposed roof shape shall be compatible with the roof shapes of those other
structures which are visually related.
4. Size and Massing of Buildings. The size of the proposed building, and its massing in relationship
to adjacent open spaces, shall be compatible with these patterns of those other structures which
are visually related.
5. Building Design. Buildings shall be developed in a way that encourages diversity in housing type,
style and design. Strict uniformity, especially for single family dwelling units, shall be discouraged.
- AMENDED 11/05/2019
As it pertains to §10-F.4.2.A, structures considered to be visually related to the newly proposed units shall be
separately determined for each new building, and shall include only those principal structures visible in winter
(minimum foliage) from a point directly in front of the center of the proposed new building at the road centerline
and at a height of 5’ above the road surface.
B. For All Other Buildings. For all other newly constructed buildings within the project, the following
standards shall apply:
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
193
1. Relationship of Materials, Textures and Colors. The materials, textures and colors of each
building’s exterior shall be compatible with the majority of structures located within 250’ of the
perimeter of the property being developed, and internally with each other.
2. Roof Shape. The proposed roof shape shall be compatible with the roof shapes of the majority
of structures located within 250’ of the perimeter of the property being developed, and internally
with each other.
3. Size and Mass of Buildings. For any newly proposed building within 100’ of the perimeter
property boundary, the size of the proposed building, and its mass in relationship to adjacent open
spaces, shall be compatible with these patterns found among existing buildings within 250’ of the
proposed building. - AMENDED 11/03/2009
4. Building Design. Buildings shall be developed in a way that encourages diversity in housing type,
style and design. Strict uniformity, especially for single family dwelling units, shall be discourage.
- AMENDED 11/05/2019
10-F.4.3 Buffers and Landscaping
Section 10-F.4.3.1 is applicable to all Workforce Affordable Housing and §10-F.4.3.3, §10-F.4.3.4, and §10-F.4.3.5,
are applicable to all large projects as defined by §10-F.4.3.2.
10-F.4.3.1 Any Workforce Affordable Housing shall submit a landscape plan prepared by a Maine-licensed landscape
architect for eight (8)- space or larger parking areas that serve the development, with adequate provision for
screening the parking areas from adjacent properties.
10-F.4.3.2 In addition, any Workforce Affordable Housing with more than 15 dwelling units that abuts a lot in a residential
district, or in residential use shall comply with the standards in §10-F.4.3.3 through §10-F.4.3.5.
10-F.4.3.3 The first 30 feet of the side or rear yard, measured from the property line, shall be retained in its natural vegetated
state to the maximum extent possible to provide a visual screen between the abutting lot and the Workforce
Affordable Housing site. -Amended 11/05/2019
10-F.4.3.4 When the natural buffering does not exist, cannot be fully retained as a visual screen, or, in the sole judgment of
the Permit Authority is not sufficient to achieve an effective visual screen, the first 30 feet of the side or rear yard
setback shall be landscaped to create the visual screen in accordance with the following procedure and standards:
a. For the purpose of this subsection, a "canopy tree" is a deciduous tree that reaches at least 35 feet
in height at maturity and at the time of planting has a minimum 2-inch caliper six inches above
the ground and a height of at least 8 feet. An "evergreen tree" reaches 10 to 35 feet in height at
maturity and at time of planting has a minimum 1-1/2-inch caliper six inches above the ground
and a minimum height of at least 6 feet. A "shrub" reaches 2 to 10 feet in height and at planting
shall be at least 18 inches in height.
b. Further, for the purpose of this subsection, one canopy tree shall be equal to 10 "plant units", one
evergreen tree shall be equal to 5 "plant units", one under-story tree shall be equal to 5 "plant
units", and one shrub shall be equal to 1 "plant unit".
c. In each rear or side yard abutting a lot in a residential district or residential use, the required buffer
shall include sufficient trees and shrubs to total a minimum of 120 "plant units" per 100 feet of
length of yard area, and at least 60 of these "plant units" shall be achieved with canopy and
evergreen trees. Each mature canopy or evergreen tree existing in the required setback prior to
the development and retained in good condition shall be awarded double the "plant units" assigned
to a newly planted tree. If any such retained tree dies within five years of the date of the building
permit issued for the development, it shall be replaced with two canopy or evergreen trees as
described in this section. New plantings required by this section that die shall be replaced within
one growing season.
d. Because different sites will have different potential impacts on the abutting lots, the applicant shall
submit at least two alternative plans for the buffer yards prepared by a landscape architect licensed
in the State of Maine. The first plan shall demonstrate the means by which the landscaping will
create a dense screen that blocks virtually all visibility between the abutting lot and the applicant's
development. The second plan shall arrange the landscaping in clusters of plantings or other
suitable arrangement to allow filtered views of the development from the abutting property. The
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
194
Permit Authority may ask for additional alternatives as it considers appropriate and necessary. The
decisions as to which plan or which combination of plans is appropriate for the site shall be the
Permit Authority’s. -Amended 11/05/2019
10-F.4.3.5 In addition to the landscaping of side and rear yards required to serve as buffers between the development and
abutting lots in residential districts or residential use, the applicant shall submit a landscape plan, prepared by a
landscape architect licensed in the State of Maine, for other yard areas, parking areas, public areas and site
entrances, in accordance with §7.17 of the Town of York Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations.
10-F.4.4 Energy Efficiency
Controlling the ongoing utility costs for home occupants is an important component of maintaining affordability.
All newly constructed Workforce Affordable Housing units shall be required to obtain an Energy Star certification
prior to issuance of an occupancy permit. This certification must be obtained from a Certified Rater who is a
member of RESNET (Residential Energy Services Network), or as required under the Energy Star Program as
specified in the application requirements (see www.energystar.gov).
For additional information, see the following web pages:
Energy Star: www.energystar.gov
Residential Energy Services Network: www.resnet.us.
10-F.4.5 Village Green Design.
For a new application for 10 or more units of single-family detached and/or duplex units, but not counting multifamily
units, of Workforce Affordable Housing, a village green design shall be the preferred option. The village
green design shall be required for these units, provided the Planning Board determines such design is feasible
given the configuration of the property. The Board may also permit conventional patterns of housing along
existing street frontage. A village green design means each of the units shall front on a central, shared common
space. Each building shall face this common space, shall have pedestrian access through this space, and shall have
shared rights to use this space. The central, shared common space shall be comprised of at least 10% of the
required land area for the units, and shall be designated for active use of the residents. It may include a central
lawn or green, garden plots, walkways, a playground, and other such active uses. It shall not be used for parking,
roads, or driveways, but may have septic leach beds located underneath provided the septic design and proposed
use above are compatible with each other. Vehicular access shall be via one or more shared driveways located to
the back side of the homes. If one or more garages will be incorporated into the principal structure, the garage
doors shall face away from the central, shared common space, and the design of the garage doors shall be such
that the architectural treatment makes the doors aesthetically compatible with the building designs. - AMENDED
11/03/2009
10-F.5 Permit Authority
Authority to review and decide on an application for Workforce Affordable Housing shall rest with the Code
Enforcement Officer, except the Planning Board shall have such authority if the number of units being created
constitutes a subdivision.
10-F.6 Governance
Regardless of the entity that builds Workforce Affordable Housing Units under this ordinance, a qualified nonprofit
housing corporation shall qualify all applicants for Work Force Affordable Housing as to the income,
employment, and residence preferences as prescribed herein, and will adhere to established legal covenants for
occupancy and resale, each of which shall be set forth as covenants in all deeds to buyers and to run with the
properties in perpetuity, as stated below:
A. Residents of Workforce Affordable Housing will not be required to leave their residences even if
their income(s) rise or their employment changes, provided that this residence remains their
primary year-round residence;
B. A qualified non-profit housing corporation shall follow the Resale Price Calculation and procedures
to allow homeowners to possibly accrue limited equity, while preserving the long-term
affordability of units within the established Workforce Affordable Housing income limits;
C. When owners of Workforce Affordable Housing units choose to sell their homes, the qualified nonprofit
housing corporation that developed the units shall be given the first option to repurchase the homes.
In the event the qualified non-profit housing corporation declines its option to purchase a unit, the
owner may sell it to a household that meets the income limits and fits one of the location
preferences set forth in this ordinance, as determined by the qualified non-profit housing corporation. All
sales shall be subject to the Resale Price Calculation.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
195
D. Resale Price Calculation. Any unit of Workforce Affordable Housing that is offered for sale shall
be limited in its maximum resale price. The total resale price must not exceed the percentage of
the property’s fair market value (as determined by an independent real estate appraiser) that the
seller paid for the property at the time of his or her purchase. For example, if the seller paid
$200,000.00 for a Workforce Affordable Home whose fair market value was determined to be
$250,000.00 (that is, 80% of the fair market value), then the maximum resale price of the property,
if appraised at $300,000.00, would be 80% of that value, or $240,000.00. Notwithstanding the
above calculation, the resale price must not exceed an amount that is affordable for households
of moderate income as defined herein. - AMENDED 11/04/2008, 11/02/2010
10-F.7 Selection Priorities
Preferences will be granted in the following order to income-qualified applicants for Workforce Affordable
Housing:
1) At least one member of a qualifying household living and working full-time (as defined by the person’s
employer) in York;
2) At least one member of a qualifying household working full-time in York but living elsewhere;
3) At least one member of a qualifying household living in York but working within a 10-mile radius of
the boundaries of York; and
4) Families employed and working with structured services, as defined by the office of General Assistance
and the Town of York. - AMENDED 11/05/2019
Veterans’ preferences shall be consistent with H.U.D. Handbook 4350.3, Rev. 1, Change 2, and all applicable Fair
Housing regulations as defined under U.S.C. 101(2).
- AMENDED 11/02/2010
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
196
ARTICLE TEN-G
FARM ENTERPRISE OVERLAY DISTRICT
10-G.1 Purpose
The Farm Enterprise Overlay District is intended to maintain and promote agriculture and its related activities
through granting agriculture increased flexibility, recognizing that agricultural enterprises often need to encompass
hybrids of different, related uses, in order to remain economically viable. Properties not in the Farm Enterprise
Overlay District may engage in agriculture and related activities as allowed in Article 4, Use Regulations.
10-G.2.a Allowed Agriculture-Related Uses
Agriculture-related uses are permitted on agricultural land in the Farm Enterprise Overlay District. This section shall
expressly supersede any conflicting provisions of Article Four. The following activities are considered agriculturerelated
uses. Other agriculture-related uses are permitted if the applicant can demonstrate that a proposed use is
similar to the following, or can demonstrate that the proposed activity meets the definition of an agriculture-related
use, as defined by this Ordinance:
• Processing and sale of agricultural products grown or raised within New England, such as a store to sell local
produce, dairy, and/or flowers; farmers market; farm stand; farm bakery
• Commercial Stable
• Pick-Your-Own Establishment
• Agricultural Composting Operation
• Cider Pressing
• Maple Syrup Production
• Hay Rides
• Sleigh Rides
• Recreational trails for activities such as hiking and cross country ski trails
• Educational events such as farming and food preserving classes, and other activities qualifying as agricultural
tourism
• Corn Mazes or Straw Bale Mazes
• Tree Farm
• Artisanal Food and/or Beverage Facility (Not to exceed 5,000 square feet). Retail Sales of Merchandise as
part of this use shall not supersede 2,500 square feet of gross floor area.
- AMENDED 05/21/2011, 05/16/2015
10-G.2.b Prohibited Commercial Uses
It is not the intent of this District to allow substantially dissimilar uses in the Farm Enterprise Overlay District, such
as a dirt bike track, atv course, rodeo, water park, firing range, paint ball course, or similar high impact commercial
activities not customarily associated with agriculture or agricultural tourism.
10-G.2.c Special Events
Events in excess of 50 people related to agricultural activities such as ox-pulls, horse shows, agricultural fairs and the
like shall be reviewed and approved by the Board of Selectmen.
- AMENDED 05/21/2011
10-G.3 Administration
Applications for Construction of buildings or structures exceeding 2,400 square feet to accommodate an Agriculture-
Related Use shall be reviewed by the Planning Board. All other applications shall be reviewed by the CEO. The
following information must be provided when applying for Planning Board review:
A. A plan drawn to an appropriate scale for effective interpretation. The site plan does not have to be a site plan
prepared by a surveyor or a professional engineer, though the Planning Board may request a professionally
prepared site plan if they determine it necessary to conduct the review. The plan shall include:
1. Property boundaries, onsite parking areas and access roads.
2. Existing uses on adjacent properties and distance of dwellings within 500 feet of the property boundary.
3. Existing and proposed structures with maximum capacity of each building where guests have access as
required to comply with building code and applicable fire safety requirements.
4. Location of temporary or permanent toilet facilities, which may be required.
5. Location of any existing or proposed wells or Subsurface Wastewater Treatments Systems.
7. Anticipated number of vehicles trips per day.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
197
8. Proposed site lighting or landscaping, if any.
10-G.4 Performance Standards
A. Parking may be located on a grass or gravel area for all uses, and shall allocate at least nine feet in width by
eighteen feet in length per space, exclusive of space required for access and maneuvering. All parking areas
shall be arranged to eliminate the need for a vehicle to back into the street. Parking areas shall not be located
in perimeter front, side, or rear setback areas, or on-street. The applicant shall demonstrate adequate parking
for the proposed uses.
B. All activities must adhere to the Town of York Noise Ordinance.
C. There must be adequate temporary or permanent wastewater facilities on site.
D. Any light sources installed in connection with an Agriculture-Related Use shall be directed downwards and
shielded to prevent light being directed off the premises.
F. Unless otherwise specified, all uses shall comply with the standards of the underlying zoning district and any
applicable overlay districts.
G. Agricultural activities that occur within the Farm Enterprise Overlay District shall not be considered a nuisance
if the activity is in compliance with applicable local, state and federal laws, rules and regulations, or if such
activities can be shown to conform to established best management practices for Maine agriculture.
10-G.5 Dimensional Standards
A. Internal Setbacks and Buffers. Where there are adjacent lots in the Farm Enterprise Overlay District
that are under common ownership, or are leased by a common individual or organization for
agricultural uses, the setbacks along lot lines shared by these lots shall be eliminated. To the extent
this affects any buffers, requirements for buffers along common Farm Enterprise Overlay District
boundaries shall also be eliminated.
B. Perimeter Setbacks. Setbacks around the perimeter of this Overlay District shall satisfy applicable
Zoning Ordinance requirements.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
198
ARTICLE ELEVEN
WETLANDS PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT
11.1 Purpose.
11.1.1 Purpose Statement. Wetlands are critically valuable resource areas that perform essential functions in the environment.
A policy of wetland protection is established in York’s 1999 Comprehensive Plan. Wetlands act to maintain water
quality by reducing the speed of surface water runoff, thus allowing for the deposit of sediments and nutrients and
recharging aquifers. Wetlands reduce the impact of wind and waves, protecting shorelands from erosion. Coastal
wetlands help prevent saltwater intrusion. In times of flooding, wetlands act to store large amounts of stormwater and
reduce flood levels. The biomass of wetlands provides excellent habitat for a diversity of wildlife and plants and is a
vital component of the environment. Wetlands contribute to a wide range of recreational opportunities, such as
canoeing, fishing, hunting and bird watching. The Town’s aesthetic values of open space, natural vistas, landform
contrast and autumn foliage are supported by the wetlands. These functions, combined with the fact that wetlands are
ill-suited for most development activities, show why long term protection of wetlands is an essential contribution to
the welfare of the community. This Article is established to protect all of York’s wetlands, primarily by avoiding
impacts and secondarily by minimizing and mitigating unavoidable impacts. To fulfill many wetland functions, upland
buffers are required and are addressed in the Shoreland Overlay District.
11.1.2 Wetlands and Shorelands. The provisions of the Wetlands Protection Overlay District apply to all wetlands, regardless
of size, as recommended in Goal 6.1.2 of the Comprehensive Plan. These provisions apply only to the wetlands
themselves and not to the surrounding upland areas. Provisions of the Shoreland Overlay District apply to the larger
wetlands and their associated uplands.
11.2 Wetland Permit. A Wetland Permit shall be required for any use, fill or alteration of a wetland, except that a property
owner shall not be required to obtain a permit to cut trees for personal use such as firewood. Permitting is addressed
in Article 18, and permit fees are addressed in Article One.
11.3 Permitted Uses. There shall be no use, including fill or alteration of any kind (including but not limited to
construction, filling, dredging and removal of vegetation) in the Wetlands Protection Overlay District, except as
follows:
11.3.1 Access to adjacent surface waters. Where development within the Wetlands Protection Overlay District is required for
access to and use of an adjacent surface water, it shall be permissible to construct footbridges and/or docks as would
otherwise be permitted. Such structures shall be constructed on posts or pilings where appropriate so as to permit the
unobstructed flow of water, and the natural contour of the wetland shall be preserved.
11.3.2 Utility, Driveway and Road Crossings. Crossing of wetlands for utilities, driveways or roads may be permitted provided
impacts are minimized and conditions specified in section 11.4 of this ordinance are adhered to. - AMENDED
11/08/2016
11.3.3 Vegetation Removal. It is prohibited to cut or disturb vegetation in the Wetlands Protection Overlay District except as
follows:
a. harvesting of wild crops without soil disturbance;
b. implementation of wildlife management practices conducted under the supervision of a wildlife biologist;
c. implementation of soil and water conservation practices, including the creation of ponds, conducted under
the supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service;
d. site clearing incidental to a plan or permit issued by the CEO or Planning Board;
e. individual trees may be cut provided that no vehicles enter the Wetlands Protection Overlay District unless
the ground is frozen; and
f. removal of non-native, invasive species with CEO approval.
11.3.4 Existing structures, or portions thereof, in wetlands or on filled wetlands may be enclosed or expanded only in a manner
that does not increase the footprint of the building in the wetland or wetland fill area.
11.3.5 Wetland mitigation activities shall be allowed. - AMENDED 11/07/2000
11.3.6 Other Uses. In man-made wetlands that are professionally delineated, including drainage ditches, stripped fields, farm
ponds and the like, and that have low functional values, uses otherwise permitted in the underlying zone may be
permitted in the wetland in certain circumstances. For this to be permissible, the wetland system shall be evaluated
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
199
using the NH Method, and, for each functional value index, none of this wetland’s values may exceed the average value
for that function. The average value for each function shall be based solely on the existing Town inventory of 87
wetlands completed by Woodlot Alternatives. If any functional value exceeds the average, such other uses shall be
prohibited. - AMENDED 11/07/2000, 05/17/2003
11.4 Conditions. The following conditions shall be required for all permits issued in this Overlay District:
11.4.1 If the wetland system to be impacted has not been evaluated as part of the Town’s Wetlands Inventory, the applicant
shall engage a recognized professional to complete an evaluation for the Town’s records. This shall be completed to
the standards of the New Hampshire Method (Ammann & Stone 1991).
11.4.2 The project shall be designed and constructed to minimize adverse impact on the wetland system, even if this requires
adjustments in design outside the Wetlands Protection Overlay District. The evaluation of potential damage shall be
based on the wetland inventory.
11.4.3 The amount of wetland impact shall be calculated as the cumulative amount of all impacts over time, including those
actions that pre-date this provision. Not more than 4,300 square feet of wetland shall be impacted on an individual
lot.
11.4.4 For subdivision applications, the application shall identify all wetland impacts caused by the project, including impacts
that would be caused by development on proposed lots at buildout, to ensure compliance with §11.4.3. The Planning
Board shall establish standards in the Subdivision Regulations to limit total wetland impact for a subdivision application.
11.4.5 A Wetland Permit for use, fill or alteration of a wetland shall be issued only to allow for a permitted use of land outside
the Wetlands Protection Overlay District. This standard shall not apply to vegetation removal as allowed in §11.3.3.
11.4.6 Ancillary damage to the wetland and adjacent uplands shall be restored as nearly as possible to the original grade and
condition. No Certificate of Occupancy or other Town permit shall be issued on a property until compliance with this
standard is demonstrated or secured by posting of a performance guarantee.
11.4.7 A Maine-licensed Professional Engineer shall submit evidence that any proposed use, fill or alteration, except for
vegetation removal, in the Wetlands Protection Overlay District will not increase the risk of off-site flooding and will
not increase stormwater discharge from the property based on the 2 and 50 year storms. The evidence submitted must
include delineation of the relevant drainage basins, both upstream and downstream, to the extent sufficient to
demonstrate compliance.
11.4.8 No materials of any kind shall be present which, when deteriorated, will contaminate ground waters.
11.4.9 All required State and Federal permits relating to the wetland fill shall be required prior to the issuance of the Wetland
Permit.
11.4.10 The Town may impose additional conditions as necessary to fulfill the purposes of this Ordinance, including mitigation
in accordance with §18.13.
11.5 Building Permits. No building permit for a new principal building shall be issued until the site has been evaluated
for the presence of wetlands. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide suitable documentation, prepared
by a recognized professional within the past ten years. - AMENDED 11/07/2000
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
200
ARTICLE TWELVE
HISTORIC AND ARCHEOLOGICAL RESOURCES
AMENDED 05/17/2008
12.1 Definitions
Words and terms used in this chapter are defined as follows. Any word or term not defined below shall take on the
meaning found in Article 2 of this Ordinance.
ALTERED: the word altered includes "rebuilt," "reconstructed," "rehabilitated," "restored," "removed," and
"demolished."
CONSTRUCTED: the word constructed includes the words "built," "erected," "enlarged," "installed," and "moved."
DEMOLITION: the razing of any exterior architectural feature or structure that is a historic landmark or in a historic
district. For buildings not designated as a historic landmark or not in a historic district, demolition shall be defined as
the razing of a building. - AMENDED 05/17/2008
ERECTED: the word erected includes the words "built," "constructed," "reconstructed," "rehabilitated," "restored,"
"altered," "enlarged," and "moved."
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE: the architectural style and general arrangement of the exterior of a
building or structure, including, but not limited to, (a) the kind, roof color, and texture of the building materials, (b)
the type and style of all windows, doors, lights, dormers, gable cornices, porches, decorative trim, etc., and (c) the
location and treatment of any vehicular access or parking space.
IMPROVEMENT: any place, structure, building, fixture, object, landscape, or topographic feature, which in whole
or in part constitutes an exterior betterment, adornment, or enhancement or any real property.
MATERIAL: a substance or substances out of which a building or structure is constructed.
STRUCTURE: a combination of materials other than a building, including, but not limited to walls, fences, walks,
parking lots or driveways.
12.2 Creation and Organization of Historic District Commission
12.2.1 Members
12.2.1.1 The Historic District Commission shall consist of five (5) regular members, and as many associates as there are
districts. The members shall be York residents. Appointments shall be made by the Selectmen. Members shall
be selected on the basis of demonstrated interest, ability, experience, and the desire to promote historic
preservation in the Town. As far as possible, the membership shall include a member with architectural design
skills and a representative of the Old York Historical Society.
12.2.1.2 All members, regular and associate, shall attend a yearly training seminar in architectural history and preservation
standards as prescribed by the Selectmen in conjunction with the Maine Historic Preservation Commission.
12.2.1.3 Regular Members: Two (2) members of the Historic District Commission shall be initially appointed to serve
terms of three (3) years; two (2) shall initially be appointed to serve terms of two (2) years, and the remaining
member shall be appointed to serve a term of one (1) year. All appointments thereafter, shall be for a term of
three (3) years; except in those instances in which the appointment is made to fill a vacancy in an unexpired term,
in which case the appointment shall be made for the remainder of the unexpired term. The Selectmen shall act
within sixty (60) days to fill a vacancy, including expired terms.
12.2.1.4 Associate Members: Each district shall be represented on the Historic District Commission by a resident of the
district who shall be an associate member. Associate members shall serve until replaced or appointed as a regular
member. They shall participate in all hearings and discussions. They shall vote only if: a) the application involves
property in their district; b) the Chairman appoints an associate to act in place of a regular member who is absent
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
201
or had been disqualified from participation because of conflict of interest. Once appointed, the associate shall act
as a voting member until the application has been approved or denied.
12.2.1.5 In addition to regular and associate members the Selectmen shall appoint other persons, not necessarily residents
of the Town of York, who shall serve in an advisory or consultant basis to assist members of the Historic District
Commission in the performance of their function. Advisory or consultant members shall participate in all hearings
and discussions, but they shall not be voting members. They shall serve during the pleasure of the Historic
District Commission.
12.2.1.6 Any regular or associate member may be removed for cause by the Selectmen upon written charges and after a
public hearing.
12.2.1.7 Regular and associate members shall serve without remuneration. Members shall continue in office after the
expiration of their terms until their successors are duly appointed and qualified.
12.2.2 Election of Officers
The Historic District Commission shall annually elect a chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary from its membership.
The annual organizational meeting shall be the first regular meeting of the calendar year.
12.2.3 Officers
12.2.3.1 The Chairman shall preside at all meetings and hearings of the Historic District Commission, and has the authority
to appoint committees, to call work sessions, and to preside over executive sessions.
12.2.3.2 The Vice-Chairman shall act for the Chairman in his absence.
12.2.3.3 The Secretary shall: Keep complete and accurate minutes and records of Historic District Commission meetings;
prepare agendas of regular and special meetings with the Chairman; provide notice of meetings to Historic District
Commission Members; arrange proper and legal notice of hearings; attend to all correspondence of the Historic
District Commission and to other duties normally carried out by a Secretary. The Secretary shall keep a complete
and accurate record of all resolutions, transactions, correspondence, findings and determinations of the Historic
District Commission and shall maintain attendance records, resumes of Historic District Commission Members,
and appointments of Historic District Commission Members. All records shall be deemed public and may be
inspected at reasonable times.
12.3 Duties, Functions, and Powers of the Historic District Commission
The Historic District Commission shall have the following duties, functions, powers:
12.3.1 To assist, advise, and educate owners of historic structures, buildings, or sites, and various departments of the Town
of York, on physical and financial aspects of preservation, renovation, rehabilitation, and reuse.
12.3.2 To assist and advise, and educate owners in complying with the requirements of this Article to the extent possible
under funding available to the Historic District Commission.
12.3.3 To work to provide continuing education on historic preservation issues to local citizens.
12.3.4 To process applications for Certificates of Appropriateness and Certificates of Demolition.
12.3.5 To serve an advisory role to local government officials regarding local and cultural resources, and act as liaison
between local government and those persons and organizations connected with historic preservation.
12.3.6 To make recommendations for establishing and/or revising historic districts, historic landmarks, or historic sites, to
the Selectmen, in accordance with the procedures detailed in Section 12.5.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
202
12.3.7 To review all proposed National Register nominations for properties within the Town of York.
12.3.8 To conduct or initiate a continuing survey of local historic and cultural resources in accordance with Maine Historic
Preservation Commission guidelines.
12.3.9 To establish a schedule of reasonable fees based on notification costs, reviewing costs, and costs of construction.
12.3.10 To receive fees; to accept grants, appropriations and gifts of money and services; and to use its financial resources
to employ clerical and technical assistance, publish educational materials, conduct surveys of properties, or carry out
any of its duties.
12.3.11 To request reports and recommendations from Town departments and agencies and from other organizations and
sources, who may have information or can advise on an application or its impact on the district.
12.3.12 To appoint citizens' committees, and testify before other Town boards whenever appropriate.
12.3.13 To adopt bylaws or additional operating procedures and policy statements consistent with the intention of this
Article and State enabling legislation.
12.3.14 To waive any procedural rule adopted by the Historic District Commission by majority vote upon good cause shown.
12.3.15 To administer the provision of the Property Tax Refund Program as established herein. - AMENDED 11/06/2001
12.3.16 To take any action necessary or appropriate to implement the purpose and intent of this Article. - AMENDED
11/06/2001
12.4 Qualifications
The historic districts, historic landmarks, or historic sites established in accordance with this Article shall have one or
more, or any combination of the following characteristics and qualifications, without limitations as to cultural or
chronological period:
12.4.1 Structures or sites at which events occur or have occurred that contribute to and are identified with or significantly
represent or exemplify the broad cultural, political, economic, military, social, or sociological history of the Town of
York and/or the nation, including sites and buildings at which visitors may gain insight or see examples either of
particular items or of larger patterns in the North American heritage.
12.4.2 Structures or sites associated with historic personages, great ideas or ideals.
12.4.3 Structures or structural remains and sites embodying examples of architectural types or specimens valuable for study
of a period, style, or method of building construction, of community organization and living, or of landscaping; or
a notable structure or site representing the work of a master builder, designer, architect or landscape architect.
12.4.4 Structures contributing to the visual continuity of the historic district.
12.4.5 Those sites or areas on or eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places or as a National Historic
Landmark.
12.5 Establishment of Historic Districts, Historic Sites, or Historic Landmarks
The process for establishment or alteration of historic districts, sites or landmarks is different than the process for
review of applications, so the provisions of Article 18-A, Application Review Procedures, shall not apply to the
procedures detailed in §12.5. - AMENDED 11/03/2009
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
203
12.5.1 Historic Districts shall be established and enlarged by amendment to Section 12.6. Any application/proposal for
the establishment of an historic district shall be in writing, directed to the Chairman of the Historic District
Commission, and shall include the following:
12.5.1.1 A statement on the remaining physical elements which make the proposed area an historic district, and a
description of building types, architectural styles, and the periods represented.
12.5.1.2 A statement of how the proposed historic district meets the qualifications in Section 12.4.
12.5.1.3 A map showing the proposed boundaries, and a written justification of the boundaries.
12.5.1.4 A map showing all structures within the proposed historic district with identification of structures contributing to
the significance of the historic district, and identification of non-contributing structures within the proposed
district.
12.5.2 Historic Landmarks and Historic Sites shall be established and enlarged by amendment to Section 12.6. Any
application/proposal for the designation of an historic landmark or historic site, shall be in writing, directed to the
Chairman of the Historic District Commission, and shall include the following:
12.5.2.1 A description of the physical elements, qualities, architectural style, period and historical significance represented
by the proposed landmark or site, including a consideration of scale, materials, workmanship and spatial qualities
as relevant.
12.5.2.2 A statement of how the proposed landmark or site meets the qualifications in Section 12.4.
12.5.2.3 A map showing the proposed boundaries, and a written justification of the boundaries.
12.5.2.4 Photographs of the proposed landmark or site illustrating the significant detail(s) described in Section 12.5.2.1.
12.5.3 A proposal for the establishment or enlargement of an historic district, historic site, or historic landmark shall be
initiated by, the Selectmen, the Planning Board, the local historical society, the Historic District Commission itself,
or by petition by one hundred (100) or more residents of the Town of York.
12.5.4 Review of Application for the designation of Historic Districts, Historic Sites, or Historic Landmarks.
The Historic District Commission shall review the applications/proposals for the designation of Historic Districts,
historic sites, or historic landmarks. Before making the Historic District Commission's recommendations to the
Secretary, the Historic District Commission shall conduct studies and research on the proposal. The Historic District
Commission may appoint individuals or organizations to assist in the studies. The Historic District Commission
shall forward a draft of the proposal/application to the Planning Board and the Maine Historic Preservation
Commission for review and comment.
12.5.5 Public Hearing
12.5.5.1 A public hearing shall be held within sixty (60) days of receipt of the application/proposal. Written notice of the
application/proposal shall be given by certified mail, thirty (30) days prior to the hearing date, to the applicant(s),
owners of all property to be included within the proposed district(s), and all other persons found by the Historic
District Commission to have special interest in the proposal, including the historical organizations in Town.
12.5.5.2 Failure of any property owner to accept or receive notice of the hearing shall not constitute grounds for objections
by such petitioner, and shall not invalidate any recommendations made by the Historic District Commission.
12.5.5.3 Notice of the hearing shall be included in a newspaper of general circulation at least ten (10) days prior to the
hearing date.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
204
12.5.6 Final Report
Within sixty (60) days after the public hearing, the Historic District Commission shall report its findings on the
application/proposal including the views of affected and interested parties, and recommendations, to the Selectmen.
12.5.7 Amendments which include recommendations for Historic Districts, historic sites and historic landmarks shall be
enacted by Town Meeting in accordance with State and Municipal laws.
12.6 Historic Districts, Sites, and Landmarks Designated
The following described lands, buildings, structures, or areas of the Town of York are designated historic districts, sites
or landmarks as follows:
Historic Landmarks
Contributing Property, 70 Clark Rd. Map 16/Lot 2 11/4/2003
Contributing Property, 83 Clark Rd. Map 16/Lot 28 11/4/2003
Contributing Property, 77 Clark Rd. Map 16/Lot 29 11/4/2003
Cape Neddick Lighthouse, 13 Sohier Park Rd. Map 29/Lot 21 4/16/86
Joseph Banks House, 112 York St. Map 49/Lot 45 05/19/90
Also site of Richard Banks House
Contributing Property, 31 Long Sands Rd. Map 50/Lot 111 11/4/2003
Contributing Property, 25 Sentry Hill Rd. Map 51/Lot 43 11/4/2003
Contributing Property, 17 Sentry Hill Rd. Map 51/Lot 44 11/4/2003
Contributing Property, 11 Sentry Hill Rd. Map 51/Lot 45 11/4/2003
Trinity Church, 546 York St. Map 52/Lot 4 11/7/2006
Contributing Property, 2 Norwood Farms Rd. Map 52/Lot 10 11/4/2003
Contributing Property, 16 Simpson Ln. Map 57/Lot 8 11/4/2003
Contributing Property, 416 York St. Map 57/Lot 74 11/4/2003
Contributing Property, 16 Sentry Hill Rd. Map 57/Lot 85 11/4/2003
Contributing Property, 450 York St. Map 57/Lot 100 11/4/2003
Contributing Property, 5 Orchard Ln. Map 58/Lot 2 11/4/2003
Contributing Property, 200 U.S. Route One Map 66/Lot 1 11/8/2005
(a.k.a. Grant House)
District Nine Schoolhouse, 301A Mtn. Rd. Map 96/Lot 64 06/05/89
(a.k.a. Agamenticus Schoolhouse)
Historic Sites
Town Farm. Consists of two lots of land owned by the Town of York which were part of the Town
Farm, consisting of: the cemetery lot near the corner of Ridge Road and Long Sands Road (no street
address or tax lot number, but identified as burial ground #192 in the book, Maine Cemetery
Inscriptions, York County Volume); and 178 Long Sands Road (0039-0025) as its boundaries exist on
May 21, 2011. Use and development of this Historic Site shall be limited to: utility lines; farming,
including but not limited to the community gardens; historic/archeological investigation, education and
interpretation; and passive recreation, including but not limited to parks and pedestrian paths. Any new
use of the site and/or any physical alteration of the site shall require a Certificate of Appropriateness of
the Historic District Commission (HDC), except in the following circumstances:
1. gardening in the existing community garden; and
2. municipal trail development or maintenance, including any related buildings or other appurtenances
not to exceed 500 square feet. - AMENDED 05/17/2008, 05/21/2011
Local Historic Districts
Village Center Local Historic District, as shown on a map entitled, “York Zoning Ordinance: Village Center Local
Historic District” dated June 17, 2016.
Lindsay Road Local Historic District, as shown on a map entitled, “York Zoning Ordinance: Lindsay Road Local
Historic District” dated January 31, 2003.
York Harbor Local Historic District, as shown on a map entitled, “York Zoning Ordinance: York Harbor Local
Historic District” dated September 16, 2003. - AMENDED 11/06/2001, 05/17/2003, 11/04/2003, 11/08/2016
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
205
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
206
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
207
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
208
12.7 Application of Zoning Ordinances
Uses permitted in historic district(s), sites, or landmarks, shall be those set forth in the Town of York Zoning Ordinance
provisions for the zone in which such district, site, or landmark is located.
12.8 Improvements Not Requiring Historic District Commission Review
12.8.1 Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural
feature of any building or structure where such repair does not involve a change in design, material, or appearance.
12.8.2 Nothing in this Article shall restrict impermanent or easily reversible alterations such as storm windows, storm doors,
window air conditioners, shutters, paint, or signs.
12.8.3 Only changes proposed by the property owner or lessee are subject to review.
12.8.4 Nothing in this Article shall prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration, or demolition of any building or
structure where construction is in accordance with a valid building permit issued prior to 3-2-85 and districts, sites,
or landmarks designated by amendment.
12.9 Improvements Requiring Historic District Commission Review
A Certificate of Appropriateness or a Certificate of Demolition issued by the Historic District Commission is required
for:
12.9.1 A physical change in the exterior of any building or structure in a designated historic district and with respect to any
historic site or landmark, by addition, reconstruction, alteration, or demolition, whether or not a building permit is
required.
12.9.2 New construction of any building or structure where such building or structure will be located in whole or in part,
within an historic district.
12.9.3 The moving of any building or structure.
12.9.4 Public improvement projects including lighting, sidewalk paving, utility distribution, street beautification, curbing,
where such improvement(s) will be located within an historic district and with respect to any historic site or landmark.
12.10 Applications for Certificates of Appropriateness or Demolition
Applications for a Certificate of Appropriateness or Demolition shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer
when obtaining a building permit, or when no building permit is required but when such activity must be approved by
the Historic District Commission.
12.11 Application Procedure
See Article 18-A, Application Review Procedures. - AMENDED 11/03/2009
12.12 Application Contents
12.12.1 Types and kinds of improvements to be considered minor shall be:
12.12.1.1 Application or use of exterior materials of a different kind, type, color or texture than those already in use.
12.12.1.2 All improvements, alterations, and renovations which can be accomplished without obtaining a building permit.
12.12.2 Applications for improvements considered minor shall contain:
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
209
12.12.2.1 The applicant's name, mailing address, and interest in the subject property.
12.12.2.2 The owner's name and mailing address, if different from the applicant's.
12.12.2.3 The address or location of the subject property.
12.12.2.4 A location or vicinity map clearly showing the location of the project.
12.12.2.5 A description of the improvement requiring the issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness.
12.12.2.6 Current photographs of the property showing the property's current condition, which accurately represents the
existing materials, textures and colors.
12.12.2.7 Current photographs of all adjacent sites, buildings, structures, and other improvements clearly showing the style
and character of the area.
12.12.2.8 The Historic District Commission may request a drawing or drawings of the exterior elevations, drawn to scale,
showing complete architectural details, including all exterior equipment and appurtenances located on the roof,
in the walls, and on the grounds. All existing and proposed materials and finishes shall be identified and noted
on the elevation. Professional drawings are not required.
12.12.3 Types and kinds of improvements to be considered major shall be:
12.12.3.1 Construction of a new building or auxiliary structure.
12.12.3.2 Any addition to or alteration of an existing building or structure which increases the square footage in that building
or otherwise alters its size, height, contour, or outline.
12.12.3.3 Alteration of a roof line.
12.12.3.4 Landscaping.
12.12.3.5 Other items defined in this Article.
12.12.4 Applications for improvements considered major shall contain:
12.12.4.1 The applicant's name, mailing address, and interest in the subject property.
12.12.4.2 The owner's name, mailing address, if different from the applicant's.
12.12.4.3 The address, or location of the subject property.
12.12.4.4 A location or vicinity map clearly showing the location of the project.
12.12.4.5 A description of the project which shall include a statement why the structure or building to be demolished does
not contribute to the district, site or landmark.
12.12.4.6 Current photographs of the property, showing its condition, and accurately representing the existing materials,
textures, and colors. All photographs shall be labeled to indicate the direction of viewing.
12.12.4.7 Current photographs of all adjacent sites, buildings, structures, and other improvements clearly showing the style
and character of the area. All photographs shall be labeled to indicate the direction of viewing.
12.12.4.8 A completed application with required exhibits for a Certificate of Appropriateness for any new construction
proposed for the site.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
210
12.13 Meetings, Hearings, and Application Review
12.13.1 The Historic District Commission shall hold regular monthly meetings, and may hold special meetings at the call of
the Chair, provided that public notice shall be given as required in §18-A.5. In the event of emergency meetings,
local representatives of the media shall be notified. Notification shall include the time and location of the meeting.
- AMENDED 11/03/2009
12.13.2 Reserved. - AMENDED 11/03/2009
12.13.3 Reserved. - AMENDED 11/03/2009
12.13.4 Reserved. - AMENDED 11/03/2009
12.13.5 A quorum shall consist of three (3) voting members.
12.13.6 Certificates must be approved by majority vote. Therefore a tie vote means the application is denied.
12.13.7 The Historic District Commission, in its discretion, and with the owner's consent, may view the premises and obtain
additional facts concerning the application before arriving at a decision. - AMENDED 11/03/2009
12.13.8 In addition to the requirements of Article 18-A, approval of an application shall be indicated by issuance of a
Certificate of Appropriateness or a Certificate of Demolition, to be signed by the Commission Chair. - AMENDED
11/03/2009
12.14 Standards of Review
12.14.1 General. The standards and requirements contained in this section and in the United States Secretary of the
Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties 1995 Edition or future additions as adopted shall be
used in review of applications for Certificates of Appropriateness for major and minor improvements, and
Certificates of Demolition for the demolition or moving of any building or structure.
12.14.2 Reconstruction, Renovation, and Alterations.
12.14.2.1 A building or structure classified as an historic landmark or site, or a building or structure located in a designated
historic district, or an appurtenance related to such structures, buildings, or sites, including walls, fences, light
fixtures, steps, paving, etc. shall not be altered, and no Certificate of Appropriateness shall be issued for such
actions, unless these actions will preserve or enhance the historical and architectural character of the building or
structure, and are visually compatible with the district.
12.14.2.2 Rehabilitation work shall not destroy distinguishing qualities or character of a building, structure, and its setting.
Distinctive stylistic features such as molding, brackets, windows, doorways, porches, etc., which characterize
historic structures shall be preserved wherever possible.
12.14.2.3 Alterations that have no historic basis shall be discouraged.
12.14.2.4 Deteriorated architectural features, such as balustrades, brackets, windows, etc., shall be repaired rather than
replaced, whenever possible. In the event replacement is necessary, the new feature shall match the feature being
replaced. Replacement of missing architectural features shall be based on physical or pictorial evidence.
12.14.3 Construction of new buildings and structures in Historic Districts.
12.14.3.1 The construction of a new building or structure shall be of such design, form, proportion, mass, configuration,
building material, texture, and location on lot, as will be compatible with other buildings and structures in the
historic district, and with streets and open spaces to which it is visually related, and in keeping with the area.
12.14.3.2 The Historic District Commission shall review such elements as screening, fencing, off-street parking, entrances,
lighting, and landscaping, to protect the district's visual character.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
211
12.14.4 Demolition or removal of an existing structure or building.
12.14.4.1 The Historic District Commission shall initially determine whether the building or structure is historically,
architecturally, or culturally significant in accordance with the qualifications outlined in Section 12.4. If it is judged
insignificant, the Historic District Commission shall approve the Application for Demolition or Removal.
12.14.4.2 If the structure is deemed significant by the Historic District Commission, it shall not be removed or demolished
unless the Selectmen shall find that it is a nuisance or dangerous, in accordance with Title 17, M.R.S.A., section
2851, et seq. After a hearing before the Selectmen at which the Historic District Commission is invited to
participate, the Selectmen shall order the Historic District Commission to approve the Application for
Demolition.
12.14.4.3 When repair or reconstruction of a damaged structure would cost more than 50% of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred, the building may be restored to its original design, or demolished and
replaced with new construction which meets the requirements of this Article.
12.15 Visual Compatibility Factors
12.15.1 New construction and the alteration of existing building and structures within historic districts shall be visually
compatible with other buildings and structures, and with streets and open spaces within the district. Applications
for Certificates of Appropriateness and Demolition shall be reviewed in terms of the following:
12.15.1.1 Height. The height of proposed buildings or structures shall be compatible with adjacent buildings or structures.
12.15.1.2 Proportion of Buildings Front Facade. The relationship of the width of the building to the height of the front
elevation shall be visually compatible with buildings, structures, and open spaces within the Historic District.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
212
12.15.1.3 Proportion of Opening with the Facade. The relationship of the width of the windows to height of windows and
doors in a building shall be visually compatible with those of windows and doors of buildings within the district.
12.15.1.4 Rhythm of Solids to Voids in Front Facades. The relationship of solids to voids in the front facade shall be visually
compatible with that of the buildings within the district.
12.15.1.5 Rhythm of Spacing of Buildings or Structures on Streets. The relationship of buildings or structures to the open
space between them and adjoining buildings or structures shall be compatible with those of buildings or structures
in the Historic District(s).
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
213
12.15.1.6 Rhythm of Entrance and/or Porch Projection. The relationship of entrance and porch projections to the street
shall be compatible with those of buildings in the Historic District(s).
12.15.1.7 Relationship of Materials, Textures, and Color. The relationship of materials, textures, and color of buildings or
structures shall be compatible with those materials used in the buildings or structures to which it is visually related.
12.15.1.8 Roof Shapes. The roof shape of a building shall be compatible with that of buildings to which it is visually related.
12.15.1.9 Scale of Buildings. The size of the building, the building mass in relation to open spaces, the window and door
openings, porches and balconies shall be compatible with those characteristics of buildings or structures, and
spaces to which it is related.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
214
12.15.1.10 Orientation. A building or structure shall be compatible with the building or structure to which it is visually related
in its directional character, whether this be vertical, horizontal or non-directional in character.
12.16 Property Tax Refund Policy
A. Purpose. Historic resources are an integral component of the character of the Town, and the continued
presence of the extensive, well maintained concentration of historic buildings in York is vital. Few of these
properties are regulated under this Article, but this does not indicate a diminished value to the community.
The purpose of offering a property tax refund for appropriate maintenance work is to provide an incentive
for the owners of historic buildings to invest in upkeep and rehabilitation, thereby discouraging the loss of
significant resources.
B. Eligibility
1. Property. The building is a contributing structure within a National Register Historic District,
individually listed in the National Register of Historic Places, a contributing structure within a
local historic district, or is determined by the Maine Historic Preservation Commission to be
eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places.
2. Owner. There shall be no delinquent property taxes on any property in York owned by the
applicant at the time of application.
3. Activity. Eligible work includes maintenance of the historic fabric by rehabilitation, restoration
or preservation of the building. All work shall meet or exceed the standards adopted by reference
in Article 12.14.1.
C. Refund Amount. The amount of refund shall be equal to the lesser of the following:
1. 10% of the actual cost of eligible work completed; or
2. the value of the total property tax paid on the property for the fiscal year in which the application
is made.
D. Application Requirements
1. Meeting with the Commission. Prior to submittal of an application, the applicant shall be required
to attend a Commission meeting and present the project at a conceptual level. This shall be an
opportunity for the Commission to offer non-binding guidance, advice and assistance to the
applicant.
2. Application form. The applicant shall complete an application form available from the
Commission.
3. Supplemental Application Materials. The applicant shall prepare materials as necessary to
supplement the application form. These materials shall include:
a. Work Plan. This shall document the scope, method and extent of work to be
performed, in sufficient detail to demonstrate compliance with requirements of this
program.
b. Maintenance Plan. This shall document activities to be performed and a schedule for
performance of maintenance of the building for at least five years following the
completion of the project.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
215
4. General Timeline. The general timeline for this process is outlined herein to enhance
understanding of the program. The Commission may vary the schedule by voting to adopt a
different timeline.
a. Advance meeting with the applicant per Article 12.16.D.1: any time.
b. Submittal of application materials: July 1 through September 15.
c. Application review and ranking: September 16 through November 30.
d. Budget process: December through to the May budget Referendum.
e. Time period for work, and fund availability: after July 1 through June 30 (the next fiscal
year), subject to possible carry-forward to later fiscal years.
E. Application Review and Ranking
1. Ranking. The Commission shall review all applications received to verify eligibility, refund amount
and conformance with application requirements. The Commission shall rank all suitable
applications. Rank shall determine the order in which funds will be allocated to projects in the
event the program is not fully funded. Rank shall be based on the following criteria:
a. The first ranking shall be based on location (creating three priority classes), as follows:
1. Buildings on property listed in Article 12.6 shall receive the highest ranks.
2. Buildings on property in the National Register Historic District, or
individually listed in the National Register of Historic Places, but not listed
in Article 1`2.6 shall receive the next highest ranks.
3. Other buildings shall receive the lowest ranks.
b. Within each of these priority classes, rank shall be further refined based on two criteria.
These shall be evaluated sequentially, as follows:
1. First, buildings that have never received a refund under this program shall be
ranked ahead of those that have (creating six priority classes).
2. The final ranking within each of the priority classes shall be a first-come, firstserved
rank based on the date of receipt of the complete application.
2. Public Hearing. A draft of the ranking of applications shall be posed and a public hearing shall be
conducted to allow public comment on the draft list of ranked applications.
F. Program Funding
1. Funding Request. The Commission shall annually request funds from the Town’s operating
budget for this program. The request shall include the ranked list of applications to be funded
with the dollar amount for each project.
2. Allocation of Funds. In the event that insufficient money is approved to fund this program,
money shall be allocated based on the ranking of applications. Applications shall be funded fully
starting with the highest ranked project and proceeding in order of rank until the funding is
exhausted.
3. Disbursement of Funds. The Commission shall forward a recommendation to the Board of
Selectmen regarding completion of work and compliance with the provisions of this program.
The Board of Selectmen shall be authorized to order the disbursement of funds following receipt
of the recommendation of the Commission.
4. Policy on Unspent Funds. If a project for which funds are allocated is not completed, is completed
but fails to meet the requirements of this Article, or is completed for less money than budgeted,
the unspent portion of the refund shall be returned to the Town’s General Fund. The Commission
may request that funds for active projects be carried forward to future fiscal years.
G. Program Requirements. The following program requirements shall apply:
1. Covenant. For a property that is not subject to regulation under this Article, as listed in Article
12.6, a protective covenant shall be required prior to payment of the refund. The property owner
shall execute and record in the York County Registry of Deeds a protective covenant that requires
any physical work on the building to conform to the requirements of Article 12.14.1 for a period
not less than five years from the date of execution of the covenant.
2. Inspections. All recipients of refunds shall be required to permit the Commission to inspect the
building in accordance with the following:
a. during the work, as frequently as deemed necessary by the Commission, to ensure
compliance with the work plan;
b. at completion of work to ensure compliance with the work plan; and
c. for any property subject to the covenant under Article 12.16.G.1, annually thereafter
for the duration of the covenant to ensure compliance with the covenant requirements.
- AMENDED 11/06/2001
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
216
12.17 Demolition Delay
No applications for the act of demolition as allowed by a building permit for a structure 75 years or older shall be
approved by the Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) until the Historic District Commission (HDC) makes a
determination as to its historic or architectural significance, and has the opportunity to pursue alternatives to
demolition that will preserve, rehabilitate, or restore it. Alternatives must be mutually agreeable to the Commission
and to the applicant. The Demolition Delay shall apply to all structures in the Town, not limited to those
previously landmarked or included in a Historic District. Demolition delay applications are unique, and in the
event the procedures of this section conflict with the procedures outlined in Article 18-A, the provisions of this
section shall prevail. - AMENDED 11/03/2009
12.17.1 Upon receiving a request to demolish a structure 75 years old or older, the CEO shall date the application and
promptly forward a copy of the application to the Chairman of the HDC. - AMENDED 11/03/2009
12.17.2 The HDC will conduct a Public Hearing within 60 days of the HDC’s receipt of the applicant’s request to demolish,
unless an extension is agreed to by both the Commission and the applicant. The purpose of the Public Hearing shall
be to determine whether the structure is of sufficient historical or architectural significance for the HDC to pursue
alternatives to demolition. Written notice of the public hearing shall be given by first class mail to the applicant and
to owners of any properties within 200’ of the applicant’s lot at least 7 days prior to the hearing date. The CEO and
any consultants or professional advisors of the HDC shall also be notified. The HDC shall post the meeting notice
in Town Hall and publish notice of the date, time and place of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in
the municipality at least 7 days prior to the Hearing. - AMENDED 11/02/2010
12.17.4 Should the HDC make a determination of historical or architectural significance, they shall seek alternatives to
demolition. The period for pursuing alternatives to demolition shall not be more than 60 days beyond the
determination of significance, or a total of 120 from the date of the HDC’s receipt of request for demolition, unless
an extension is agreed to by both the HDC and the applicant.
12.17.5 There shall be a notice posted of the intent to demolish visible on the property throughout the period of HDC
review in order to encourage public awareness and input into the review process.
12.17.6 Following the Public Hearing, and at the same meeting, the HDC shall determine if the structure is significant
enough to warrant pursuit of alternatives to demolition. The following actions may be taken following the Public
Hearing:
A. If it is determined to be not significant, the HDC shall transmit this decision to the CEO, who shall be
authorized to issue the permit to demolish immediately.
B. If it is determined to be significant, the HDC shall transmit this decision to the CEO, who shall be prohibited
from issuing the permit to demolish until the 120 delay is fulfilled. Criteria for determining structure
significance shall be based upon §12.4.3.
C. Failure to make a determination of significance within 60 days shall also constitute Commission approval of
the application for demolition.
12.17.7 Any alternative to structure demolition must be mutually agreed upon in writing by the applicant and the HDC.
12.17.8 The HDC shall be authorized to obtain photographic or professional documentation of a structure determined to
be significant, in conjunction with Old York Historical Society if they so desire, at no expense to the applicant.
12.17.9 In the event a structure is demolished before the review process is complete, no building permits shall be issued to
the applicant, or for construction on the lot the demolished building occupied, for two years, not including any
delays incurred due to the Growth Ordinance, and be subject to §19 of this ordinance. Any permits current for the
applicant shall be revoked. In the event a structure is deemed a danger to life or property by the CEO, the CEO
may allow demolition before the review deadline.
- AMENDED 05/17/2008
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
217
12.18 Solar Energy Systems
Solar energy system installations proposed for properties located within a historic district, historic site or historic
landmark must receive a certificate of appropriateness (“COA”) from the Historic District Commission (“HDC”).
The HDC may issue a COA for a Solar Energy System installation that meets the criteria specified herein as permitted
within the underlying zoning district.
A. Criteria for Certificate of Appropriateness--General:
1. Solar Energy System should be sited so they will not substantially alter, obscure, or add to the
exterior features of the historic resource or visually intrude on the overall historic character of the
historic resource.
2. Solar Energy System should, if possible, be installed on new additions or non-historic structures
on the site.
3. Multiple placement options and site locations should be considered for Solar Energy System
installation(s) including using a ground-mounted system instead of a roof-mounted, building
integrated or building-mounted system.
4. Existing trees of twenty four inches (24”) or greater in DBH shall not be eliminated in order to
install a ground mounted Solar Energy System.
B. Criteria for Certificate of Appropriateness--Specific Types of Solar Energy
1. For Ground-Mounted Solar Energy Systems:
a. Solar Energy Systems shall be installed in a location that is not highly visible from public streets,
and screening may be required to further limit visibility.
b. Solar Energy Systems shall not detract from any character defining features of the site, which
may include both natural and designed features.
2. For Building-Integrated Solar Energy Systems:
a. Solar Energy Systems shall be unobtrusive and shall not impair the historic integrity of
a building by removing, altering, or obscuring historically significant architectural
features of the building or adding historically contrasting features to the building.
b. Solar Energy Systems shall not be highly visible from a public street, or if visible, the
system shall not be distinguishable from the building.
3. For building mounted photovoltaic and roof-mounted Solar Energy Systems:
a. Solar Energy Systems shall be unobtrusive and shall not impair the historic integrity of
the building by removing, altering, or obscuring historically significant architectural
features of the building or adding historically contrasting features to the building.
b. Roof-mounted Solar Energy Systems shall be placed on a non-character-defining roof
plane or a non-primary elevation, shall not alter a roof plane or character defining
feature such as a dormer or chimney, shall run parallel to the original roof plane, shall
not extend more than nine inches above the roof plane, and shall not extend above the
roof ridge line.
c. Building mounted photovoltaic and roof-mounted Solar Energy Systems shall not
contrast with the color of the roof or the building surface on which they are mounted.
d. Character defining elements such as historic windows, walls, siding, or shutters which
face public streets and contribute to the character of the building shall not be altered,
removed, or obscured in connection with the installation of a Solar Energy System
4. The HDC has the discretion to waive any of the above criteria which, if strictly applied would
significantly decrease the efficiency, specified performance, or conservation benefits of the
proposed Solar Energy System.
- AMENDED 11/06/2018
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
218
ARTICLE THIRTEEN
MODULAR HOMES, MANUFACTURED HOUSING, AND MANUFACTURED
HOUSING PARKS
(NOTE: This Article was revised in its entirety on May 19, 2012. Any revisions noted in the text below will have been made
subsequent to this date. For earlier legislative history, see the November 8, 2011 version of the Zoning Ordinance.)
Modular homes and manufactured housing are construction types for dwellings and therefore are not listed as principal uses in
Article 4. Standards pertaining to modular homes, manufactured housing and manufactured housing parks are established in this
Article.
13.1 Modular Homes
Modular homes shall be allowed in all places and subject to all requirements and restrictions as apply to a
conventionally-constructed dwelling, subject to the following requirements:
A. If less than 28 feet in width, the long side of the modular home shall be generally parallel to the street.
B. The unit shall be placed on a permanent foundation which complies with building codes.
C. The unit shall have a pitched roof, with a pitch not less than 2 inches of rise per 12 inches of run.
D. The unit shall meet or exceed the minimum floor area required for dwelling units in the zone in which it is
located, in zones where this is regulated.
E. A building permit shall be required prior to moving or locating a modular home, and compliance with the
administrative provisions of §13.4 shall be required prior to issuance of this permit.
13.2 Manufactured Housing
Outside a Manufactured Housing Park, manufactured housing shall be allowed in all places and subject to all
requirements and restrictions as apply to a conventionally-constructed dwelling, subject to the following requirements
for any unit moved into or within York:
A. Size. The minimum width of the unit shall be 14’ and the minimum floor area of the unit shall be 750 square
feet.
B. Width-Based Standards. If less than 28 feet in width:
1. The unit shall be permitted only in those areas where Manufactured Housing Parks are permitted (see
§13.3, below), and the long side of the unit shall be generally parallel to the street; and
2. If located on a corner lot at the intersection of 2 streets, the unit shall have attached side construction
such as a garage, breezeway or other room, that results in a minimum width of 28 feet of structure
facing each street.
C. Foundation. The unit shall be placed on a permanent foundation which complies with building codes.
D. Roof. The unit shall have a pitched roof, with a pitch not less than 2 inches of rise per 12 inches of run.
E. Construction Standard. Manufactured housing units which are being moved into the Town of York shall
comply with one of the following standards:
1. the unit was constructed after June 15, 1976 and its construction is certified by the US Department of
Housing and Urban Development; or
2. the unit fully complies with State and Town residential construction, insulation, plumbing, electrical,
and other codes as applicable to residential construction at the time the unit is moved into York.
Existing manufactured housing units which are lawfully located within York as of August 4, 1988, shall be
permitted to remain, and may be moved to other locations within the Town.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
219
F. Permit Required. A building permit shall be required prior to moving or locating a manufactured housing unit,
and compliance with the administrative provisions of §13.4 shall be required prior to issuance of this permit.
13.3 Manufactured Housing Parks
Manufactured housing parks shall be allowed subject to the following:
A. Location. Manufactured housing parks shall be located in accordance with the following criteria:
1. Base Zoning Districts. Any manufactured housing park shall be permitted within the GEN-2 zone,
and those parks with 15 or less units of manufactured housing parks shall be permitted within that
portion of the GEN-3 zone not located southeasterly of Ridge Road nor westerly of Old Post Road.
2. Overlay Districts. No manufactured housing parks shall be permitted within the Watershed Protection
Overlay District or within the Shoreland Overlay District.
B. Density. The minimum size of the park shall be the sum of the following areas:
1. 5,000 square feet per manufactured housing unit if served by public sewer, or 12,000 square feet per
unit if served by a central on-site controlled septic system or systems, or 20,000 square feet per unit
otherwise; plus
1. required road rights-of-way; plus
2. required buffer strips; plus
3. required open space; plus
4. any setbacks required for the Shoreland Overlay District.
C. Required Open Space. For a manufactured housing park served by public sewer, 10% of the total land area
shall be reserved for recreational use of the park occupants. Such area shall generally be useful for the intended
purpose (relatively flat and dry, and accessible to park occupants).
D. Required Perimeter Setbacks. Minimum lot setbacks applicable in the base zoning district shall apply around
the perimeter of the lot on which the park is located. These standards shall not be applied to sites within the
park.
E. Required Perimeter Buffers. A manufactured housing park shall establish and maintain a vegetated buffer strip
of at least 50 feet in width along each portion of the external property boundary if density in the park is at least
twice that of existing residential density on the adjacent lot, or if undeveloped is at least twice that of the
maximum permitted residential density on that lot. No structures, streets or utilities shall be permitted within
this buffer, except as necessary to gain access or provide service to the park and to maintain safe sight distances.
The half of the buffer closest to the property boundary may be required to have additional plantings only to
the extent required of other residential development.
F. Utilities. Above-ground utilities shall be allowed in parks.
G. Road and Traffic Issues.
1. Streets within a park shall be designed by a Maine-licensed Professional Engineer.
2. All manufactured housing units within a park shall have direct access only to internal streets, not onto
adjacent roads outside the park.
3. Street design shall conform to all design and construction standards of the Site Plan and Subdivision
Regulations and other Town codes, except as expressly superseded by Title 30-A MRSA §4358(3)(G).
H. Groundwater Impacts. The party developing or expanding a manufactured housing park shall have the burden
of proof that the development will not pollute a public water supply or aquifer.
I. Miscellaneous Standards.
1. No dwelling units other than manufactured housing shall be permitted within a manufactured housing
park.
2. Each unit of manufactured housing shall comply with the standard of §13.2.E regarding HUD
certification and construction standards.
2. Conversion of a manufactured housing park to another use, or change of use of the units within the
park shall require full compliance to all applicable regulatory standards such as lot size, density, and
setbacks, and shall require prior approval of the Planning Board.
3. The land within a manufactured housing park shall remain a single lot and shall remain under unified
management, provided park occupants shall have the right to establish some form of joint ownership
and management of the park.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
220
4. Establishment, expansion or modification of a manufactured housing park shall require approval of the
Planning Board under the Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations.
5. A building permit from the CEO shall be required for installation, relocation, or modification of each
unit of manufactured housing within a park.
13.4 Documentation of Tax Payment
Prior to issuance of a building permit for the location or relocation of any modular home or manufactured housing
unit within the Town of York, the CEO shall require certification of payment of sales tax to the State of Maine in
accordance with 30-A MRSA §4358(4).
13.5 State Preemption
State law establishes certain standards for manufactured housing parks which are less restrictive than and supersede
local standards. See §21.3 for treatment of conflicting provisions.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
221
ARTICLE FOURTEEN
CONVERSION OF SEASONAL DWELLINGS
14.1 Restrictions
No seasonal dwelling may be converted to a year-round dwelling unless the owner or the person so converting the
seasonal dwelling shall have first obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer a seasonal dwelling conversion permit.
Before issuing such a permit, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a written determination that the application
meets the standards pertaining to the dwelling unit and the lot, as follows:
A. Regarding the dwelling, the following is met:
1. It is a contributing structure in a Local Historic District or is a designated historic landmark; or
2. After conversion, the structure shall conform to minimum egress requirements, specifically Section R310,
Emergency Escape and Rescue Openings, and R311, Means of Egress, under the version of the International
Residential Code (IRC) that is current at the time of application.
3. All new construction, whether renovations or additions, will conform to requirements for residential construction
under all applicable local and state codes, and be subject to all local building permit requirements.
B. Lots containing more than one seasonal dwelling may have one dwelling unit converted to year round in accordance
with the standards in 14.1.A; for conversion of multiple seasonal dwellings to year round dwellings, the density
standards must be met for the lot, as required for the base zone and any applicable overlay zones. Lots that contain a
year round dwelling at the time of an application for conversion of a seasonal dwelling to a year round dwelling must
be able to meet current density standards for the application to be permitted. - AMENDED 11/06/2007, 11/05/2013
14.2 Administration
See §18-A.4. - AMENDED 11/03/2009
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
222
ARTICLE FIFTEEN
PARKING
15.1 Provisions Applicable to All Zoning Districts
15.1.1 Amount of Parking.
15.1.1.1 Off-street parking, either by means of open air spaces or by garage space (open or enclosed), in addition to being
a permitted use, shall be considered an accessory use when required or provided to serve conforming uses located
in any district. – AMENDED 11/07/2017
15.1.1.2 The following minimum off-street parking requirements shall be provided and maintained for any new
construction, alteration and change of use.
USE NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES
a. Single-family dwelling and two- 2 parking spaces for each dwelling unit
family dwelling
b. Multi-family dwelling 2 parking spaces per dwelling with 3 or
more bedrooms and 1.5 spaces per
dwelling unit with less than 3 bedrooms.
c. Hotel/motel/Short Term Re- 1.25 parking spaces for each rental unit
sidential Rentals accommodation or each bedroom within
a short term residential rental – AMENDED
11/07/2017
d. Tourist home, lodging home, inn 1 parking space for each rental room
and bed and breakfast accommodation and 1 parking space for
each employee on the work shift with the
maximum number of employees, and 2
parking spaces for the owner/manager of
the business
e. Boarding/Rooming House 1 parking space for each room rented and
2 parking spaces for the owner/manager of
the boarding/rooming house
f. Retail, Wholesale or Service 1 parking space for each 200 sq. ft. of gross
Establishment floor area
g. Offices, professional and public 1 parking space for each 200 sq. ft. of gross
buildings leaseable area, exclusive of cellar and bulk
storage areas
h. Industrial 0.6 parking space per 1 employee or
fraction thereof - AMENDED 11/08/1994
i. Restaurants, and other places 1 parking space for every 3 seats,
serving food and beverage permanent or otherwise, and 1 parking
space per employee for the work shift with
the maximum number of employees
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
223
j. Theaters, auditoriums, and other 1 parking space for each 3 people or for places of
amusement or assembly each 3 seats
k. Elderly congregate housing, 1 space per each unit
dwelling units, as defined within
the term elderly congregate housing or
elderly housing units as defined within
the term elderly housing.
l. Elderly congregate housing, 1 space per 3 units
residential care units, as defined
within the term elderly congregate
housing
m. Nursing homes 1 space per 6 beds, plus 1 space per
employee on the maximum shift
n. Campgrounds 1 parking space shall be provided for each
recreational vehicle, tent or shelter in a
campground and an additional parking space
shall be provided for each 8 camp sites or fraction
thereof.
o. Cultural Facility 1 space for each residential unit, .5 space per
Artist Studio, and 1 visitor parking space per
1,000 feet of common area.
- AMENDED 05/22/2010
15.1.1.3 For any structure or use for which a parking standard is not specifically provided in 15.1.1.2, the Planning Board
shall determine the number of off-street parking spaces required to both eliminate the need for on-street parking
and provide adequate parking. The Board shall consult the Institute of Transportation Engineers standards and
other professional publications as a guideline for the amount of parking required.
15.1.1.4 Where adequate parking cannot be provided on-site per §15.1.1.2 and §15.1.1.3, or by shared parking per §15.1.1.5,
or by private off-site parking per §15.1.1.6, the Planning Board shall have the authority to permit a reduction in
the provision of parking in accordance with the following:
a. Reductions in parking shall be addressed only as part of a comprehensive development plan for the
property.
b. The Planning Board may require the applicant to engage a qualified professional to assess traffic and
parking. The assessment shall include, at a minimum, the following:
1. Projected trip generation and parking generation associated with the development.
2. Evaluation of the potential impacts on public safety and on convenience of site-users and the
general public.
3. Identification of potential problems and solution options for each.
4. Opinion regarding the overall reasonableness of the proposed reduction in parking.
c. The Planning Board may grant the parking reduction when it finds the proposal:
1. will not adversely impact adjacent properties;
2. will not adversely impact existing uses in the district in which it is located;
3. will not adversely impact public health, safety, and welfare; and
4. is consistent with York’s Comprehensive Plan.
- AMENDED 11/04/2003
15.1.1.5 The Planning Board may approve the joint use of a parking facility by two or more principal buildings or uses
where it is clearly demonstrated that said parking facility would substantially meet the intent of the requirements
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
224
of this Ordinance by reason of variation in the probable time of maximum use by patrons or employees of such
establishment and where said parking facility is located within three hundred (300) feet of each establishment.
15.1.1.6 Required off-street parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the principal use, except when the Planning
Board approves the use of an off-site parking facility to satisfy all or a portion of the parking requirements
identified in 15.1.1.2, when it is clearly demonstrated that said off-site parking would substantially meet the
purposes of this Ordinance and the Town of York Comprehensive Plan. The Planning Board shall consider the
following concerns in rendering a decision to allow off-site parking: the character of the area where the proposal
to use off-site parking is requested; the size of the proposed structure or use and the amount of parking it may
require; the availability and location of off-site parking to support the proposed structure or use; the reasons why
the proposed structure or use cannot provide adequate on-site parking; measures performed by the applicant,
such as but not limited to the applicant paying the cost to construct an off-site parking facility and allowing this
facility to serve an identified public need for parking; and the consistency of this proposal with the Town of York
Comprehensive Plan.
15.1.1.7 The amount of handicap parking spaces required by federal and state law for each use shall be provided and shall
be located to allow easy and safe use by handicap persons.
15.1.1.8. For affordable apartments created pursuant to §7.13, only one parking space per affordable apartment unit shall
be required. Where this standard is less restrictive than other parking standards, it shall prevail as provided by
§21.2. - AMENDED 11/03/2009
15.1.2 Dimensions for parking areas and parking spaces.
15.1.2.1 A parking space shall measure at least nine (9) feet in width by eighteen (18) feet in length, exclusive of space
required for access and maneuvering.
15.1.2.2 All required on-site parking spaces shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of the primary building or use
which the parking is designed to serve.
15.1.2.3 All parking areas with more than two parking spaces shall be arranged to provide adequate and safe maneuvering
area, and to eliminate the need for a vehicle to back into the street. The design of the parking area shall provide
for safe pedestrian movement within the parking area and provide access to the use the parking areas has been
designed to serve.
15.1.2.4 All parking areas shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the nearest property line. Unlicensed and uninspected
vehicles, or component parts of vehicles, shall not be parked or stored closer to any property line than
would be required for a newly constructed building within the base and any applicable overlay districts in which
it is to be located. - AMENDED 11/08/1994, 11/08/2005
15.2 Alternative Parking Standards in the YBVC Zoning District
The parking standards of §15.1.1.2 are national standards based on suburban-style development, where people drive
rather than walk from one use to the next. Such standards are completely unsuitable in a village area which is focused
on pedestrian movement, and will in fact result in designs which are completely out of character with the Town’s design
goals for this village. Within a comfortable walking distance, there are more than 500 public and another 1,300 private
parking spaces in and around the village. Despite this large number of spaces, on-site parking is deficient or nonexistent
on many properties. There is a high degree of shared parking by default – people tend to park only once for
their entire stay in the village, and they walk to a variety of destinations. Though finding parking is not always easy, the
village remains quite functional. With this as background, the following standards shall apply in the YBVC base zone.
A. Alternative Standard for Required Parking in YBVC. Parking requirements in the YBVC base zone shall be
50% of that specified in §15.1.1.2, except that dwellings (§15.1.1.2.a & b) and non-residential uses that provide
overnight accommodations (§15.1.1.2.c, d, e & n) shall comply in full with §15.1.1.2. Note that the following
section (§15.2.B) nullifies the parking standards for certain changes or expansions of use.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
225
B. Change or Expansion of Non-Residential Use in YBVC. A change of use from one non-residential use to
another non-residential use without building enlargement, or an expansion of a non-residential use without
building enlargement, shall not trigger parking analysis nor require the provision of additional parking spaces
beyond that which exist at the time of application, subject to the following requirements:
1. if the new or expanded use provides overnight accommodations (as described in §15.2.A), each unit of
overnight accommodation other than workforce affordable housing shall have one dedicated parking
space available for use of the occupants; and
2. the number of on-site parking spaces shall not decline.
C. Parking Non-Conformity in YBVC. The provisions of 17.4.B, which require lessening of non-conformity, shall
not apply to parking in the YBVC base zone. - AMENDED 05/19/2012
15.3 Parking Performance Standards in the YVC-1 & YVC-2 Zoning Districts
The parking standards of §15.1.1.2 shall not apply in the YVC-1 and YVC-2 districts. Said standards are national
standards based on suburban-style development, where people drive rather than walk or bike from one use to the next.
Such standards are completely unsuitable in a village area which is focused on pedestrian movement, and will in fact
result in designs which may completely be out of character with the Town’s design goals for this village. Parking spaces
shall be provided to conform to the number required in this section. Where a proposed use does not fall clearly into
one of the listed activities, the Board shall determine the activity which most closely resembles the proposed use, and
the proposed use shall comply with the parking standards of that category.
A. Alternative Standard for Required Parking in YVC-1 & YVC-2. Parking requirements in the YVC-1 and YVC-
2 base zones shall be 50% of that specified in §15.1.1.2.
B. Change or Expansion of Non-Residential Use without Building Enlargement in YVC-1 & YVC-2. A change
of use from one non-residential use to another or an expansion of a non-residential use shall meet the parking
performance standards required in this section.
C. Parking Non-Conformity in YVC-1 & YVC-2. The provisions of §17.4.B, which require decreasing nonconformity,
shall not apply to parking in the YVC-1 & YVC-2 base zones.
D. Parking in the Front Yard. Whenever possible, no portion of any lot which is used to satisfy the front yard
requirements of this ordinance shall be used for parking. Parking shall be located in the rear of the lot (behind
the building), unless the applicant can demonstrate to the Planning Board the need for parking to be located
on the side of the building using pertinent standards located in §15.3-E and §15.3-F below.
E. Parking Requirement Reduction. The Planning Board may reduce off-street parking requirements for proposals
in the YVC-1 & YVC-2 districts greater than what is specified in this section provided the Board considers the
following:
1. Where legal on-street parking is located within 1,000 feet of a non-residential use and the Board
determines that this parking will be available to meet some or all of the parking demand for the
particular use(s).
2. Where publicly supplied off-street parking is located within 1,000 feet of a nonresidential use and the
Board determines that this parking will be safe, convenient, and available to meet some or all of the
parking demand.
3. Where it is clearly demonstrated that the parking demand will be lower than that established by this
section and that the reduction will not detract from neighborhood property values, inconvenience to
the public, or increase congestion on adjacent streets.
4. For the reuse or redevelopment of a parcel, if the Planning Board determines that the new use will not
significantly increase the demand for parking compared to the former use.
5. If the Planning Board determines that the demand for parking will be less than the required standard
because some customers/users will walk or take alternative transportation to the site. In these cases,
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
226
the owner of the property seeking the reduction or their representative, shall be responsible for
providing documentation to the Planning Board substantiating the reduced parking demand or
alternative supply.
F. Additional Modified Parking Standards. In applying or modifying the parking standards for any proposed use
in the YVC-1 & YVC-2 districts, the Planning Board shall consider:
1. Parking spaces shall be sufficient to accommodate the normal day-to-day residential or non-residential
use.
2. The likelihood of people walking or bicycling to the proposed use and the number of bicycle racks
proposed. The Board shall consider any plan by the applicant to make the site more appealing for
pedestrians and bicyclists.
3. The size of the structure and the site.
4. The environmental, scenic, or historic sensitivity of the site (including applicable limitations on
impermeable surfaces). In cases where sufficient area for parking cannot be created on the site without
disturbance to these resource values, the board may require a reduction in the size of the structure so
that the available parking will be sufficient.
5. The availability of on-street parking.
6. Availability of off-site off-street parking that is open to the public, the owner, controlled by the
applicant, or available on a shared unit basis. Availability of accessible satellite parking shall also be
considered.
7. Accessibility to public transit facilities such as public bus stations or routes, or scheduled bus services
to the site.
8. Other standards used in generally accepted traffic engineering and planning manuals.
G. Parking requirements for residential dwellings and related uses. The requirements of §15.3-A above may be
waived for applications that involve dwelling units with less than 1,000 square feet of floor area and elderly or
workforce housing as defined in this ordinance. These requirements may also be waived if the applicant can
demonstrate that all required parking can be accommodated through mixed use development, shared parking
or other situations deemed acceptable by the Planning Board as prescribed in §15.3-E and §15.3-F above.
- AMENDED 05/21/2016
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
227
ARTICLE 15-A
TRAFFIC SAFETY
15-A.1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure that increases in traffic resulting from locally-approved development
activities are safely accommodated, and that new development is required to provide for transportation improvements
required as a result of that development. The application of these standards is not limited to those projects reviewed
by the Planning Board, but applies equally to all development generating significant volumes of traffic. Most
development activities shall be required to perform a simple, “initial assessment,” and projects generating significant
new trips shall be required to prepare a more in-depth evaluation and provide mitigation of their impacts.
15-A.2. Overview of Process. An applicant seeking local approvals shall be required to provide an Initial Assessment of
traffic impacts. This is a quick professional evaluation of anticipated traffic impacts. For those applications where
significant traffic impacts are anticipated, a Full Traffic Study is required. In all cases, safe sight distances are required.
Where a Full Traffic Study is required, the applicant shall be responsible for mitigating their impacts.
15-A.3. Initial Assessment. The following shall apply.
A. Applicability. Before Town permits or approvals are issued for any application relating to establishment,
expansion, or change-of-use for any non-residential use, or relating to any division or subdivision of land or
buildings for residential use (including but not limited to site plan approval, subdivision approval, use permit,
or road opening permit) the applicant shall provide to the Director of Public Works an initial assessment of
the expected trip generation.
B. Qualified Professional. This Initial Assessment shall be a statement, prepared and certified by a Mainelicensed
Professional Engineer, describing the expected peak hour trip generation associated with the
proposal.
C. Trip Generation Rates. Trip generation shall be based on the ITE’s Trip Generation Manual (most recent
edition). In the event this source does not contain suitable information regarding the proposal, the engineer
preparing this initial assessment shall meet with the Director of Public Works, or their designee, to determine
an appropriate means of completing this evaluation.
D. Peak Hour. This Initial Assessment shall be based on expected trip generation at highest peak hour, based
on an evaluation of the AM peak hour for the use, the PM peak hour for the use, and the peak hour for the
generator, in each case for weekday, Saturday and Sunday conditions.
E. Threshold for Full Traffic Study. A Full Traffic Study shall be required in consultation with the Director of
Public Works if any of the following conditions are met:
1. Peak hour trip generation of the development will be 35 or more vehicle trips.
2. Traffic generated by the development will cause an existing access to have more than 35 peak hour
trips, assuming that access has less than 35 peak hour trips as an existing condition.
3. For applications to the Planning Board, the Board may require a full traffic study in any case if it
finds this to be reasonably necessary to ensure the protection of the public health, safety and
welfare.
15-A.4. Full Traffic Study. The following shall apply.
A. Qualified Professional. A Full Traffic Study shall be prepared by a Maine-licensed Professional Engineer
having a minimum of 3 years experience in transportation engineering.
B. Scope of Study. The applicant’s engineer shall have a pre-application meeting with the Director of Public
Works, or their designee, to determine the required scope of the study. The requirements for the study shall
be based on standard transportation engineering practices.
15-A.5. Performance Standards. The following shall apply.
A. Sight Distances. In all cases, whether a Full Traffic Study is required or not, adequate sight distance shall be
provided at all new intersections and driveways. The standards against which this shall be judged are the
Maine Department of Transportation Driveway and Entrance Rules.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
228
B. Mitigation of Adverse Impacts. In the event the Full Traffic Study identifies traffic flow or safety problems
that will be created by the proposed development, the applicant shall be responsible for mitigating the
impacts.
- ARTICLE ADDED 05/22/2004
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
229
ARTICLE SIXTEEN
SIGN STANDARDS
(Entire Article Amended 11/08/2011)
16.1 Purpose
Because a proliferation of advertising signs could create a hazard to the motoring public, and diminish the natural
scenic and historic beauty of York, it is the purpose of this section to reduce the possible negative effects of signs while
providing reasonable opportunities for the advertisement of goods, services and other attractions in York while
minimizing visual clutter and contributing to York’s aesthetic coherence. These standards regulate on-premise business
advertising signs, and temporary off-premise advertising signs.
16.2 Sign Types
16.2.1 A-frame sign: An advertising sign located on the ground, not permanently attached and easily movable, and usually
two-sided. Also called a “sandwich board.”
16.2.2 Banner. A sign composed of light weight cloth, plastic material, or other non-rigid material, affixed to a structure
either by ropes, pins, cables, etc. or by framing, in such a way that it moves in the wind.
16.2.3 Billboard. See Article Two, Definitions.
16.2.4 Blade Sign. Hanging or placard style signs which project from the front façade of the building over the sidewalk,
fixed at an angle or perpendicular to the wall on which it is mounted. These signs are typically two sided and either
square, rectangular or oval in form.
16.2.5 Business Directional Signs. Off-Premise Business Directional Signs are governed by the Town of York’s
Directional Sign Ordinance.
16.2.6 Changeable Signs. An on-premise sign created, designed, manufactured, or modified in such a way that its message
may be electronically, digitally or mechanically altered by the complete substitution or replacement of one display
by another. Signs that contain changeable copy that can only be altered by manual means shall not be considered
changeable signs.
16.2.7 Directory Sign. A directory of the business establishments occupying a building affixed to the exterior wall of a
building containing multiple businesses.
16.2.8 Freestanding Sign. A sign that is permanently erected in a fixed location and supported by 1 or more columns,
upright poles or braces extended from the ground or from an object on the ground, and not attached to or
dependent for support upon any building.
16.2.9 Gateway Signs: A gateway sign is a freestanding sign, constructed within a public right-of-way, or adjacent lot,
which communicates the name of the Town or village area. - AMENDED 05/16/2015
16.2.10 Information Sign. A sign, without commercial speech or advertising material, designed and intended to convey
information about a permitted use, whether it be a business, institution, school, church, public building, fraternal
or service clubs, to convey regulations or restrictions, or otherwise to provide needed guidance to the general
public; for example, "no trespassing", “exit”, hours of operation, and other useful information.
16.2.11 Open Flag. A flag placed outside a business, during business hours, indicating a business is open.
16.2.12 Window Sign: A sign printed on, affixed to, in contact with or etched on a window and intended for viewing from
the exterior of the building.
16.2.13 Wall Sign: A sign attached to, erected against or hanging from the wall of a building, with the face in a parallel
plane to the plane of the building wall. Signs on awnings shall be considered wall signs. Wall signs shall include
only letters, background, and an optional logo. Information shall consist only of the name and/or logo of the
business. Wall signs shall not list products, sales, other promotional messages, or contact information.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
230
16.3 Performance Standards
16.3.1 No new, additional or enlarged commercial sign shall be erected or placed within the Town of York except as
provided below. No person, firm, corporation or organization shall erect, enlarge, or replace any sign described
above without first obtaining a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer, except as exempted by this
Ordinance. All permit applications shall include a drawing showing all dimensions, types of materials, and
illumination proposals. An application for a “Gateway Sign,” as permitted in this ordinance, shall obtain written
approval from the Board of Selectmen after receiving comment by the Code Enforcement Officer and Public
Works Director. - AMENDED 05/16/2015
16.3.2 Signs shall not cause any traffic hazard, or any nuisance, as defined by state statute.
16.3.3 Sign color or format shall not resemble traffic signals or safety signs.
16.3.4 Signs adjacent to any public way shall not: a) obstruct clear and free vision of vehicle operators; b) interfere with,
obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized sign, by reason of its position, shape, color, illumination
or wording; c) otherwise constitute a hazard to pedestrian or vehicle traffic.
16.3.5 Signs shall not be attached or affixed to any tree or to any public utility pole.
16.3.6 Signs are prohibited on roofs, and shall not project above the eave lines or parapet walls of buildings to which
they are attached. For flat roofed buildings that employ roof fronts that give the appearance of a pitched roof,
signs are prohibited on the roof front.
16.3.7 Signs shall not be placed so as to interfere with free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape, or
parking lot.
16.3.8 Signs shall not be placed so as to adversely impair vehicular or pedestrian safety or circulation.
16.3.9 All signs, including any supporting posts or structural elements, shall be appropriately maintained. Appropriate
maintenance consists of the sign remaining in the same condition as when it was installed. Missing lettering,
cracked or broken glass or plastic, insecure or broken signs, or any other sign condition that may cause unsafe or
unsightly conditions shall be repaired or removed.
16.3.10 Any sign which advertises a business no longer being conducted shall be removed within 6 months of the business
closing.
16.3.11 All signs, except where otherwise specified in §16.6. and §16.7, shall be on the property of the business being
advertised, or within that business’s access easement. In the event a sign is placed on an access easement, it shall
be calculated towards the maximum sign area allowed per business and/or per lot for the business being
advertised.
16.4 Illumination of Signs
16.4.1 Except as prohibited in section 16.9 of this ordinance externally and internally illuminated signs shall be
illuminated only by steady, stationary, shielded light sources directed solely on the sign without causing glare.
- AMENDED 05/16/2015
16.4.2 Light levels shall be deemed acceptable if they do not exceed a factor of 3 above the ambient light intensity at any
point on the ground when measured with an incident light meter and the following procedure:
a. The intensity of the sign illumination, in foot candles, is measured with all normal background and
ambient illumination on.
b. With the sign turned off, the same measurement is repeated.
c. The ratio of the measurement in (1) to that in (2) shall not exceed 3.
It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide documentation that proposed sign lighting meets the
above maximums.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
231
16.4.3 Except in the case of permitted and/or grandfathered neon signs, LED lights shall be the source of sign
illumination, unless it can be demonstrated that another bulb type is equal or greater in energy efficiency.
16.4.4 Illuminated signs shall be constructed and erected in such a manner as to deflect light away from residential
properties and public roads.
16.5 Dimensional Standards
16.5.1 Measurement of Sign Area
16.5.1.1 Measurement of signs include the area of all boards, panels, frames, or sheets of material but does not include
supporting posts or any structural elements outside the limits of such perimeter which do not form an
integral part of the display.
16.5.1.2 In determining the area of wall signs or window signs, the entire area with a continuous perimeter enclosing
the extreme limits of the actual letters, characters, background surface, and any associated graphics shall be
measured. For a sign consisting of individual letters or symbols without a distinguishable background, the
area shall be that of the smallest rectangle which encompasses all of the letters and symbols.
16.5.1.3 Sign area shall be determined as the product of the maximum width and maximum height of the sign unit,
excluding the supporting structure. However, if the supporting structure is built in the shape of a corporate
symbol, its area shall also be counted.
16.5.1.4 Maximum Dimension shall mean the longer of either height or width.
Sample Illustrations of how to calculate sign area. Dashed line indicates where measurements are taken.
16.5.2 Dimensional Standards by Sign Type
16.5.2.1 A-Frame Signs
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
232
a. A-Frame signs may be double sided with the identical sign face displayed on both sides; a double-sided aframe
sign shall constitute one sign and only one side shall contribute towards total sign area. One Aframe
sign is permitted per business. An A-frame sign shall not exceed 8 square feet, and may not exceed
a maximum height of 4 feet from the ground to the top of the sign.
b. An A-frame sign must be placed within fifteen feet of the primary entrance of the business it is advertising,
and must not interfere with pedestrian traffic or violate standards of accessibility as required by the
American with Disabilities Act. Placement of A-frame signs must maintain a five foot sidewalk clearance
at all times.
c. A-frame signs may only be displayed during business hours, and must not be left out overnight.
16.5.2.2 Blade Signs
a. Blade signs may be double sided with the identical sign face displayed on both sides; a double-sided blade
shall constitute one sign and only one side shall contribute towards total sign area.
b. Blade Signs shall be permitted only for businesses that have a principal entrance on the first story.
c. Blade Signs may encroach over a sidewalk or public way up to four feet and must have a minimum
clearance from existing grade of at least eight feet, with a maximum height of twelve feet to the top of the
sign. Blade Signs shall not encroach above the roof line nor above the bottom of the second story window.
e. The maximum permitted sign area for a blade sign is 8 square feet.
f. For buildings with multiple businesses, a blade sign is allowed for each first floor business located there,
except that businesses which front on two streets and have an entrance for the public on each frontage, may
have one blade sign on each frontage.
g. A business may have either a freestanding sign or a blade sign, but not both, except that a business located
on a lot which fronts on two streets may choose to have two freestanding signs, or two blade signs, or
one of each.
16.5.2.3 Directory Sign
a. One directory of the business establishments occupying a building may be affixed to the exterior wall of
the building at each public entrance to the building.
b. Each business directory sign may be no larger than 4 square feet.
16.5.2.4 Freestanding Signs
a. Freestanding signs may be double-sided with the identical sign face displayed on both sides; a doublesided
sign shall constitute one sign and only one side shall contribute towards total sign area.
b. Not more than one freestanding sign shall be permitted per lot, except that on a lot which fronts on two
streets, in which case the lot may have one freestanding sign along each road on which the lot fronts. All
freestanding signs shall be placed perpendicular to the road frontage they are meant for. In the case of
lots with multiple frontages, the frontage which constitutes the front lot line shall be allowed the maximum
area and longest dimension allowed for freestanding signs in that zone. For lots which front on two streets
in the Route One zones, a freestanding sign on the secondary frontage shall be allowed a maximum of 20
square feet of area, with the longest dimension not over 6 feet. For lots which front on two streets in all
other zones except for RES-1A, RES-1B, RES-2, and RES-3, a freestanding sign on the secondary
frontage shall not exceed 12 square feet of area.
c. In the Route One zones, freestanding signs shall not exceed 48 sq. ft. of area in total, with the longest
dimension not over 12 feet. However, such signs may be larger in area when they advertise a group of
multiple businesses located in a single building, mall, plaza or office park. In such cases, an additional 12
square feet per additional business may be added, for up to a maximum total of 100 square feet, with the
longest dimension not over 12 feet. Allocation of sign area for each business is at the discretion of the
applicant as long as no business is allocated more than 48 square feet of sign area. Sign area devoted to
the name of the building, mall, plaza or office park shall be included in calculation of sign area.
d. Freestanding signs shall not be placed closer than twelve feet from any lot line, unless after an on-site
inspection, the Code Enforcement Officer waives or partially waives this setback on a finding that no sign
could be properly set back and provide reasonable advertising exposure in both directions.
e. Maximum height of freestanding signs in the Route One zones shall be fifteen feet from adjacent ground
grade to top of sign.
f. In all other zones except for RES-1A, RES-1B, RES-2, and RES-3, freestanding signs shall not exceed
20 square feet of area, with the longest dimension not over 6 feet. However, signs may be larger in area
when they advertise a group of businesses located in a single building, mall, plaza or office park. In such
cases an additional twelve square feet per business may be added for up to a maximum total of 64 square
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
233
feet, with the longest dimension not over 6 feet. Allocation of sign area for each business is at the
discretion of the applicant as long as no business is allocated more than 20 square feet of sign area. Sign
area devoted to the name of the building, mall, plaza or office park shall be included in calculation of sign
area.
g. Freestanding signs not in the Route 1 zones, RES-1A, RES-1B, RES-2, and RES-3 zones, maximum
height shall be twelve feet from adjacent ground grade to top of sign.
h. A business may have either a freestanding sign or a blade sign, but not both, except that a business located
on a lot which fronts on two streets may choose to have two freestanding signs, or two blade signs, or
one of each.
16.5.2.5 Gateway Signs
Gateway Signs shall not have a sign area greater than 12 square feet or be greater than 8’ from the adjacent
ground grade to the top of the sign.
16.5.2.6 Home Occupation Signs
See 7.4.5.B
16.5.2.7 Information Sign
Display area of Information Signs shall not exceed three square feet or extend higher than seven feet
above ground level.
16.5.2.8 Open Flags
Open Flags shall not exceed 3’x5’; no more than one per business shall be displayed; it shall be displayed
only when the business is open; it shall only be displayed on the business premises; it shall not be
illuminated; and it shall not obstruct free and clear vision of vehicle operators; interfere with, obstruct the
view of or be confused with any authorized sign; or otherwise constitute a hazard to pedestrian or vehicle
traffic.
16.5.2.9 Wall Signs
Wall signs shall not exceed a total of 25 sq. ft. or 10 percent of the wall area to which they are attached,
whichever is less. Not more than one wall sign shall be permitted per building, with the following
exceptions: buildings with multiple businesses shall be permitted one wall sign per business. Where there
are two or more wall signs per building, their total area shall not exceed the above maximum per wall. No
part of a wall sign shall extend more than twelve inches from the building wall unless the sign is part of
an awning, or be located more than 15 feet above the ground to the top of the sign. Wall signs shall not
be wider than 90% of the width of the building façade.
16.5.2.10 Window Signs
Permanent window signs affixed to or painted on the inside of a window shall occupy no more than 25%
of the surface of each window area. Window area is counted as a continuous surface until divided by an
architectural or structural element. Mullions are not considered an element that divides window area.
16.5.2.11 Signs within the RES-1A, RES-1B, RES-2 and RES-3 Zoning Districts
Any permitted principal use within the RES-1A, RES-1B, RES-2, and RES-3 districts shall allow no more
than one blade or freestanding sign located on the premises, or single lot. Signs shall be solid wood or
metal. The total area of such signs shall not exceed four square feet and shall have no artificial illumination.
Maximum height shall not exceed 12 feet from the ground to the top of the sign.
16.6 Temporary Signs
16.6.1 In the event of conflict with the Performance Standards of section 16.3, the specific standards for Temporary
Signs shall prevail.
16.6.2 Temporary signs giving notice or relaying information such as political posters, advertisements of charitable
functions, civic, educational, or non-profit organization notices of meetings and signs of a similar nature are
allowed for a period of time as specified by state law or a maximum of thirty days if not specified by state law,
without a permit, provided no such sign shall exceed 48 square feet in total area.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
234
16.6.3 Temporary real estate signs advertising the sale, lease or rental of the premises upon which the sign is located are
allowed without a permit and shall be removed by the owner or agent within thirty days of sale, lease or rent. Not
more than one temporary real estate sign shall be permitted per lot, with the following exceptions: properties with
multiple units for sale, whether commercial or residential, shall be permitted one temporary real estate sign per
unit for sale; lots with two frontages may have one sign per unit for sale for each street frontage. The sign area of
each sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in the Route 1 Zones, and the sign shall not exceed 5 square feet in all
other zones. In no case shall temporary real estate signs constitute more than 48 square feet in aggregate in the
Route 1 Zones, or 20 square feet in all other zones, if more than one such sign is on the property.
16.6.4 Temporary development or construction site signs are allowed without a permit provided such signs do not exceed
sixteen square feet in area, or thirty two square feet in aggregate if more than one such sign is on the property,
and are limited to a general identification of the project, building, owner, contractor, or other indication of the
business conducting the site work, and shall be removed upon completion of the project. No more than one sign
is permitted for each project, building, owner, contractor, or other indication of the business conducting the site
work. If the project work is intermittent, the sign is only permitted while the work is underway.
16.6.5 Open House Signs. For an open house, a real estate seller or their agent may place up to four temporary signs at
one time announcing the open house and indicating directions to the property. No signs shall be posted more
than 48 hours before the start of the Open House. The sign area of each sign shall not exceed 5 square feet.
16.6.6 Yard Sale Signs. For a yard sale with a permit from the York Police Department, yard sale signs shall be allowed
without a permit from Code Enforcement, subject to the following requirements:
A. Not more than 4 signs shall be located off-premise;
B. Off-premise signs shall not be larger than 5 square feet;
C. All signs shall be posted not more than 24 hours before the start of the yard sale, and shall be removed
within 1 hour of the end of the yard sale; and
D. No sign shall be placed such that, in the opinion of the York Police Department, it constitutes a traffic
or other hazard.
16.6.7 New Business Openings. When a new business opens for the first time, it has a unique need to inform the public
that the business is now open. This event warrants additional signage for a limited period, beyond the signage
which it will have on a permanent basis. For this reason, temporary banners or other temporary signs for the
opening of a new business shall be permitted with a permit from Code Enforcement, subject to the following
limitations:
A. The business has all required Town permits, approvals and licenses.
B. One sign or banner shall be permitted facing each street adjoining the lot.
C. The size of each sign or banner shall not exceed:
1. In all Route One zones 32 square feet;
2. In all other zones, 20 square feet.
D. Each sign or banner shall be legible, and shall be maintained in good condition and appearance.
E. No sign or banner shall be illuminated.
F. No such sign or banner shall be located in a manner which would obstruct sight distance for drivers,
bicyclists and pedestrians, and any sign shall be moved upon request if the York Police Department
finds this standard is not adequately met.
G. Temporary sign display shall begin within 7 days (before or after) of the initial opening of the business
to customers, and all such temporary signage shall be removed within 30 days of its first display.
16.6.8 Temporary Event Signs. Businesses advertising sales or special events shall be permitted to have temporary signs
for limited time periods. A Temporary Event sign shall be allowed with a permit from Code Enforcement, subject
to the following limitations:
A. The new business has all required Town permits, approvals and licenses.
B. The temporary event sign may take the form of a freestanding sign, an a-frame sign, or a banner.
C. For signs on lots with two frontages, one sign shall be permitted facing each frontage.
D. The size of each freestanding sign or banner shall not exceed:
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
235
1. In all Route 1 zones 32 square feet;
2. In all other zones, 20 square feet.
E. A-frame signs shall not exceed eight square feet regardless of zone.
F. Each a-frame sign, freestanding sign or banner shall be legible, and shall be maintained in good
condition and appearance.
G. No a-frame sign, freestanding sign or banner shall be illuminated.
H. No sign or banner shall be located in a manner which would obstruct sight distance for drivers,
bicyclists, and pedestrians, and any sign shall be moved upon request if the York Police Department
finds this standard is not adequately met.
I. Temporary event sign display shall begin no earlier than 48 hours before the special event, and all such
temporary event signage shall be removed within 24 hours of the special event ending.
J. Special Events shall be permitted for a maximum duration of one week, and the dates of the event shall
be indicated in the permit application.
K. A business may utilize temporary event signs for a maximum of twelve days per calendar year.
16.7 Exemptions
The following signs do not require a permit from the Town, though they are subject to the performance standards of
this article. The following signs are not included in total number of signs allowed, or total sign area allowed for a
business or property.
16.7.1 Signs erected for public safety and welfare or pursuant to any governmental function.
16.7.2 Information signs.
16.7.3 Signs relating to trespassing and hunting, not exceeding two square feet in area.
16.7.4 Signs announcing an event, or activity, or information of a civic, philanthropic, educational or non-profit
organization may be erected and maintained on residential properties for a period not to exceed 30 days prior to
the event and removed within three days after the event.
16.7.5 Open Flags.
16.7.6 Temporary signs giving notice or relaying information, such as political posters, announcements of charitable
functions, civic, educational, or non-profit organization notices of meetings and signs of a similar nature.
16.7.7 Temporary real estate signs.
16.7.8 Temporary development or construction site signs.
16.7.9 Open House Signs.
16.7.10 A-Frame Signs.
16.7.11 Window Signs.
16.8 Non-Conforming Signs
16.8.1 Continuance: A non-conforming sign that does not conform to the provisions of this Section, but which did meet
such provisions when the sign was installed, may continue.
16.8.2 Maintenance: Any lawfully existing sign may be maintained, repaired or repainted, but shall not be enlarged, except
in conformance with the provisions of this Section.
16.8.3 Replacement: Any new sign of different size and shape replacing a non-conforming sign shall conform to the
provisions of this Section, and the non-conforming sign shall not thereafter be displayed. Any application to
replace a non-conforming sign shall demonstrate that the replacement sign is no more non-conforming than the
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
236
existing sign, or the application will be denied. After-the-fact permitting to replace a nonconforming sign shall
not be permitted.
16.9 Prohibited Signs and Displays
16.9.1 Billboards, streamers, pennants, ribbons, spinners or other similar devices shall not be displayed.
16.9.2 Banners, except as specified under Temporary Signs, or as permitted by the Selectmen’s Policy on Banner
Placement.
16.9.3 Flashing, moving or animated signs, movable electric signs, changeable signs, intermittently lit signs, digital, or
signs that display electronic images or video are not permitted. Signs indicating fuel prices, time and/or
temperature are permitted provided they meet the other provisions of this Section. AMENDED 5/16/2015
16.9.4 Neon or gas filled tubular signs are prohibited in all areas of Town except in the YBVC Zoning District where
they are permitted as window signs, blade signs, or wall signs.
16.9.5 A string of lights shall not be used for the purpose of advertising or attracting attention on non-residential
properties, except that holiday lighting shall be permitted on non-residential properties from November 1 through
January 10 of each year, and low intensity landscape lighting shall be permitted year-round. Residential lighting is
not governed by this lighting standard.
16.9.6 No signs shall be erected in Districts BUS-1, BUS-2, and RES-4 without written permission of the Board of
Design Review, the procedures for which are outlined in Zoning §18.9.
16.9.7 Along any State or State-Aid Highway, Title 23 MRSA §1401-A specifies additional setback requirements which
may be more restrictive than Town Requirements.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
237
Summary Table of Dimensional Standards
Type of Sign Zoning District Maximum
Sign Area Total Number Allowed Min.
Setback
Maximum
Height
A-Frame Signs All Zones 8 sq. ft. 1 per business n/a 4 ft.
Blade Signs All except RES-1-A, RES 1-B, RES-2,
RES-3 8 sq. ft. 1 per 1st floor business n/a 12 ft.
RES-1-A, RES 1-B, RES-2, RES-3 4 sq. ft. 1 per principal use n/a 12 ft.
Directory Sign All Zones 4 Sq. ft . 1 per public entrance n/a n/a
Freestanding Signs
Multiple Business Signs Route 1 Zones 100 sq. ft. 1 per lot, unless lot fronts on more
than one road 12 ft. 15 ft.
BUS-1, BUS-2, GEN-1, GEN-2, GEN-3,
RES-4, RES-5, RES-6, RES-7, YBVC,
YVC-1 & YVC-2
64 sq. ft. 1 per lot, unless lot fronts on more
than one road 12 ft. 12 ft.
Freestanding Signs Route 1 zones 48 sq. ft. 1 per lot, unless lot fronts on more
than one road 12 ft. 15 ft.
BUS-1, BUS-2, GEN-1, GEN-2, GEN-3,
RES-4, RES-5, RES-6, RES-7, YBVC,
YVC-1 & YVC-2
20 sq. ft. 1 per lot, unless lot fronts on more
than one road 12 ft. 12 ft.
RES-1-A, RES 1-B, RES-2, RES-3 4 sq. ft. 1 per principal use n/a 12 ft.
Identification Sign All Zones 3 sq. ft. n/a n/a 7 ft.
New Business Openings Route 1 Zones 32 sq. ft. 1 per business n/a n/a
All Other Zones 20 sq. ft. 1 per business n/a n/a
Open Flags All Zones 15 sq. ft (3ft. X
5ft.) 1 per business n/a n/a
Open House All Zones 5 sq. ft. 4 per open house n/a n/a
Temporary Development All Zones 16 sq. ft. each/32
sq. ft. total n/a n/a n/a
Temporary Event Signs Route 1 Zones 32 sq. ft. 1 per business, unless lot fronts on
more than one road n/a n/a
All Other Zones 20 sq. ft. 1 per business, unless lot fronts on
more than one road n/a n/a
Temporary Real Estate
Signs Route 1 Zones 12 sq. ft. 1 per unit for sale for each street
frontage n/a n/a
All Other Zones 5 sq. ft. 1 per unit for sale for each street
frontage n/a n/a
Wall Signs All Zones 25 sq. ft or 10%
of wall area 1 per business n/a 15 ft.
Window Signs All Zones 25% of window
surface n/a n/a n/a
Yard Sale Signs All Zones 5 sq. ft. each 4 signs off premise n/a n/a
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
238
Summary Table of Permitting Authority by Sign Type
Sign Type Permitted By:
A-Frame Sign CEO
Banner Select Board
Blade Sign CEO
Business Directional Sign Select Board
Directory sign CEO
Freestanding Sign CEO
Home Occupation Sign CEO
Identification Sign No Permit Required
New Business Openings CEO
Open Flag No Permit Required
Open House No Permit Required
Temporary
Development/Construction No Permit Required
Temporary Event Sign CEO
Temporary Political Sign No Permit Required
Temporary Real Estate Sign No Permit Required
Wall Sign CEO
Window Sign No Permit Required
Yard Sale Sign Police Department
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
239
ARTICLE SEVENTEEN
NON-CONFORMING SITUATIONS
17.1 Non-Conforming Uses
17.1.1 Continuance
A non-conforming use which is otherwise lawful according to all applicable regulations may continue in accordance
with this Article and other applicable regulations.
17.1.2 Resumption of Use Prohibited
A lot or structure in or on which a non-conforming use is discontinued for a period exceeding 24 months, or which
is superseded by a conforming use, may not again be devoted to a non-conforming use, except as allowed by this
ordinance. This applies even if the owner has not intended to abandon such use.
17.1.3 A Structure Occupied by a Non-Conforming Use
17.1.3.1 A structure in which a non-conforming use occurs may be maintained and repaired, but may not be altered so as
to expand the non-conforming use, except as provided by Section 17.1.6. When a single family dwelling is a nonconforming
use, the dwelling may be expanded provided it remains a single family dwelling. - AMENDED
05/09/1992
17.1.3.2 No structure which is occupied solely by a non-conforming use may be enlarged, except as provided by Section
17.1.6. In the case of a structure in which both a non-conforming use and a conforming use occur, only that part
of the structure which is occupied by the conforming use may be enlarged, except as provided by Section 17.1.6.
- AMENDED 11/07/2006
17.1.3.3 A non-conforming use which occupies part of a structure may not be expanded into other parts of the structure,
except as provided by Section 17.1.6.
17.1.4 Change of Use
17.1.4.1 An existing non-conforming use may be changed to another non-conforming use provided that the new use is
equally or more appropriate to the zoning district than is the existing non-conforming use, and the impact on
adjacent properties is less adverse than the impact of the former use, as determined upon review by the Planning
Board, using the criteria in Section 17.1.4.3. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a permit to allow this
change of use only when an approval is granted by the Planning Board. - AMENDED 11/04/1997, 11/03/2009
17.1.4.2 Reserved. - AMENDED 11/03/2009
17.1.4.3 The determination of appropriateness requires the issuance or denial of a change of non-conforming use permit
based upon written findings on the changes in traffic (volume and type), pedestrian circulation and amenities,
parking, lighting, noise, stormwater run-off, impact on municipal facilities and services, character of the area,
fumes, odors and potential for litter, wastes or by-products, likely to result from such change of use. The
performance standards contained in the zoning ordinance applicable to the zone and the new use must be met.
- AMENDED 11/04/1997
17.1.4.4 An applicant requesting a change of use must submit an application that identifies the location and condition of
the existing property, including a site plan, and a narrative description of how the applicant believes the project
satisfies the standards of 17.1.4.3. - AMENDED 11/03/2009
17.1.5 Reserved. - AMENDED 11/07/2006
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
240
17.1.6 Non-Conforming Use of Land or Structures in all Base Zones
A non-conforming use of land or a structure in which a non-conforming use occurs, may continue to exist and may
expand within the lot boundaries, existing as of March 13, 1982 in the Route One base zones or existing as of
November 7, 2006 in other base zones, provided the expanded use or structure meets the setback requirements, to
the greatest extend practical as determined by the Planning Board, of the zone in which it is located. All such
expansions must conform, to the greatest extend practical as determined by the Planning Board, to the applicable
performance standards. Such expansion shall be permitted within an overlay district only if the expansion is in full
conformance with the overlay district. All such expansions of a non-conforming use or structure are subject to
review and approval by the Planning Board. - AMENDED 11/07/2006
17.2 Non-Conforming Structures
17.2.1 Repair, Enlargement
17.2.1.1 Maintenance, Repair and Improvement Without Enlargement. A non-conforming structure may be maintained,
repaired and improved, provided there is no enlargement of the structure with respect to its footprint and/or its
volume. - AMENDED 04/10/1993, 11/07/2006
17.2.1.2 Enlargement. The standards applicable to Enlargement of Non-Conforming structures, as amended by the voters on
November 4, 2008, shall retroactively apply to any application accepted by the Planning Board or Code Enforcement
Officer on or after June 26, 2008, the date on which the first public hearing was posted for the amendments. The
former Enlargement of Non-Conforming Structures provisions shall apply to applications accepted prior to this date.
A non-conforming structure may be enlarged only in conformance with the provisions of this Section. A Code
Enforcement Officer shall review the application to determine conformance with these standards, and may impose
conditions on an approval to ensure conformance. Criteria for approval include each of the following: - AMENDED
11/04/2008, 11/03/2009
A. The expansion is not within the 100-year floodplain or on a Coastal Dune;
B. Expansion within the Shoreland Overlay District conforms to the requirements of §8.3.11.4;
C. The expansion satisfies all applicable non-dimensional requirements of the zoning district in which the structure
is located;
D. The expansion results in neither expansion of other legal non-conformities nor the creation of any new nonconformities;
E. A one-time vertical expansion of a non-conforming principal structure shall be permitted, provided that:
1. the expansion does not exceed the structure height limits specified in this Ordinance and,
2. in no case may the rear and side yard setbacks be less than five feet, and
3. in no case may the front yard setback be less than 15 feet.
4. in no case may the vertical expansion result in a structure height greater than that of the average height of
adjacent principal structures. Adjacency shall be considered the facing, rear, and side lots within a radius of
125’ from the lot boundary;
F. A one-time horizontal expansion shall be permitted, provided that:
1. the expansion shall extend no farther into the setback than the existing non-conforming structure, and
2. the area of the non-conforming structure shall not be more double the area of the original non-conforming
structure;
3. in no case may the lot exceed maximum lot coverage.
G. Expansion does not cause or worsen any safety problems, such as but not limited to reduction of sight distances
from driveways or intersections; and
H. The purpose of the expansion cannot reasonably be accomplished by expansion which is conforming because of
reasons such as the configuration of the structure, topography of the lot, and other such factors.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
241
I. An approved plan for expansion of a non-conforming structure shall be recorded by the applicant with the York
County Registry of Deeds, within 90 days of approval. The recorded plan must show the existing and proposed
footprint of the non-conforming structure, the existing and proposed structure height, the footprint of any other
structures on the parcel, the shoreland zone boundary and evidence of approval by the municipal review authority.
- AMENDED 03/18/1992, 11/07/2006, 11/04/2008, 05/20/2017
J. In order to verify compliance with an approved plan for expansion of a non-conforming structure, an as-built
plan shall be provided to the Code Enforcement Department prior to issuance of a final occupancy permit. -
AMENDED 11/05/2019
17.2.1.3 Concerning Manufactured Housing: Manufactured housing units which fail to meet the standards set forth in Section
13.5, which were lawfully established prior to 12/13/84, shall be considered non-conforming structures and may
continue and may be maintained, repaired, improved, and expanded only if the expansion results in bringing the
manufactured housing unit more in compliance with the standards of Article 13. No such non-conforming structure
may be replaced by another non-conforming structure, but may be replaced by a manufactured home that meets the
requirements of Article 13. A non-conforming structure may be moved to a different location on the same lot or parcel
of land as long as all applicable standards of the particular zoning district are met.
17.2.2 Patios, Steps, Decks
17.2.2.1 The addition of an open patio with no structures elevated above ground level does not constitute the enlargement
of a non-conforming structure.
17.2.2.2 The addition of a deck or steps constitutes an enlargement of a structure and must meet all the applicable
requirements of the zoning district in which the structure is located.
17.2.2.3 The addition of a fire escape required by any state or local fire regulation does not constitute the enlargement of
the structure.
17.2.3 Foundations
17.2.3.1 The replacing of a foundation below a structure which increases the height of that structure, constitutes the
enlargement of that structure and must meet the provisions of Section 17.2.1. However, a structure in the Flood
Hazard Area may be raised, if done to meet the requirements of the Floodplain Management Regulations.
- AMENDED 05/18/2002
17.2.3.2 Construction of a foundation under an existing dwelling which expands the habitable space (any space for living,
sleeping, bathing, eating, cooking, or dining purposes) constitutes the enlargement of that structure and must meet
all applicable requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
17.2.4 Reconstruction
17.2.4.1 Any non-conforming structure which is hereafter damaged or destroyed by fire, or by any cause other than the
willful act of the owner or his agent, may be restored or reconstructed within 24 months of the date of said damage
or destruction, provided that such restoration does not enlarge the size so that the structure becomes more nonconforming
than the prior non-conforming structure. Nothing in this Section prevents the demolition of the
remains of any structure so damaged or destroyed. For properties located in the Shoreland Overlay District, see
more restrictive requirements of §8.3.11.4.g.
17.2.4.2 Designated Historic Structures under the jurisdiction of the Local Historic District Regulations shall be
reconstructed in conformance with the guidelines in Article 12.
17.2.5 Except for buildings which are non-conforming with respect to required Shoreland setbacks, a non-conforming
building can be demolished and replaced with another building so long as the new building is no more nonconforming
than the building that is removed. To qualify under this provision, the property owner or applicant
shall have a Maine-licensed land surveyor locate the existing building on the lot and show it on a stamped plot
plan. The new building shall be constructed within two years. Once the new building is in place and prior to the
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
242
issuance of an occupancy permit, the surveyor must evaluate and certify that the new building is not more nonconforming
than the prior building in any respect. For a building which is non-conforming with respect to
required Shoreland setbacks, reconstruction or replacement is controlled by the standards of §8.3.11.4.
17.3 Non-Conforming Lots of Record
17.3.1 Contiguous Lots - Vacant or Partially Built
Adjacent lots that are or that come under common ownership shall comply with the following standards. However,
this section (§17.3.1) shall not apply to lots in a subdivision approved by the Planning Board of the Town of York, by
the York Harbor Village Corporation, or by the York Beach Village Corporation after September 23, 1971, provided
that the subdivision has vested its approval and the lots are still owned by the original subdivider.
A. Lots in the Shoreland Overlay District. When one or more of the adjacent lots lie partially or entirely in the
Shoreland overlay district, lot consolidation shall be controlled by the following requirements.
1. A lot without a principal structure which is or becomes under the same ownership as an adjoining lot shall
be merged with the adjoining lot to form a single lot when at least one of the lots is a non-conforming lot of
record. This provision shall not apply if the lots are served by a public sewer or can accommodate a
subsurface sewage disposal system in conformance with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal
Rules; and:
a. Each lot contains at least 100 feet of shore frontage and at least 20,000 square feet of lot area; or
b. Any lots that do not meet the shore frontage and lot size requirements of subparagraph “a” above are
reconfigured or combined so that each new lot contains at least 100 feet of shore frontage and 20,000
square feet of lot area.
2. No lot consolidated under this section shall be subdivided without approval of the Planning Board, and shall
be subject to the regulations in effect at the time of the new application.
B. Lots Not in the Shoreland Overlay District. When no part of any of the adjacent lots lies in the Shoreland Overlay
District, then the following controls apply.
1. Consolidation Criteria. Two or more adjacent lots that are or that become under the same ownership shall
be merged to form a single lot, provided that both of the following apply.
a. At least one of the lots shall be a nonconforming lot with an area smaller than:
1. 12,000 square feet in the RES-4, RES-5, RES-6 or YBVC zone if served by public water and public
sewer; or
2. 20,000 square feet in all other circumstances.
b. At least one of the lots shall not have a principal structure.
2. Consolidation Sequence. In situations involving more than two lots, consolidations shall be sequenced in a
manner that maximizes the number of lots remaining while ensuring compliance with §17.3.1.B.1, above.
3. Previously Consolidated Lots. Lots that were consolidated under prior standards may be re-established, or
transferable development rights obtained, as follows:
a. Lots that were consolidated under prior lot consolidation provisions may be redivided if both of the
following conditions are satisfied:
1. As a result of the re-division, none of the resulting redivided lots shall become smaller than:
a. 12,000 square feet in the RES-4, RES-5, RES-6 or YBVC zone if served by public water and
public sewer; or
b. 20,000 square feet in all other circumstances.
2. The applicant shall demonstrate that the lots are suitable for the proposed uses, without requiring
any variances.
The authority to regulate and standards for approval of re-divisions shall be determined by the State
Subdivision Law (M.R.S.A. Title 30-A §4401-4407) and the Town’s Site Plan and Subdivision
Regulations.
b. Lots that were consolidated under prior lot consolidation provisions which cannot be redivided in
accordance with the criteria in §17.3.1.B.3.a, above, shall be entitled to certain development rights which
may be transferred to another property in accordance with the standards of this section. This is a simple
form of Transfer of Development Rights (TDR). The following shall apply:
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
243
1. The TDR shall only be established for any undeveloped lot which was required by the Town to
be merged with another lot. Lots, in their pre-merged condition, with any building development
shall not be eligible.
2. The area of the former lot from which TDR is to occur shall be permanently restricted to prevent
the construction of any new building, by means such as a deed restriction, prior to or concurrent
with approval of the TDR.
3. The TDR shall be available to the developer of any subdivision located within the Growth Area
as designated in the Comprehensive Plan.
4. The net buildable area of the receiving subdivision shall be increased by the net buildable area of
the sending lot, but no subdivision shall use TDR credits to increase its density by more than 20%
above that otherwise permitted.
5. This option requires approval of the Planning Board.
- AMENDED 05/20/2000, 11/07/2006
17.3.2 Vacant Lots
A vacant non-conforming lot not contiguous to another lot owned by the same person or corporation, may be built
upon. A vacant non-conforming lot which has been re-divided pursuant to §17.3.1.B.3.a or which is not required to be
consolidated per §17.3.1 may be built upon even if held in common ownership with the adjacent lot. In any case, the
structure must conform to all applicable dimensional standards. - AMENDED 11/06/2007
17.3.3 Built Lots
A non-conforming lot on which a conforming structure is located is subject to the following restrictions:
17.3.3.1 The structure may be repaired, maintained, and improved, and may be enlarged provided that all dimensional
requirements of the zoning district in which the lot is located, with the exception of lot size and/or lot frontage, can
be met.
17.3.3.2 Accessory structures may be constructed on such non-conforming lots, provided that all dimensional requirements
of the zoning district in which it is located, with the exception of lot size and lot frontage, can be met.
17.3.4 Dimensional Requirements for Non-Conforming Lots of Record
The following dimensional requirements shall apply to all non-conforming lots of record.
17.3.4.1 The width of irregularly (non-rectangular) shaped non-conforming lots shall be measured at the zoning ordinanceestablished
minimum front yard setback line.
17.3.4.2 In Districts GEN-1, GEN-2, GEN-3, YVC-1, YVC-2 RES-1, RES-2, and RES-3 side yard setbacks must be at least
12% of the width, and the rear yard setback must be at least 12% of the average depth, but in no case may the side
yard or rear yard setback be less than 5 ft., and in no case shall setbacks for non-conforming lots of record be made
to be greater than that required for conforming lots in that base zone unless prescribed elsewhere in this ordinance.
- AMENDED 05/21/2016
17.3.4.3 Districts YBVC, RES-5, RES-6, and RES-7: Side yard setback must be at least 12% of the width, and the rear yard
setback must be at least 12% of the average depth, but in no case may the side yard or rear yard setback be less than
5 ft., and in no case shall setbacks for non-conforming lots of record be made to be greater than that required for
conforming lots in that base zone. - AMENDED 05/17/2008, 11/04/2008, 11/06/2012
17.3.4.4 Districts BUS-1, BUS-2, and RES-4: The dimensional requirements of the zone shall apply. There are no exceptions
for non-conforming lots of record.
17.3.5 Contiguous Built Lots
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
244
If two or more contiguous lots are owned by the same person or corporation, if all or part of the lots do not meet the
dimensional requirements of this ordinance, and if a principal use exists on each lot, the non-conforming lots may be
conveyed separately or together.
17.3.6 Uses Requiring Lots Larger Than the Zoning District Minimum
No use that requires a lot area or frontage which is greater than the established minimum lot area or frontage for the
zoning district in which it is located is permissible on a non-conforming lot.
17.3.7 Vested Rights
Vested rights to maintain a non-conforming use do not arise from the mere filing of a notice of intent to build, an
application for a building permit, or an application for required state permits and approvals. Such rights arise only
when substantial construction of a structure is begun prior to the enactment or amendment of this ordinance. Such
construction must be legal at the time it is commenced and the owner must be in possession of and in compliance with
all validly issued permits, both state and local.
17.4. Non-Conforming Design
A. A non-conforming design may continue indefinitely without change.
B. A building or use on a property with non-conforming design shall be permitted to expand or change provided
the property after the expansion is closer to conformity than it was prior to the expansion. Where there are
multiple aspects of non-conformity, each aspect must be improved in some manner. The burden shall be
on the applicant to establish the baseline of non-conforming conditions and to show how the required
reductions in each aspect of non-conformity will be met. - AMENDED 11/07/2006
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
245
ARTICLE EIGHTEEN
ADMINISTRATION
This Ordinance shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer, who shall sign and issue all permits and notices required of
the Officer by this Ordinance. The Officer shall not issue any permit that will be a violation of this ordinance. - AMENDED
11/08/1994
18.1 Route One Use Permits - Applicable to Route One-1, Route One-2, Route One-3, Route One-4, Route One-
5 and Route One-6 Zoning Districts - AMENDED 11/04/1997
18.1.1 Route One Use Permit
As used throughout this Ordinance, a Route One Use Permit is a permit issued by the CEO or an approval issued
by the Planning Board for the establishment, modification or expansion of a use within any of the Route One base
zones. - AMENDED 11/05/1996, 05/19/2012
18.1.2 Jurisdiction
The Code Enforcement Officer shall process and approve or deny all applications for Route One Use Permits on
which the Officer is empowered to act pursuant to Article 4, Use Regulations. The Code Enforcement Officer is
also empowered to administratively review and approve applications to establish a new non-residential use or to
change from one non-residential use to another, provided: the use occupies not more than 2,500 square feet of floor
area of an existing building; the use does not have outside storage or display; the use does not involve the sale or
lease of vehicles; the change does not create or worsen any non-conformity; impervious surfaces remain unchanged
or are reduced; and the applicant is subject to the same performance standards which would apply for an application
to the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall hear and approve, approve with modifications or conditions, or
deny all applications for Route One Use Permits on which it is empowered to act pursuant to Article 4, Use
Regulations, except as noted above. No Route One Use Permit shall be issued unless authorization for it is made
in this Ordinance. - AMENDED 11/07/2000, 11/07/2006, 05/19/2012
18.1.3 Activities Requiring Use Permits
A Route One Use Permit shall be required for any proposed land use or activity so indicated in Article 4, Use
Regulations. A Route One Use Permit shall also be required for any proposed change in land-use and for the
resumption of any conforming use which has been discontinued for 2 years or more. - AMENDED 11/05/1996,
05/19/2012
18.1.4 Application Procedure
18.1.4.1 Permit Issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
See §18-A.4. - AMENDED 11/05/1996, 11/07/2006, 11/03/2009
18.1.4.2 Permit Issued by the Planning Board
Applications submitted to the Planning Board shall be reviewed under the Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations.
If the design and/or performance standards of the Zoning Ordinance are in conflict with those of the Site Plan
& Subdivision Regulations, the standards of the Zoning Ordinance shall apply. - AMENDED 11/05/1996,
11/04/1997, 11/07/2006
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
246
18.2 Shoreland Permits
NOTE: The Town, on May 9, 1992, adopted comprehensive revisions to Section 18.2, Shoreland Permits, from the
March 18, 1992 consolidated Zoning Ordinance adopted by the Town. This Section reflects amendments
made subsequent to the May 9, 1992 vote. - AMENDED 11/04/2008
18.2.1 Permits Required
No person shall engage in any activity or use of land or structure, or expand, change, or replace an existing use or
structure, or renew a discontinued non-conforming use without first obtaining a Shoreland permit, when such a
permit is required. - AMENDED 11/04/2008
18.2.2 Permit Application
An application for permit shall be submitted in writing to the Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall determine if the application is subject to review procedures identified in 18.2.3 or 18.2.4. The Code
Enforcement Officer or Planning Board may require the submission of whatever information is necessary to
determine conformance with provisions of the Shoreland Overlay District. - AMENDED 11/08/1994,
11/05/1996, 05/18/2002
18.2.3 Reserved
18.2.4 Procedure for Permits Issued by Code Enforcement Officer
Permits subject solely to Code Enforcement Office review are identified in the Schedule of Use Regulations, Section
8.2.1. - AMENDED 05/18/2002, 11/08/2011
The Code Enforcement Officer shall determine if the application is complete and contains all information necessary
to enable the Officer to make a determination.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall review the application to determine conformance with provisions of the
Shoreland Overlay District and Article 18.2.6, and may impose conditions on a permit to ensure conformance.
- AMENDED 11/05/1996, 05/18/2002, 11/04/2008, 11/03/2009
18.2.5 Procedure for Permits subject to Planning Board review.
18.2.5.1. Certain minor uses or construction that are otherwise subject to Planning Board approval may be issued
administratively by the Code Enforcement Officer. These shall be limited to the following circumstances:
a. An applicant that proposes internal changes only to an existing structure located in the Limited Residential,
Mixed Use or Stream Protection Subdistrict, provided no footprint, volumetric or height expansion is
proposed, and there is no adverse impact on the adequacy of an existing subsurface wastewater disposal
system.
b. An applicant that proposes to construct a deck or alter an existing deck attached to a structure located in the
Limited Residential or Mixed Use Subdistrict, provided the new construction complies with shoreland
setbacks.
- AMENDED 11/03/1998, 05/18/2002, 11/04/2008
18.2.5.2 An application for a Shoreland Permit must be made to the Community Development Department. If the application
appears to be complete it shall be forwarded to the Planning Board for its consideration. - AMENDED 11/04/1997,
05/18/2002, 11/04/2008, 11/03/2009
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
247
18.2.5.3 Shoreland Permits normally issued by a Code Enforcement Officer may be issued by the Planning Board
concurrently with processing of related applications. - AMENDED 11/04/2008
18.2.5.4 Reserved. - AMENDED 11/03/2009
18.2.5.5 The Board shall use the standards identified in Article 8 and §18.2.6 to make its decision, and shall follow the
procedural requirements of Article 18-A. The Board may establish reasonable conditions to ensure conformity with
the purposes of the Shoreland Overlay District. The conditions of approval may include requirements for mitigation
to lessen impacts to resource values projected to occur from the proposed use or activity. - AMENDED
05/18/2002, 11/04/2008, 11/03/2009
18.2.6 Standards for Review of Shoreland Permits
The following standards shall be applied in making a determination to approve or deny and application for a
Shoreland Permit. - AMENDED 05/18/2002
a. Will not result in unsafe or unhealthful conditions;
b. Will not result in erosion or sedimentation;
c. Will not result in water pollution;
d. Will not adversely impact spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life, bird and other wildlife habitat;
e. Will conserve shoreland vegetation;
f. Will conserve visual points of access to inland and coastal waters, and shoreland scenes and vistas as viewed
from public facilities and public (Town and State) roads; - AMENDED 11/04/1997
g. Will conserve actual points of public access to waters;
h. Will conserve natural beauty;
i. Will avoid problems associated with floodplain development and use; and
j. Will not interfere with existing navigational uses; and
k. Will not unreasonably alter the natural flow or storage capacity of any waterbody; and
l. Will adequately provide for the disposal of all wastewater;
m. Will conserve protective buffers from the normal high water mark of adjacent wetlands; and
n. Will conserve the amount of pervious surface. - AMENDED 11/04/1997
18.2.7 Special Use Permit for the Resource Protection District
The Planning Board following the process outlined in Article 18.2.5 may issue a special use permit to allow
construction of one (1) single family residence in a Resource Protection District if the applicant demonstrates that
all of the following conditions are met:
a. The lot on which the single family residence is proposed has no existing conforming or non-conforming
structures and was established and recorded in the
York County Registry of Deeds prior to the lot being designated Resource Protection and located in the
Resource Protection Subdistrict on the Official Shoreland Overlay District Map.
b. There is no location on the property, other than a location within the Resource Protection Subdistrict,
where the single family residence can be built.
c. The proposed location of all buildings, sewage disposal system and other improvements are subject to
Septic Standards 8.3.9 and the Town Supplemental Subsurface Disposal Rules. Other location
requirements are:
1. Located on natural slopes of less than 20% and,
2. Located outside the floodway of the 100 year floodplain along rivers and artificially formed great ponds
along rivers and outside the velocity zone in areas subject to tides, based on detailed flood insurance
studies and as delineated on the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s Flood Boundary and
Floodway Maps and Flood Insurance Rate Maps: all buildings including basements, are elevated at least
three feet above the 100 year floodplain elevation; and the development is otherwise in compliance
with any applicable municipal floodplain ordinance (Septic Standards 8.3.9 and Town Supplemental
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
248
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules). If the floodway is not shown on the Federal Emergency
Management Agency maps, it is deemed to be 1/2 the width of the 100 year floodplain. For purposes
of this subparagraph, “floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the 100 year flood without cumulatively increasing the
water surface elevation more than one foot in height and “velocity zone” means an area of special flood
hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of the primary frontal dune along an open coast and
any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources.
d. The total footprint, including cantilevered or similar overhanging extensions, of all principal and accessory
structures is limited to a maximum of 1,500 square feet. This limitation shall not be altered by variance. -
AMENDED 11/04/2008, 11/06/2018
e. All structures, except functionally water dependent structures, are set back from the normal high water line
of a waterbody or upland edge of a wetland to the greatest practical extent, but not less than 100 feet
horizontal distance. In determining the greatest practical extent, the Planning Board shall consider the depth
of the lot, the slope of the land, the potential for soil erosion, the type and amount of vegetation to be
removed, the proposed building site’s elevation in regard to the floodplain and its proximity to moderate
value and high value wetlands. - AMENDED 11/04/2008
f. The Board of Appeals can grant an administrative appeal, but cannot grant a variance to the terms of Special
Use Permit. - AMENDED 05/18/2002
18.2.8 Expiration of Permit
18.2.8.1 A Shoreland Permit issued after May 9, 1992 shall expire one year from the date of issuance if a substantial
start is not made in construction or in the use of the property during that period. If a substantial start is made
within one year of the issuance of the permit, the applicant shall have one additional year to complete the
project, at which time the permit shall expire. - AMENDED 11/04/2008
18.2.8.2 For all residential Shoreland Permits issued on or prior to May 9, 1992, all improvements identified in the
approved Shoreland Permit must be completed by November 5, 1998 or the Permit shall lapse and become
void on November 6, 1998.
18.2.8.3 For all non-residential Shoreland Permits issued on or prior to May 9, 1992:
a. If a substantial start was not made in construction of required improvements and structures
identified in the approved Shoreland Permit by November 5, 1998, then the Permit shall have
lapsed and become void on November 6, 1998.
b. If a substantial start was made in construction of all required improvements and structures
identified in the approved Shoreland Permit by November 5, 1998, then all improvements
identified in the approved Permit must be completed by November 5, 2002 or the Permit shall
lapse and become void on November 6, 2002.
c. Any permits or approvals other than the Shoreland Permit that have lapsed must be obtained prior
to resumption of work. All other permits and approvals shall comply with standards in effect at
the time of the issuance of the permit.
d. For purposes of this section, “substantial start” shall mean the applicant has completed at least
50% (based on cost of construction) of all required improvements and new structures.
e. This section (§18.2.8.3) shall be retroactive to April 1, 1997. - AMENDED 11/07/2000
18.3 Delegation of Small Windmill Review Authority
The Planning Board is empowered to review and permit Small Windmills.
18.3.1 Application Procedure
Any application to the Planning Board for a Small Windmill shall follow the public notice process for a onestep
Minor Site Plan.
18.3.2 Submission Requirements:
a. A complete Planning Board Application form.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
249
b. A plan of the proposed Small Windmill, showing the general arrangement of adjacent streets, buildings,
utilities and other structures; the plan shall indicate the location of existing trees and other significant
site features; the type and location of plants proposed in any screening plan for the facility and the
method of fencing, if any; the proposed extent of site clearing shall be delineated;
c. A copy of the most recent deed for the property, and the source deed if the current deed differs from
the source deed;
d. Proof of ownership or evidence of the applicant’s right, title or interest to the property shall be
submitted; a copy of all easements, rights-of-way, or other encumbrances currently affecting the
property shall be submitted;
e. Location of the proposed Small Windmill in relation to designated Scenic Resources superimposed on
a USGS 7.5 minute topographical map.
f. The application shall include a visual impact analysis of the Small Windmill as installed, which shall
include:
1. a statement addressing steps that have been taken to mitigate any potential adverse visual impacts;
2. any visual screening incorporated into the development that is intended to lessen the system’s
visual prominence;
3. the color of the system’s components;
4. elevations showing the proposed Small Windmill in relation to its surroundings; and
5. a Small Windmill within the viewshed of a Scenic Resource shall include photo simulations from
affected public rights of way.
g. The applicant shall submit Small Windmill specifications, including manufacturer and model, rotor
diameter, and evidence that the proposed tower height does not exceed the height recommended by
the manufacturer of the wind turbine; and
h. The applicant shall provide documentation from the manufacturer or a Maine-licensed Professional
Engineer (PE) that the Small Windmill will not produce noise levels in excess of 50 dBA at the closest
neighboring property line.
- AMENDED 05/29/2009
18.4 Watershed Protection Overlay District Permits -- The application and administrative procedures for both permitted
uses and conditional uses within the Watershed Protection Overlay District can be found in Sections 10.5 and 10.6.
18.5 Wetland Permits – Wetland Permits may be issued by the Code Enforcement Officer, or may be issued by the
Planning Board concurrently with processing of related applications. - AMENDED 11/07/2000, 11/04/2008
18.6 Historic Overlay District -- The application and administrative procedures for this overlay district can be found in
Article 12.
18.7 Conversion of Seasonal Dwellings -- The application and administrative procedures for the conversion of a seasonal
dwelling can be found in Article 14.
18.8 Appeals and Board of Appeals
18.8.1 Board of Appeals
18.8.1.1 A Board of Appeals is hereby established. The Board shall consist of five Members and three Associate Members
who shall be residents of the Town of York and who shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen. The term of
office of the members of the Board of Appeals shall be three years. The term of office of the Associate Members
shall be three years. No business of the Board shall be transacted unless a total of five members and associate
members are present and able to act. A vacancy in the office of Member or Associate Member shall be filled for
the unexpired term only. Any Member or Associate Member of the Board of Appeals may be removed for cause
by the Board of Selectmen upon written charges and after Public Hearing for which at least ten days notice shall
be given. The members and Associate Members of the Board of Appeals shall receive no compensation for their
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
250
services. The Board of Appeals shall annually select a Chairman and Secretary from its own membership. The
Board of Appeals shall adopt from time to time such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to carry out
the duties conferred on it by this ordinance. - AMENDED 05/09/1992
18.8.1.2 The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, recording the vote of each Member or Associate Member on
each matter coming before the Board. The minutes of the Board's proceedings and all the writings required by
this ordinance made by the Board shall be a public record.
18.8.2 Powers and Duties
The powers and duties of the Board of Appeals shall be in all respects as prescribed by Title 30-A M.R.S.A., Section
4353. Among the powers granted, the Board shall have the following powers:
18.8.2.1 The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide Appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination
made by any person or Board charged with the administration of this Ordinance. Additionally, the Board shall
hear and decide appeals from any procedural error made by any person or Board charged with the administration
of this ordinance, or by the failure of such person or Board to act.
18.8.2.2 To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this Ordinance upon which the Board is specifically
authorized by this Ordinance.
A. The Board of Appeals, after the submission and review of all information requested, may grant a special exception
for those uses identified in Article Four, as requiring a special exception.
1. For non-residential uses, the special exception shall be issued if the following criteria are met:
a. The proposed use will not adversely impact adjacent properties.
b. The proposed use will not adversely impact allowable uses in the district where the proposed use is to be
located.
c. The proposed use and its location will not adversely impact the health, safety, and welfare of the Town.
d. The proposed use shall be in harmony with and promote the general purposes and intent of the Town of
York Zoning Ordinance.
e. All requirements of Subsection 2, below, are also met.
2. The approval of each special exception shall be subject to meeting all other requirements of the zoning district
in which the special exception is located. The Board of Appeals may subject approvals of special exceptions to
conditions more restrictive than the minimum requirements of the zoning ordinance. To be approved, the
following conditions must be met:
a. Will not adversely impact traffic congestion and safety.
b. Will not result in noise, odor, or glare that adversely impact adjacent properties.
c. Will not result in dust, fumes, vapors, or gasses that adversely impact adjacent properties.
d. Will minimize and detain on site all stormwater run-off such that it will not adversely impact adjacent
properties.
e. Will be in compliance with Town of York Erosion and Sedimentation Control Standards and as such will
not result in erosion and sedimentation.
f. Will provide adequate buffers and screening from adjacent properties.
g. Will provide adequate and environmentally safe storage of any explosive materials, chemicals, or fuels.
h. Will provide adequate landscaping and grading to preserve the natural terrain.
i. Will provide a harmonious relationship of any proposed building to the surrounding environment.
j. Will provide for removal of solid waste generated on site in a timely and environmentally safe manner.
k. Will provide adequate off -street parking.
l. Will not adversely impact property values of adjacent or nearby properties.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
251
B. The Board of Appeals, after the submission and review of all information requested, may grant a special exception
for those provisions as specified in this Ordinance other than Article 4. The criteria for approval shall be those
cited in the text which establishes the special exception (see, as an example: §7.9.A).
- AMENDED 11/06/2007
18.8.2.3 To authorize a variance from the terms of the ordinance, as provided herein. A variance is authorized only for
lot area, lot coverage by structures, and setbacks. A variance shall not be granted to permit a use or structure
otherwise prohibited. Variances shall not be granted to reduce the setback from the normal high water mark of
a public water supply as required in Article 10. A variance shall only be granted where, owing to special conditions,
a literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance will result in undue hardship and where the spirit of the
ordinance is observed. The term "undue hardship" as used in this subsection means:
a. The land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is granted;
b. The need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not to the general
condition in the neighborhood;
c. The granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality; and
d. The hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner.
The Board of Appeals shall limit any variances granted as strictly as possible in order to preserve the terms of
the ordinance as much as possible, and it may impose such conditions to a variance as it deems necessary.
18.8.2.4 Before granting a variance on property located in the Shoreland Overlay District, the following additional
standards and procedures shall be required:
a. The Board shall notify the York Conservation Commission at the time it notifies abutters of the
pending application, and the Commission shall have a right to be heard at the public hearing;
- AMENDED 11/04/2008
b. The Board must make written findings which shall describe how the proposal would meet all
remaining standards of the Shoreland Overlay District; - AMENDED 11/04/2008
c. Where setbacks from a protected resource are to be varied, the Board shall protect the remaining
buffer to the maximum extent possible, and may require enhancements of the buffer where this
is necessary to adequately protect the shoreland resourced. If the variance pertains to a single
family residence or its accessory buildings, the construction or expansion may be allowed if either
of the following two conditions is met:
1. there is no expansion of the footprint of the existing buildings; or
2. the total area of the footprint of the house and all accessory buildings is no greater than
1,000 square feet. - AMENDED 11/04/2003, 05/22/2004, 11/04/2008
d. If the variance pertains to a single family residence or its accessory buildings, the construction or
expansion may be allowed if either of the following two conditions is met:
1. there is no expansion of the footprint of the existing buildings; or
2. the total area of the footprint of the house and all accessory buildings is no greater than
1,000 square feet. - AMENDED 11/07/2006
e. Before granting a variance on property located in the Floodplain Management Overlay District
the Board must make a determination that the applicant has demonstrated good and sufficient
cause for the variance, and the existence of the variance will not cause a conflict with other state,
federal or local laws or ordinances.
f. A copy of each variance request, including the application and all supporting information supplied
by the applicant, shall be forwarded by the municipality to the Commissioner of Maine DEP at
least 20 days prior to action by the Board of Appeals. Any comments received from the
Commissioner prior to the action by the Board of Appeals shall be made part of the record and
shall be taken into consideration by the Board of Appeals. - AMENDED 05/20/2000,
11/04/2008
18.8.2.5 Variances shall not be granted within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the
base flood discharge would result. The Board of Appeals must make a determination that should a flood
comparable to the base flood occur, the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional
threat to public safety, public expense, or create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public or conflict
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
252
with existing local laws or ordinances. Any variance granted in a floodplain management area shall be the
minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
18.8.2.6 Reserved
18.8.2.7 Reserved
18.8.2.8 Appeals involving Route One Use Permits. If the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board disapproves
an application for a Route One Use Permit, or grants a Use Permit approval with conditions that are objectionable
to the applicant or to any abutting land owner or any aggrieved party, or when it is claimed that the provisions of
the ordinance do not apply to a Route One Use Permit, or that the true intent and meaning of the ordinance has
been misconstrued or wrongfully interpreted, the applicant, an abutting land owner, or aggrieved party may appeal
the decision as follows:
a. When errors of administrative procedure are found, the Board of Appeals shall refer the case back to
the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board for rectification.
b. When errors of interpretation are found, the Town's Board of Appeals may modify or reverse the order
or action but may not alter the conditions attached by the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning
Board. All changes in conditions, other than changes made by the granting of a variance, shall be made
by the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board in accordance with the Board of Appeals'
interpretation.
c. Appeals involving conditions imposed by the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board, or a
decision to deny approval, shall be from the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board to the
Superior Court, according to State Law, when such appeals do not involve administrative procedures
and interpretation.
18.8.2.9 Disability Variance. The Board of Appeals may grant a variance to an owner of a dwelling for the purpose of
making that dwelling accessible to a person with a disability who resides in or regularly uses the dwelling. The
Board shall restrict any variance granted under this subsection solely to the installation of equipment or the
construction of structures necessary for access to or egress from the dwelling by the person with the disability.
The Board may impose conditions on the variance, including limiting the variance to the duration of the disability
or to the time that the person with the disability lives in the dwelling. For the purposes of this subsection, a
disability has the same meaning as a physical or mental handicap under Title 5, Section 4553 and the term
“structures necessary for access to
or egress from the dwelling” is defined to include railing, wall or roof systems necessary for the safety and
effectiveness of the structure. - AMENDED 11/07/1995
18.8.2.10 Minor Variance from Dimensional Standards
A. Purpose. Consistent with MRSA Title 30-A §4353.4-C, this section provides the Appeals Board with a
limited degree of flexibility to help property owners better utilize their property for building purposes.
B. Standards. A minor variance from dimensional standards shall be issued only when the petitioner
demonstrates that all of the following standards are met:
1. Strict application of the Ordinance to the petitioner and the petitioners property would cause a
practical difficulty (“Practical Difficulty” is defined here to mean that the strict application of the
Ordinance to the property precludes the ability of the petitioner to pursue a use permitted in the
zoning district in which the property is located and results in significant economic injury to the
petitioner);
2. The need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not to the general
condition of the neighborhood;
3. The granting of a variance will not produce an undesirable change in the character of the
neighborhood and will not unreasonably detrimentally affect the use or market value of abutting
properties;
4. The practical difficulty is not the result of action taken by the petitioner or a prior owner;
5. No other feasible alternative to a variance is available to the petitioner;
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
253
6. The granting of a variance will not unreasonably adversely affect the natural environment; and
7. The property is not located in whole or in part within the Shoreland Overlay District.
C. Limitations. The following limitations shall apply.
1. A variance under this section may only be granted for setbacks from property boundaries, and
street frontage. - AMENDED 05/22/2004, 05/29/2009
2. In no case may a variance reduce the dimensional requirement to less than 80% of the originally
required measure.
D. Variance Recorded. A minor variance from dimensional requirements must be recorded consistent with
§18.8.3.7. - AMENDED 11/07/2000
18.8.3 Appeals Procedure and Board Decisions
18.8.3.1 An administrative appeal or variance shall be filed within 30 days of action taken by the official or Board charged
with the administration of this Ordinance. Thirty (30) days is defined to mean the date the official written
notification of decision is issued by the Code Enforcement Officer or the Board. If the 30th day occurs on a
non-work day for the Town, the final date for filing of an appeal shall be the next regular work day for the Town.
A special exception may be filed at any time by an applicant, provided the Board of Appeals has not denied an
application for the same property and use within one year of the date of the new application for a special exception.
An administrative appeal, special exception or variance shall be filed with the Board of Appeals or its designee on
forms provided by the Town. - AMENDED 11/07/1995, 11/05/1996, 11/03/2009
18.8.3.2 Reserved. - AMENDED 11/08/2005
18.8.3.3 The Board of Appeals shall schedule a Public Hearing on all appeal applications within 60 days of the filing of a
completed appeal application. Notice of the Public Hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Town of York and mailed by certified mail to the parties involved and all abutters not
less than 7 days prior to such hearing. - AMENDED 05/22/2004
18.8.3.4 The Board of Appeals shall render a decision on an application not later than 30 days from the date of the final
Hearing. The final decision on any matter before the Board shall be made by written order signed by the Chair
and shall include all materials identified as the public record. The public record shall include: a transcript or tape
recording of the testimony; the exhibits, together with all papers and requests filed in the proceeding; a statement
of findings and conclusions, as well as the basis for these findings and conclusions, upon all the material issues of
fact, law or discretion presented; and the appropriate order, relief or denial of relief. Notice of any decision shall
be mailed or hand delivered to the appellant, the appellant’s representative or agent, the Planning Board and the
municipal officers within 7 days of the Board’s decision. - AMENDED 11/07/1995
18.8.3.5 The Board of Appeals may reconsider any decision reached under this Section within 45 days of its prior decision.
A request to the Board to reconsider must be filed within 10 days of the decision to be reconsidered. A
reconsideration vote and the action taken on that reconsideration must be completed within 45 days of the date
of the vote on the original decision. The Board may conduct additional Hearings and receive additional evidence
and testimony regarding the reconsideration during this time period. - AMENDED 11/08/2005
18.8.3.6 Any party may take an appeal within 45 days of the vote on the original decision, to Superior Court from any
order, relief or denial in accordance with the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 80B. This time period may be
extended by the court upon motion for good cause shown. The Hearing before the Superior Court must be
without a jury.
18.8.3.7 A variance granted by the Board of Appeals must be filed with the York County Registry of Deeds with 90 days
of the vote of the Board to grant the variance. A variance not filed within 90 days shall expire. - AMENDED
11/07/1995
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
254
18.9 Site Design Review/Board of Design Review -- Applicable to RES-4, BUS-1, BUS-2 Districts
18.9.1 Findings and Objectives
Excessive uniformity, dissimilarity, inappropriateness or poor quality of design in the exterior appearance of
structures and signs and the lack of proper attention to site development and landscaping in the business,
commercial, and certain residential areas hinders the harmonious development of the area, impairs the desirability
of residence, investment or occupation in the area, limits the opportunity to attain the optimum use and value of
land and improvement, adversely affects the stability and value of property, produces degeneration of property in
such areas with attendant deterioration of conditions affecting the peace, health and welfare of the inhabitants, and
destroys a proper relationship between the taxable value of property and the cost of municipal services therefor.
The purpose and objectives of site development requirements and the site design review procedure are to:
18.9.1.1 Encourage originality, flexibility and innovation in site planning and development, including the architecture,
landscaping and graphic design of said development;
18.9.1.2 Discourage monotonous, drab, unsightly, dreary and inharmonious development;
18.9.1.3 Conserve the area's natural beauty and visual character and charm by insuring that structures, signs, and other
improvements are properly related to their sites, and to surrounding sites and structures, with due regard to the
aesthetic qualities of the natural terrain and landscaping, and that proper attention is given to exterior appearances
of the area's structures, signs and other improvements;
18.9.1.4 Protect and enhance the area's appeal to tourists and visitors.
18.9.1.5 Stabilize and improve property values and prevent blighted areas and thus, increase tax revenues.
18.9.1.6 Achieve the beneficial influence of pleasant environments for living and working on behavioral patterns and, thus
decrease the cost of governmental services.
18.9.1.7 Foster civic pride and community spirit so as to improve the quality and quantity of citizen participation in local
government and in community growth, change and improvement.
18.9.1.8 Sustain the comfort, health, tranquility and contentment of residents and attract new residents by reason of the
area's favorable environment, and thus, to promote and protect the peace, health and welfare of the Town of
York.
18.9.2 Board of Design Review
There is hereby established a Board of Design Review whose members, term, officers, and manner of transacting
business shall be as follows:
18.9.2.1 Members. The Board shall consist of five members, each of whom shall be a resident of the Town of York.
- AMENDED 05/17/2014
18.9.2.2 Appointment; Term. The members of the Board shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen for 3-year terms,
maintaining a staggered rotation such that only one or two appointments expire each year. The Board of Selectmen
shall appoint a qualified person to fill the vacancy for the remainder of any unexpired term. - AMENDED
05/17/2014
18.9.2.3 Vacancies; Removal. Any vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term as original appointments
are herein provided. The Board of Selectmen may remove any member of the Board, after hearing, for misconduct
or non-performance of duty.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
255
18.9.2.4 Officers. The Board shall elect a Chair, Vice-Chair and Secretary at the first meeting on or after each July 1st. During
the absence, disability or disqualification of the chairman and vice-chairman, the remaining members shall select an
acting chairman. AMENDED 5/17/2014
18.9.2.5 Quorum; Voting. A quorum shall consist of three members. The Concurrence of a majority of the members of the
Board present and voting shall be necessary to determine any questions before the Board. - AMENDED
11/07/2000
18.9.2.6 Meeting Records. The Board shall hold one regular meeting each month. However, a meeting need not be held if
there are no drawings or plans submitted for review by the Board. The deliberations and proceedings of the Board
shall be public records. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings and such minutes shall be public records.
18.9.2.7 Rules. The Board may adopt and amend by-laws to govern the conduct of its business consistent with Robert’s Rules
of Order and the provisions of this ordinance. - AMENDED 05/17/2014
18.9.3 Jurisdiction and Powers of the Board
18.9.3.1 No building permit shall be issued for a new non-residential building, and no sign permit shall be issued until the
plans, drawings, sketches, and other documents required under Section 18.9.5 have been reviewed and approved by
the Board in conformity with the criteria specified in Section 18.9.4.
18.9.3.2 Construction, site development and landscaping shall be carried out in substantial accord with the plans, drawings,
sketches and other documents approved by the Board, unless altered with Board approval. Nothing in this
subsection shall be construed to prevent ordinary repair, maintenance and replacement of any part of the building
or landscaping which does not involve a substantial change from the goals and objectives of Section 18.9.1. Where
a building permit is required, it shall be the responsibility of the Code Enforcement Officer to determine whether a
"substantial change" would result from the proposed action.
18.9.3.3 The Board may authorize variances from the site development requirements, off-street parking and loading and
supplemental provisions of this ordinance which are subject to the jurisdiction of the Board, where it can be shown
that by reason of exceptional size, shape or topographic conditions, or other special or unusual circumstances, the
literal enforcement of such requirements would not allow reasonable development to take place. Variances shall be
considered in conjunction with the site design review process and subject to procedural and appellate provisions
applicable to such process.
18.9.4 Criteria and Standards
The following standards shall be utilized by the Board in reviewing the plans, drawings, sketches and other documents
required under Section 18.9.5. These standards are intended to provide a frame of reference for the applicant in the
development of the site and building plans as well as a method of review for the Board. These standards shall not be
regarded as inflexible requirements. They are not intended to discourage creativity, invention and innovation.
18.9.4.1 Preservation of Landscape: The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar as practicable by minimizing
tree and soil removal, and any grade changes shall be in keeping with the general appearance of neighboring
developed areas.
18.9.4.2 Relation of Proposed Buildings to Environment: Proposed structures shall be related harmoniously to the terrain
and to existing buildings in the vicinity that have a visual relationship to the proposed buildings. The achievement
of such relationship may include the enclosure of space in conjunction with other existing buildings or other
proposed buildings and the creation of focal points with respect to avenues of approach, terrain features or other
buildings.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
256
18.9.4.3 Drives, Parking and Circulation: With respect to vehicular and pedestrian circulation, including walkways, interior
drives and parking, special attention shall be given to location and number of access points, general interior
circulation, separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and arrangement of parking areas that are safe and
convenient and, insofar as practicable, do not detract from the design of proposed buildings and structures and the
neighboring properties.
18.9.4.4 Surface Water Drainage: Special attention shall be given to proper site surface drainage so that removal of surface
waters will not adversely affect neighboring properties or the public storm drainage system.
18.9.4.5 Utility Service: Whenever feasible, electric, telephone and other utility lines shall be underground. Any utility
installations remaining above ground shall be located so as to have a harmonious relation to neighboring properties
and the site. The proposed method of sanitary sewage disposal from all buildings shall be indicated.
18.9.4.6 Advertising Features: The size, location, design, color texture, lighting and materials of all exterior signs and outdoor
advertising structures or features shall not detract from the design of proposed buildings and structures and the
surrounding properties. Individual off-premises signs shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area; on-premises
signs shall, in aggregate, not total over one hundred (100) square feet in area, with no single sign exceeding fifty (50)
square feet in area. No sign shall exceed ten (10) feet in any dimension. Illuminated signs shall be indirectly lit.
18.9.4.7 Special Features: Exposed storage areas, exposed machinery installations, service areas, truck loading areas, utility
buildings and structures and similar accessory areas and structures shall be subject to such setbacks, screen plantings
or other screening methods as shall reasonably be required to prevent their being incongruous with the existing or
contemplated environment and the surrounding areas.
18.9.4.8 Application of Design Standards: The standards of review outlined in Sections 18.9.4.1 through 18.9.4.7 above also
apply to all accessory buildings, structures, exterior signs and other site features, however related to the major
buildings or structures.
a. The Board shall also be guided by the objectives of Section 18.9.1, and such objectives shall serve as
additional criteria and standards.
b. Unless otherwise authorized under this ordinance, the Board shall not have the authority to waive or
modify the site development requirements of this ordinance, the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance
or the requirements of any other applicable ordinance.
18.9.5 Procedure
A prospective applicant for a building or other permit who is subject to site design review shall submit the following to the Board
of Design Review:
a. A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the proposed layout of all structures and other improvements including, where
appropriate, driveways, pedestrian walks, landscaped areas, fences, walls, off-street parking and loading areas. The site
plan shall indicate the location of entrances and exits and the direction of traffic flow into and out of off-street parking
and loading areas, the location of each parking space and each loading berth and areas of turning and maneuvering
vehicles. The site plan shall indicate how utility services and drainage are to be provided.
b. A landscape plan, drawn to scale, showing the location of existing trees proposed to be removed or to be retained on
the site, the location and design of landscaped areas, the varieties and sizes of trees and plant materials to be planted
on the site, other pertinent landscape features, and irrigation systems required to maintain trees and plant materials.
c. Architectural drawings or sketches, drawn to scale, including floor plans, in sufficient detail to permit computation of
yard requirements and showing all elevations of the proposed structures and other improvements as they will appear
on completion of construction.
d. Specifications as to type, color and texture of exterior surfaces of proposed structures.
e. A sign plan, drawn to scale, showing the location, size, design, material, color and methods of illumination of all exterior
signs.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
257
18.10 York Beach Village Center Design Standards
The document entitled, York Beach Village Center Design Standards, with an effective date of November 2, 2010, is
hereby incorporated into the Town of York Zoning Ordinance by reference. - AMENDED 11/08/2005, 11/02/2010
18.11 Wireless Communications Facilities. Wireless communications facilities, as defined and regulated in the Town’s
Wireless Communications Facilities Ordinance, shall be exempt from this Ordinance. For wireless communications
facilities owned and utilized exclusively by a water or sewer utility district, and which are exempt from permitting under
the WCF Ordinance, the structure height limits of this ordinance shall not apply. - AMENDED 11/05/1996,
05/22/2004, 05/29/2009
18.12 Community Facilities Impact Fee Program
18.12.1 Purpose of Program
The Town of York finds that new development places demands on municipal government to provide new services
and expand and improve public facilities. In order to provide an equitable source of funding for these new services
and facilities, the Town of York has established a municipal infrastructure improvement program which charges a
proportionate share of the costs of facilities improvements to those who are creating the demand for these
improvements.
18.12.2 Use of Impact Fees
18.12.2.1. Impact fees may only be used for financing facility improvements needed due to demand caused by new growth.
18.12.2.2. Impact fees may not be used for any of the following.
a. Operations and maintenance costs, such as but not limited to paying salaries, day-to-day operational costs
or replacement of existing equipment;
b. The cost to improve facilities to meet existing deficiencies, such as but not limited to relieving existing
congestion or overcrowding; or
c. The cost to construct or improve facilities that are not needed to serve new development or which do not
benefit new development. There must be a reasonable connection between the need for additional facilities
and growth due to new development and between spending the fees collected and benefits received by the
development paying the fee.
18.12.3 Applicability
18.12.3.1 The Code Enforcement Officer shall require the applicant for a Building Permit to participate in the municipal
infrastructure improvement program and pay a development impact fee at the rate currently in effect for schools.
The total impact fee shall be paid separately from any other fees required by this Ordinance and shall be paid at
the time the Occupancy Permit is issued.
18.12.3.2 The Board of Selectmen shall establish the initial impact fee schedule and shall review and revise, if necessary, the
impact fee schedule at least annually to reflect changes in planned improvements, current budget levels and
compliance with the Town of York Comprehensive Plan and the Town’s Capital Improvement Program. Prior to
the establishment or revision of the impact fee schedule, the Board of Selectmen shall hold two public hearings on
the proposed fee schedule. Notice of the public hearings shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation
in the Town at least twice. The first notice shall be published no more than 30 days in advance of the first hearing
and the second no less than seven days in advance of the first hearing.
18.12.3.3 The impact fee schedule shall indicate the improvements to be financed; the anticipated schedule for construction;
and the characteristic of new development by which the fee shall be calculated such as, but not limited to:
a. number of bedrooms,
b. square footage of floor area, or
c. traffic generated
18.12.3.4 The amount of the fee shall be reasonably related to the development’s share of the cost of the facilities
improvements made necessary by the development or, if the improvements were previously constructed at
municipal expense prior to the development, the fee must be reasonably related to the portion or percentage of the
improvement used by the development.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
258
18.12.4 Segregation of Impact Fees From General Fund
18.12.4.1 The Code Enforcement Officer shall record the name of the individual paying the impact fee, the Tax Assessor’s
map and lot numbers for the property for which the impact fee is being paid, the amount of the fee paid for each
facility for which fees are collected, and the date the impact fee was paid.
18.12.4.2 Upon collection of an impact fee, the Code Enforcement Officer shall transfer the funds to the Municipal Treasurer
who shall deposit the impact fees in special non-lapsing accounts dedicated for funding the improvements for
which the fee is collected.
18.12.4.3 Impact fee funds shall be maintained separately from and shall not be combined with other municipal revenues.
18.12.4.4 Funds collected as impact fees shall be expended only for the infrastructure improvement for which the fee was
collected.
18.12.5 Refund of Impact Fees
The Town shall refund impact fees, or that portion of impact fees, actually paid that exceed the Town’s actual costs
or that were not expended within ten years of the date they were collected. The Board of Selectmen shall establish
the procedure for refunding impact fees or portions of impact fees not expended. Unexpended fees shall be
returned to the owner of record at the time a refund is warranted.
18.12.6 Effective Date
Authorization to impose and collect impact fees pursuant to this section shall begin retroactively on December 1,
2002, and shall continue permanently. There shall be no lapse in authorization between the end of the former
sunset date and the beginning of this new authorization. - AMENDED 11/04/1997, 05/17/2003
18.13 The Board of Selectmen is empowered to adopt a Shoreland and Wetland Mitigation Policy. The process and
standards for adoption or modification of this policy shall be that used for adoption or modification of the Site
Plan and Subdivision Regulations. The policy shall:
a. define the types of allowable mitigation activities, consistent with the definition of wetland mitigation in
Article Two of this Ordinance;
b. establish guidelines for administration; and
c. establish fiscal procedures, including at a minimum a provision that any money collected and not used within
six years shall be returned.
- AMENDED 05/20/2000
18.14 Reserved. - AMENDED 11/03/2009
18.15 Delegation of Site Plan Review Authority
A. Purpose. The general purpose of this authorization is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community,
and to implement the policies of the Comprehensive Plan, recognizing the need to balance growth, development
and change with the preservation and enhancement of those qualities and resources that make York a safe,
beautiful and desirable place to live, work and visit.
B. Authorization. The Planning Board is hereby empowered to regulate sites in accordance with the following:
1. Jurisdiction.
A. For any use within the Commercial, Office, Industrial, Public/Semi-Public/Institutional, Vehicular,
Recreation/Amusement, or Miscellaneous use categories in Article Four of this Ordinance, the
following shall be subject to review under the Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations if the building for
the use has 5,000 square feet or more of gross floor area, or the use requires 25 or more parking spaces:
1. establishment of a new use where no use subject to this jurisdiction exists at the time of
application;
2. alteration of an existing site on which a use within this jurisdiction already exists; or
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
259
3. expansion, exterior alteration or construction of a new building in which a use within this
jurisdiction is conducted.
B. Regarding multi-family housing, the following shall be subject to review under the Site Plan and
Subdivision Regulations:
1. establishment of the use;
2. increase in the number of dwelling units;
3. alteration of the site; or
4. expansion, exterior alteration or construction of a new building associated with the use.
C. Regarding a hospital use in the York Village Hospital Overlay District, any application to alter the site,
enlarge a hospital building, or alter the exterior of a hospital building shall be subject to review under
the Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations regardless of the size or extent of the change.
D. Any change which amends a site plan previously approved by the Planning Board shall require approval
of the Planning Board.
E. Regarding non-residential development in the YVC-1 and YVC-2 districts. In addition to applicable
Planning Board authorization to regulate sites; any non-residential development that results in the
alteration of more than 50% of the exterior façade, any expansion of 1,500 square feet of gross floor
area or more, or a proposal for a new principle non-residential or mixed-use building shall be subject
to applicable Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations. - AMENDED 05/21/2016
F. Any application to install medium or large-scale ground-mounted Solar Energy Systems shall be subject
to review under the Site Plan and Subdivision regulations. - AMENDED 11/06/2018
2. Limitations. On a site that is otherwise subject to Site Plan Review, a temporary event or special event which
requires no permanent alterations to the site and which has been approved by the Board of Selectmen or
their designee shall be exempt from Site Plan Review.
3. Regulations. The Planning Board may adopt, amend or repeal its Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations after
holding 2 public hearings. Prior notice of the hearings shall be provided to the public at least 7 days prior
to the hearing. At a minimum, notice shall be posted in Town Hall and published in a newspaper that has
general circulation in the community.
- AMENDED 11/06/2001, 05/17/2003, 05/22/2004, 11/08/2005, 11/07/2006
18.16 Condominium Conversion
In addition to the Maine Condominium Act (Title 33 §1601-101 et seq), the Town of York requires approval of the
condominium conversion of property.
1. Approval shall be granted when the following conditions are met:
a. Conversion of units that have been used for transient rental accommodations (rental occupancy by the
same person or people for a period of less than 31 consecutive days), including but not limited to a
motel, hotel, lodging home, tourist home, inn, rental cottages or similar facilities, shall not be converted
to condominium-owned dwellings unless the density requirement of §5.4.9 is met.
b. For a site not in full compliance with the standards of Article 15, available parking spaces shall be
proportionately allocated among all proposed condominium units to the extent possible.
c. Based on an inspection by the CEO, no buildings on the property are found to be dangerous buildings
as defined by M.R.S.A. Title 17 §2851.
d. There are no unresolved prior code violations on the property.
2. A Code Enforcement Officer shall make written findings of fact for the Town’s building file regarding
compliance with this Section to signify approval of a proposed condominium conversion.
3. Where condominium ownership is proposed as part of an application being reviewed by the Planning Board,
a Code Enforcement Officer’s approval shall be required as a Condition Precedent to final approval by the
Planning Board. - AMENDED 11/08/2005, 05/20/2006
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
260
18.17 Professional Certification of Project Compliance
The purpose of this section is to help ensure projects are built in full compliance with design plans approved pursuant
to this Ordinance, and to identify non-compliance issues as a way to enhance and simplify enforcement.
A. During the application review process, the CEO, Planning Board, Historic District Commission, or Design
Review Board may require each State-licensed design professional (limited to professional engineers,
architects, and landscape architects) responsible for design elements of an approved plan to provide a written
evaluation with regard to the finished project prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. This evaluation
shall be based on periodic on-site inspections by the professional(s) during the construction of the project,
and shall explicitly state whether or not the project is built in full compliance with the approved design plans.
Each design professional shall attest only to those aspects of the plan for which they are responsible. The
evaluation shall be certified by stamp and signature of the professional.
B. If a temporary occupancy permit is requested prior to project completion, the CEO shall require an interim
written evaluation. The interim written evaluation shall evaluate compliance of work performed to date, and
shall list remaining work necessary to complete the project in accordance with the approved plans.
C. This provision shall be in addition to other inspection requirements authorized by the Town codes. The
cost of compliance with work required pursuant to this Section shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
- AMENDED 05/20/2006
18.18 Planned Growth Ordinance
At any time when there is in effect in the Town of York a growth limiting ordinance which delays the substantive
review of applications for building permits or other development approvals from any agency of the Town of York, any
person who has filed a complete application for a growth permit and complete applications for all other development
approvals required at the time of the application for the growth permit for that particular development proposal shall
be exempt from any amendments to any land use regulations of the Town of York enacted after the last of such
complete applications was filed, even if those applications have not received substantive review.
- AMENDED 11/07/2006
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
261
ARTICLE EIGHTEEN-A
APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURES
18-A.1 Definitions
As used in this Article, the following definitions shall apply:
APPROVAL: A decision by a board that authorizes an applicant to undertaken specified activities. See also:
“Conditional Approval,” “Permit” and “Denial.”
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL: A decision by a board that becomes an approval when the board determines the
applicant has satisfied all conditions precedent.
DENIAL: A decision by a Code Enforcement Officer or board which rejects issuance of an approval or permit.
DENIAL WITHOUT PREJUDICE: A denial which results solely from procedural defects by the applicant, such
as but not limited to failure to meet deadlines or provide needed information. (Also includes, “denied without
prejudice,” “deny without prejudice,” and so forth.)
PERMIT: An administrative decision by a Code Enforcement Officer that authorizes an applicant to undertake
specified activities. See also: “Approval” and “Denial.”
18-A.2 General Provisions
For permits and approvals issued pursuant to this Ordinance, the following provisions shall apply.
A. Goal of Transparency
It shall be the goal of this Ordinance that the process of deciding on an application shall be fully transparent
to all parties, and that the public record shall be complete in order to demonstrate and document the
understanding of circumstances and reasons for actions. In interpreting and applying this section, err to the
side of greater transparency. (NOTE: Compliance with the State’s Public Right to Know Law is required.
See Title 1 MRSA §401 et seq.)
B. Permits and Approvals Run with the Land
Permits and approvals run with the land, regardless of changes in ownership, unless otherwise specified.
C. Owner Authorization Required
No application shall be considered by the Code Enforcement Officer or a board unless the application is
authorized in writing by the property owner.
D. Technical Assistance
The board and code enforcement officer shall be authorized to secure independent professional assistance
to ensure proper and thorough review of applications and construction inspection of approved projects. The
applicant shall pay the full cost of this professional service. Such costs shall be in addition to the application
fee (see §1.5). All money received shall be deposited in a Town account. Any funds not spent on such services
shall be returned to the applicant. Failure to reimburse the Town for the full cost of such assistance shall
constitute a violation of this Ordinance shall be grounds for suspending application review, issuance of a
Stop Work Order, or other necessary action as provided for in this Ordinance.
E. Expiration of Permits and Approvals
Except as provided elsewhere in this Ordinance, a permit or approval shall expire one year from the date of
issuance if a substantial start is not made in construction or in the use of the property during that period. If
a substantial start is made within one year of the issuance of the permit or approval, the application shall be
valid for one additional year, at which time it shall expire if all work or change of use is not complete. The
following shall also apply:
1. Date of Issuance is defined as follows:
a. With respect to a permit, the date of issuance shall be the date upon which the Code
Enforcement Officer issues the written permit to the applicant.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
262
b. With respect to an approval, the date of issuance shall be the date upon which the board
votes to approve the findings of fact associated with the approval.
- AMENDED 05/21/2011
c. With respect to a conditional approval, the date of issuance shall be the date upon which the
board votes to find the conditions precedent have been satisfied by the applicant (see §18-
A.5.E.4.b.3).
2. When a zoning approval is issued in conjunction with another permit, such as a subdivision
approval, the expiration deadline shall be the least restrictive of the applicable codes.
3. A substantial start in construction shall mean that a minimum of 25% by value of the proposed
improvements (site amenities, buildings, etc.) have been completed.
F. Professional Certification of Plans
Every drawing plan, specification, and report prepared by a Maine-licensed professional which is submitted
to a code enforcement officer or a board with respect to an application shall be certified as indicated by the
professional’s stamp and signature. In this context, Maine-licensed professionals shall include professional
land surveyors, professional engineers, architects, and landscape architects.
G. Burden of Proof
With respect to application review processes, it is the applicant’s burden to demonstrate compliance with
requirements.
18-A.3 Application Fees
See §1.5.
18-A.4 Application Process for a Permit Issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
The Code Enforcement Officer shall decide on all permit applications using the following process.
A. Submittal of Application
The applicant for a permit shall complete a Town permit application form, shall include all necessary
supplemental materials and information required to demonstrate compliance with the Ordinance, and shall
deliver the application package to the Code Enforcement Officer at times specified by the Town. Unless
otherwise requested by the Code Enforcement Officer for good reason, one copy of the application package
shall be provided by the applicant. The application fee shall be paid at the time of application, and is nonrefundable.
B. Advanced Abutter Notification
For building construction less than 125’ from the normal high water mark or upland edge of a Shoreland
resource, the Code Enforcement Officer shall send notice by first class mail to abutters at least 7 days prior
to issuing a Shoreland Permit. The purpose of this action is to put abutters on notice of a pending action,
and to allow abutters to comment on or provide relevant information about the application prior to a
decision being made.
C. Decision
The Code Enforcement Officer shall make a decision, without undue delay, as follows:
1. Permit. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a permit when the decision is within her/his
jurisdiction and the applicant demonstrates full compliance with all applicable requirements of this
Ordinance and all other applicable Town codes. Conditions subsequent may be imposed on the
permit to ensure compliance with this Ordinance or to ensure commitments made by the applicant
during the review process are honored.
2. Denial. The Code Enforcement Officer shall deny an application that has not demonstrated full
compliance with the substantive requirements of this Ordinance and all other applicable Town
codes. An application that has been denied shall not be resubmitted unless the defects have been
corrected or the prohibiting language has been changed.
D. Findings of Fact
The Code Enforcement Officer shall make findings of fact regarding the permit or denial at the time the
decision is made. To the extent all relevant information is documented on the application form, stand-alone
findings of fact may not be necessary.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
263
E. Voluntary Notification of Abutters
Abutters could potentially appeal the issuance of a permit, so it is in the applicant’s interest to mail
notification to abutters when a permit has been issued. There are cases in Maine where abutters have
successfully appealed long after the 30 day appeal deadline specified in the code has expired simply because
an abutter had no way of knowing a permit had been issued. To minimize the risk of such late appeals,
applicants are encouraged to formally notify abutters soon after obtaining a permit, and to keep a record of
such action.
F. Posting Permit at the Property
Within 7 days of obtaining a permit, and before starting any work, a copy of the permit shall be posted in a
location on the property which is most visible to the public and neighbors. If the permit is a Building Permit,
the Building Code requires this to remain posted until the final inspection and sign-off by the Code
Enforcement Officer. For all other types of permits, the copy shall remain posted until the appeal period
has expired.
G. Appeal
See §18.8.3.
18-A.5 Application Process for Board Approval
The provisions of this section (§18-A.5) shall apply to each board in its administration of its responsibilities under
this Ordinance, except for: the Board of Appeals which follows the provisions of §18.8; the Board of Selectmen;
and the Legislative Body of the Town.
A. Conceptual Discussion
Before a complete application is submitted, an applicant may choose to request a conceptual discussion with
the board having jurisdiction. The applicant shall be required to complete an application form, and shall
identify specific questions or issues on which it seeks direction. The board shall conduct a public hearing,
with required public notice, as a part of this meeting. The conceptual discussion shall be non-binding on all
parties, and shall not be considered a part of the substantive review of an application. If an application fee
is required for a conceptual meeting, it shall be paid at the time of the request, and is non-refundable.
B. Submittal of Application
The applicant shall complete an application form provided by the board, and shall submit to the board all
information necessary for the board to make an informed decision. Application submittals shall be delivered
to Town Hall during normal business hours. Each board shall adopt a policy which specifies the number of
copies of application materials required. The application fee shall be paid at the time of application, and is
non-refundable.
C. Scheduling
The application shall be placed on the next regular meeting agenda on which time is available for the
application review. All applications shall be scheduled on a first-come, first-served basis.
D. Public Notice
It shall be the responsibility of the board to provide public notice in accordance with the following
requirements:
1. Public Meeting for Application Review. Prior to discussion of an application at any public meeting, the
following public notice shall be required:
a. Agenda. The board shall make a written agenda available to the public at least 7 days in advance
of the meeting. This agenda shall indicate the date, time and place at which the meeting will
occur. It shall also identify the name of the applicant, the name of the property owner (if
different than the applicant), the street address and the tax map/lot number of the property,
along with a brief statement about the nature of the business to be conducted.
b. Agenda Posted in Town Hall. The agenda for the meeting shall be posted in Town Hall a
minimum of 7 days in advance of the meeting.
c. Agenda Published in Newspaper. The agenda for the meeting shall be published in a newspaper
with general circulation in the Town. The date of publication shall be a minimum of 7 days in
advance of the meeting.
d. Supplemental Postings. In the name of transparency and full disclosure, it is recommended,
though not required, that the agenda be posted at other locations such as post offices, on the
Town’s web page, and on the Town’s public access cable television station. Failure to post in
such ways shall not invalidate any action of the board.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
264
2. Public Hearing for Application Review, or Site Visit. Prior to opening a public hearing or conducting
a site visit, the following public notice shall be required:
a. Agenda Requirements. All requirements for the agenda, its posting and publication as specified
for a public meeting (see §18-A.5.D.1) shall also be required for a public hearing or site visit,
except that the agenda shall specifically indicate that a public hearing or site visit is to be
conducted.
b. Notice Mailed to Abutters. Notice of the pending public hearing or site visit shall be mailed to
the applicant, the applicant’s representative, and abutters by first class mail at least 7 days in
advance of the public hearing or site visit.
c. Continuation of a Public Hearing. During consideration of an application, a board may
decide to extend its public hearing to a later meeting, or to reschedule a site visit. If the board
specifies the date, time and place as part of a vote to continue the public hearing or reschedule
the site visit, then additional notice mailed to abutters shall not be required. In all other
circumstances, mailed notice to abutters shall be required per §18-A.5.D.2.b. Publication of the
agenda in a newspaper shall be required only if the timeframe permits.
3. Calculation of Deadlines. When calculating requirements for advanced notice, start with the date of
the meeting and count the required number of days backwards. Example: with requirements for 7
day advance notice, a meeting on a Monday would require the agenda to be prepare, posted and
published no later than the prior Monday, and any necessary mailed notices to be postmarked by the
prior Monday as well.
4. Failure to Provide Complete or Accurate Public Notice. In the event that any of the above
requirements regarding the agenda or mailed notices are not met for any reason, no discussion of the
application shall occur at the meeting. (NOTE: this section shall not be interpreted to mandate the
Supplemental Postings per §18-A.5.D.1.d, which are expressly optional.)
5. Conflicting Provisions
In the event there is a conflicting requirement in state statute or another ordinance, the standard
which imposes the higher standard for public notification shall apply.
E. Decision-Making
Upon receiving an application, the board shall follow this sequence in reaching a decision. Each board may
develop its own procedures for processing applications, and this may include additional steps such as
presentations by staff and applicants, and preliminary and final review phases, but in no case shall those
procedures contradict these requirements. Any such procedures shall be made available to the public to
ensure everyone knows the ground rules.
1. Application Acceptance. A board has jurisdiction to consider an application only if it finds the
application submittal to be complete and, by majority vote at a public meeting, accepts the application
for review. Where this Ordinance provides a list of required submittal materials for an application,
the board shall vote to accept an application as complete when it finds the application includes all
specified materials. Where the Ordinance provides no such list, the board shall vote to accept the
application as complete if it finds the information submitted is sufficient, in the opinion of the board,
to render an informed decision about compliance of the application with the requirements of this
Ordinance.
a. Except at a scheduled conceptual discussion, no discussion of the merits of an application
shall occur prior to application acceptance.
b. The public hearing shall not begin prior to application acceptance.
c. Upon acceptance of an application, the board may proceed with a public hearing at the same
meeting, or may schedule the public hearing to occur within 30 days of its vote to accept.
d. If the board finds an application is not complete, it shall identify all required information
which is missing and shall inform the applicant, in writing, of such deficiencies.
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
265
e. After the board votes to accept an application, additional information shall be requested only if
the board later determines some key piece of information is not included in the application and
is necessary to render an informed decision.
f. After the board votes to accept an application, it may decide to conduct a site visit. The site
visit shall be considered a public meeting, and shall be subject to the public notice requirements
of §18-A.5.D.2.
g. The vote to accept an application for review locks in the version of this Ordinance for the
duration of the application review, unless the voters enact an amendment with a retroactive
effective date.
2. Public Hearing. The board shall conduct a public hearing. The public hearing is the only time
during the process where the public has a right to offer input during the application review process.
The purpose of the public hearing is to ensure the public has the opportunity to be aware of, and
comment on, all aspects of the application, and the board has the opportunity to hear all points of view
before rendering a decision. The public hearing may occur during one or more meetings depending
upon circumstances. The public hearing should be preceded by a description of the application, and
should be re-opened when new material is submitted by the applicant so there is an opportunity to
comment on the new material.
The public has several means of participating in the public hearing. The most obvious means of
participating is to attend the public hearing and speak when provided this opportunity. Please direct
all comments and questions to the chair of the board. It is the responsibility of the chair to re-direct
the question to the applicant, staff, or others when applicable. Someone wishing to provide input
regarding the application, but unwilling or unable to attend the public hearing in person, has the option
of providing written testimony. A letter or e-mail, addressed to the chair of the board, may be submitted
in advance of the public hearing. Any such correspondence received shall be read into the record at the
meeting so that all parties are aware of it. If time permits, copies may be distributed to all board
members and the applicant.
Because board members are prohibited from speaking individually with applicants or abutters regarding
a specific application, it is important that communication outside the public hearing be in writing and
submitted either through Town Hall (staff) or the chair.
3. Deliberation. The board shall not begin its deliberation on the merits of the application until the public
hearing has been opened. In this way, the board is made aware of the range of issues before it begins
its decision-making process. The board may temporarily suspend the public hearing to deliberate on
certain aspects of the application, so it is not required that the public hearing be completed before
deliberation begins and some initial decisions are made.
4. Decision. The board shall vote to grant approval, conditional approval or denial of the application
within 60 days of voting to accept the application as complete, unless the applicant and board agree to
extend this timeframe. The public hearing shall be closed before this decision is reached.
a. Approval. The board shall grant approval of an application when the applicant demonstrates
full compliance with all applicable requirements of this Ordinance and all other applicable
Town codes within the jurisdiction of the board. Conditions subsequent may be imposed on
the approval to ensure compliance with this Ordinance or to ensure commitments made by
the applicant during the review process are honored. If applicable, the board shall sign plans
to indicate this approval after the chair signs the adopted findings of fact.
b. Conditional Approval. The board may grant conditional approval of an application when the
applicant demonstrates the application will be in full compliance with all applicable
requirements of this Ordinance and all other applicable Town codes within the jurisdiction
of the board when certain conditions precedent are met. Findings of fact shall be required
for a conditional approval.
1. Each condition precedent shall be established by the board such that compliance can
be determined without discretion – a yes/no decision. For instance, an acceptable
condition precedent would be a requirement for the applicant to obtain a state permit
– it is either obtained or it isn’t. An unacceptable condition precedent would be a vague
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
266
requirement to revise the landscape plan to improve buffering for the neighbors – this
could be done in a wide variety of ways, and it is not clear on its face what specifically
is required of the applicant to satisfy the condition. Each condition precedent shall be
listed in the findings of fact.
2. The conditional approval shall be valid for a period of 60 days from the date on which
the vote was taken. If the applicant fails to satisfy all conditions precedent within this
timeframe, the board may vote to deny without prejudice. Both of these standards shall
be expressly stated in the findings of fact.
3. When an applicant satisfies the terms of a conditional approval, the board shall vote to
either: sign the plans to indicate the full approval; or shall issue a written notice
indicating its determination that all conditions precedent have been satisfied. The date
of this action shall not extend the date on which an appeal may be filed pertaining to
the original conditional approval, but an appeal may be filed on issues regarding the
applicant’s satisfaction of conditions precedent.
c. Denial. The board shall deny an application that has not demonstrated compliance with the
requirements of this Ordinance and all other applicable Town codes within the jurisdiction
of the board. An application so denied shall not be resubmitted unless the defects have been
corrected or the prohibiting language has been changed.
d. Denial Without Prejudice. The board may vote to deny without prejudice an application
which fails to meet procedural requirements. An application denied without prejudice may
be resubmitted and reheard with or without substantive design changes.
F. Findings of Fact
The board shall vote to adopt findings of fact regarding its final decision. The board may prepare these
findings itself, or may require the applicant to provide a draft for the board’s consideration. If a draft is to
be submitted by the applicant, the draft must be provided within 30 days of the decision vote. In all cases,
the board shall adopt the findings of fact within 60 days of its vote. Approval of the findings of fact shall be
indicated by the signature of the Chair. The findings of fact shall be filed at Town Hall and mailed or handdelivered
to the applicant within 7 days of approval by the board. In no case shall a plan be signed by the
board before it has approved the findings of fact. (NOTE: see §18-A.5.E.4.b.2 for specific language which
must be included in the findings of fact.) If the applicant is required to submit draft findings of fact and fails
to do so within the required timeframe, the board may vote to deny without prejudice.
G. Plans for Board Signature
If plans are to be signed by the board to indicate its approval, these plans shall be submitted by the applicant
within 30 days of the relevant vote (§15-A.5.E.4.a for an approval, or §15-A.5.E.4.b.3 for a conditional
approval), and shall be signed by the board within 30 days of receipt. Plans shall always be signed after the
chair signs the adopted findings of fact. The board may vote to deny without prejudice if the applicant fails
to meet this submittal deadline.
H. Reconsideration
All decisions of boards made pursuant to §18-A.5.E.4 shall be final, and may be altered only by appeal.
I. Appeal
See §18.8.3.
J. Number of Active Applications
There shall be no more than one active application per property before a particular board at any given time.
An application shall be considered active beginning at the time of initial submittal of application materials
per §18-A.5.B, and ending when the board reaches its final decision on the application and either: 1) if no
appeal is filed, when the appeal deadline expires, or 2) if an appeal is filed, when all activity relating to the
appeal is completed and the matter is resolved.
This provision is not intended to prohibit one applicant from having applications on a single property before
multiple boards. For example, approval of the Historic District Commission and Planning Board may each
be required, and these processes can run concurrently.
- AMENDED 11/03/2009
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
267
ARTICLE NINETEEN
ENFORCEMENT AND VIOLATIONS
19.1 Any violation of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be a nuisance.
19.2 It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.
19.3 Upon finding a violation the CEO shall speak with or notify in writing the person responsible for such violations,
indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it, including discontinuance of illegal
use of land, buildings or structures, or work being done, removal of illegal buildings or structures, and abatement of
nuisance conditions. A summary of each warning and a copy of such written notices shall be maintained as a permanent
record. - AMENDED 05/18/2013
19.4 The Board of Selectmen, upon notice from the Code Enforcement Officer, is hereby authorized and directed to
institute any and all actions and proceedings, either legal or equitable, including seeking injunctions of violations and
the imposition of fines, that may be appropriate or necessary to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance in the name
of the Town. - AMENDED 05/18/2013
19.5 Any person, included but not limited to a property owner, tenant, contractor or agent, who violates this Ordinance
shall be subject to a minimum fine of $100.00 for each violation, plus legal expenses associated with prosecution. Each
day such a violation is continued is a separate offense, beginning at the earliest time evidence shows the violation
existed. - AMENDED 05/18/2013
19.6 When a violation of a Town ordinance or regulation is identified and the Code Enforcement Officer has issued a
written notice of violation, the following shall apply:
A. for a lot with a single principle tenant or unit, such as but not limited to a single house or a single
business, no permits or approvals shall be issued for that lot until the violation is resolved; or
B. for a lot with multiple tenants or units, such as but not limited to apartment buildings or malls, one of
the following two options shall apply:
1. if the violation relates solely to a single tenant or unit, no permits or approvals shall be issued
for that tenant or unit until the violation is resolved (the tenants and units which were not
cited shall not be adversely affected); or
2. if the violation relates to the site in general, no permits or approvals shall be issued for any
tenant, unit or that lot until the violation is resolved.
- AMENDED 05/29/2009
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
268
ARTICLE TWENTY
AMENDMENTS
20.1 This Ordinance may be amended by a majority of a regular or special meeting of the Town of York legally warned,
called, and conducted, provided that the procedures of Title 30-A M.R.S.A., Sections 3002 and 4352 are followed.
20.2 Per MRSA Title 38 §438A.3, amendments of any shoreland-related provisions of this Ordinance require approval of
the Commissioner of the Maine Department of Environmental Protection. A copy of any shoreland-related
amendments approved by Town vote and certified by the Town Clerk shall be forwarded to the Commissioner for
approval. If the Commissioner fails to act on the amendment within 45 days of receipt, it shall be automatically
approved. The date of Commissioner approval, whether explicit or by default, shall be the effective date of the
amendment. During the period between the Town vote and the Commissioner’s decision, no action shall be taken on
permit applications unless the permit could be granted under both the current and proposed standards.
- AMENDED 5/20/2000
Town of York Zoning Ordinance Revised through November 5, 2019
269
ARTICLE TWENTY-ONE
SEVERABILITY AND CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
21.1 This Ordinance shall not nullify the more restrictive provisions of covenants, agreements, other
ordinances or laws, but shall prevail notwithstanding such provisions which are less restrictive.
21.2 Whenever two provisions in this Ordinance are in conflict, the provision which imposes the greatest
restriction on the use of property shall prevail, except in those areas where this ordinance contains specific
statements to the contrary.
21.3 Exception to Sections 21.1 and 21.2 above: modular homes, manufactured housing and manufactured
housing parks governed by Article 13 shall comply with all ordinances and regulations in the Town of
York. Where specific provisions of Article 13 conflict with other parts of this Ordinance, or with other
Ordinances, the provisions of Article 13 shall prevail.
21.4 Should any Section, or part thereof, of this Ordinance be held by the courts to be invalid, the same shall
not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to
be invalid.