CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF BUCHANAN, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Published in 1994 by Order of the City Commission 
____________ 
Adopted: October 23, 1995 
Effective: November 16, 1995 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS AT CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Deborah Seager 
Mayor 
____________ 
Thomas Gordon 
Harold Jackson 
Larry Thompson 
Doyle Vergon 
City Commission 
____________ 
Gregory E. Buckley 
City Manager 
____________ 
Thomas P. Policinski 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Janet L. Colip 
City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Patricia Moore 
Mayor 
____________ 
Dale Toerne 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Mark Weedon 
Cameron Downey 
Sean Denison 
City Commission 
____________ 
William Marx 
City Manager 
____________ 
Randy Hyrns 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Brenda J. Hess 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Buchanan, Michigan. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the Compiled Ordinances, Revised 1991, as supplemented through July 1991, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city commission. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the Compiled Ordinances, Revised 1991, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. 
CODE CD1:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLES SLT:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Allen Z. Paul, Supervising Editor, and Laura Johnson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Janet L. Colip, City Clerk, Gregory E. Buckley, City Manager, and Thomas P. Policinski, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida  
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 338 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Buchanan Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained by the City Commission of the City of Buchanan, Michigan: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Buchanan, Michigan" published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 110, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before October 23, 1995, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city commission to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after October 23, 1995, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective November 16, 1995. 
    Passed and Adopted by the city commission this 23rd day of October, 1995. 
/s/   
      Mayor 
      Thomas Gordon   /s/   
      City Clerk 
      Janet L. Dehring   Certificate of Adoption 
    I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the City Commission of the City of Buchanan held on the 23rd day of October, 1995. 
/s/   
      City Clerk, Janet L. Dehring   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Municipal Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord./Res. No. Date Adopted Include/Omit Supp. No. Supp. No. 8 2010.06/382  6-14-10 Omit 8 2011.04/383  4-11-11 Include 8 2011.08/384  8-22-11 Omit 8 2011.08/385  8-22-11 Include 8 2012.07/386  7-23-12 Include 8 2013.02/387  2-11-13 Include 8 2013.08/388  8-12-13 Include 8 2014.08/389  8-11-14 Include 8 Supp. No. 9 2015.06/392  6- 8-15 Include 9 2016.01/398  1-11-16 Include 9 2016.01/399  1-11-16 Include 9 2016.09/401  9-12-16 Include 9 2016.10/402 10-10-16 Include 9 2017.06/403  6-26-17 Include 9 2017.07/404  7-17-17 Include 9 2017.11/405 11-13-17 Omit 9 2017.12/406 12-12-17 Include 9 Supp. No. 10 2015.03/390  3- 9-15 Include 10 2015.03/391  3- 9-15 Include 10 2018.05/407  5-29-18 Include 10 2018.10/409 10- 8-18 Include 10 2019.03/411  3-11-19 Include 10  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Preamble 
Charter of the City of Buchanan 
NOTICE OF PUBLICATION OF CHARTER 
    TAKE NOTICE that we, the undersigned, Charter Commissioners duly elected by the electors of the City of Buchanan, at an election held the 8th day of November, A.D., 1948, do hereby publish the following Charter and submit the same in compliance with the statute in such case made and provided being Section 2259 of the Compiled Laws of 1929; Section 5.2102 of Michigan Statutes Annotated, and in conformity with the resolution of adoption passed by this Commission at a meeting of the Charter Commissioners held on March 18, A.D., 1949. 
    Dated this 25th day of April, A.D., 1949. 
    Phil J. Sexton, Milford H. Schultz, Caleb J. Wilson, William Y. Pohly, Harold C. Stark, John C. Strayer, Arthur Johnston, Ralph Allen, Harry M. Beistle. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Buchanan, Michigan, as adopted by voters on November 8, 1948. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and catchlines has been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

PREAMBLE 
    We, the people of the City of Buchanan, Michigan, pursuant to authority granted by the constitution and statutes of Michigan, in order to secure the benefits of efficient self-government, and to promote our common welfare, do hereby establish this Charter as follows: 
CHAPTER 1. - CONTINUATION OF EXISTING CORPORATION; BOUNDARIES 

Section 1.1. - Boundaries. 
    The following territory in the County of Berrien and State of Michigan constituting the present City of Buchanan shall continue and remain a body politic and corporate, under the official name and title of City of Buchanan, and shall be subject to the municipal control of said City, to-wit: 
All that tract of country situated in the County of Berrien, and State of Michigan, being in the Township number Seven South of Range Eighteen West, and described as follows: The southwest one-quarter of section twenty-five; the south one-half of the northwest one-quarter of section twenty-five; the southeast one-quarter of section twenty-six; the southwest one-quarter of section twenty-six; the south one-half of the northeast one-quarter of section twenty-six; the south one-half of the northwest one-quarter of section twenty-six; the northwest one-quarter of section thirty-six; the northwest one-quarter of section thirty-five; the northeast one-quarter of section thirty-five and so much of the southeast one-quarter of section thirty-five as is included in what is known and recorded as "Hobart's Addition to the City of Buchanan." Also beginning at a point in the west line of section twenty-five, in said township and range, where said west line intersects the north line of the above described plat; thence north in said west line across the St. Joseph River to the highway; thence southeasterly along said highway to a point directly opposite the place where the east line of the present corporate limits of said village of Buchanan intersects the St. Joseph River; thence south to the said east line of said City. 
Section 1.2. - Alteration of Boundaries. 
    Territory may be attached to or detached from the City in the manner provided by law. 
Note- Certain areas have been annexed to the City since adoption of this Charter. A current plat book and description is maintained at City Hall. 
CHAPTER 2. - MUNICIPAL POWERS 

Section 2.1. - General Statement of Powers. 
    All powers, privileges, and immunities, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, possessed by the City of Buchanan by virtue of its incorporation as such and enumerated in the Charter of the City adopted on August 5, 1929, the former Charter of the City which is hereby superseded, are hereby expressly retained by the City and shall constitute a part of the powers of the City even though not expressly enumerated herein. 
    The following powers provided for in the existing Charter of the City are hereby expressly retained, but this listing shall not be held to be an exclusive list of powers: 
(1)  To restrain and prevent vice and immorality, and to prohibit and prevent, in the streets or elsewhere in the City, indecent exposure of person, the show, sale or exhibition for sale, of indecent or obscene pictures, drawings, engravings, paintings and books or shows of every kind. 
(2)  To apprehend and punish vagrants, disorderly persons and prostitutes. 
(3)  To preserve the public health and to determine and declare what shall be deemed nuisances, and to prevent and abate the same. 
(4)  To prohibit and suppress disorderly and gaming houses. 
(5)  To regulate, license, or suppress billiard and pool tables, and bowling alleys. 
(6)  To suppress gaming or gambling in any form. 
(7)  To license taverns, restaurants, eating houses, hotels and rooming houses. 
(8)  To regulate, license, restrain or prohibit public shows and exhibitions, theaters, picture shows, public dances and other amusements. 
(9)  To license auctioneers and pawn-brokers; license and regulate hawkers, peddlers and solicitors, and to regulate or prohibit sales of property at auction, except sales made pursuant to some order of court or public law and also to require transient traders and dealers to take out licenses before engaging in business and may regulate by ordinance the term and conditions of issuing the same. 
(10)  To license and regulate hacks, taxicabs and other public vehicles. 
(11)  To provide for the inspection and to regulate the sale of provisions, food and beverages. 
(12)  To provide for the inspection and sealing of weights and measures, and to enforce the keeping and use of proper weights and measures by vendors, and for the seizure and destruction of incorrect, inaccurate or fraudulent weights and measures. 
(13)  To provide for the inspection and regulation of the weighing or measuring of goods, wares, merchandise, fuel and provisions sold by weight or measure. 
(14)  To regulate or prohibit the use, selling, storing or transportation of firearms, fireworks, combustible or explosive substances or materials within the City, and to regulate and restrain the making of fires in the streets or other open spaces in the City. 
(15)  To make ordinances for the prevention and extinguishing of fires, and to establish and maintain definite fire limits. 
(16)  To license and regulate solicitors for passengers or for baggage for any hotel, tavern, public house, boat or railroad; also draymen, carmen, truckmen, porters, runners, drivers of vehicles of every description, used and employed for hire, and to fix and regulate the amounts and rates of their compensation. 
(17)  To regulate the height and construction of all fences now or hereafter to be built. 
(18)  To regulate or prohibit bill boards in the City. 
(19)  To establish lines and grades upon which buildings may be erected, and beyond which such buildings shall not extend. To regulate and restrict the location of trades, and industries, and the location of buildings designed for specific uses, and to regulate the height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected, and to divide the City into zones of such number, shape and area as may be best suited to carry out the purpose of this subdivision. 
(20)  To regulate the erection and repair of buildings and to prevent the erection and provide for the removal of all buildings deemed unsafe. 
(21)  To regulate traffic and the parking of automobiles and other vehicles, and to provide for impounding all vehicles parked in violation of such regulations. 
(22)  To declare and define the powers and duties of the officers of the City, provided the same shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter. 
(23)  To provide for the care, custody, and preservation of the public property of the City. 
(24)  To prohibit, prevent and suppress mock auctions and every kind of fraudulent game, device, or practice, and to punish all persons managing, using, practicing, or attempting to manage, use or practice the same, and all persons aiding the management or practice thereof. 
(25)  To prohibit and punish the use of toy pistols, slingshots and other dangerous toys, or implements in the City. 
(26)  To provide for and regulate the numbering of buildings upon the streets and alleys, and to compel the owners or occupants to affix numbers on the same, and to designate and change the names of public streets, alleys and parks. 
(27)  To provide for the taking of a census of the inhabitants of the City whenever the Commission shall see fit, and to direct and regulate the same. 
(28)  To regulate the price to be charged for gas, electricity and other service rendered by all persons, firms, or corporations, or other public utilities, owning and operating in the streets, alleys and public places of the City, and the placing and location of wires, pipes and conduits, and to regulate the manner in which all persons, firms or corporations operating public utilities shall use the streets, alleys and public places in the City, and to forbid the erection and maintenance of poles on any or all the streets and alleys in the City and to compel the placing of all wires underground in such streets and alleys as may be designated by the Commission. 
(29)  To regulate trades, occupations and amusements within its boundaries. 
(30)  To provide, maintain and regulate one or more pounds and to authorize the impounding of all vehicles, beasts and fowls found in the streets or otherwise at large, contrary to any ordinance of the City; to prescribe the fees for impounding, and the amount or rate of expense for keeping, and the charges to be paid by the owner or keeper of the vehicles, beasts, or fowls impounded, to authorize the sale of the vehicles, beasts or fowls, for the payment of such fees, expenses and charges, and for penalties incurred, and may impose penalties for rescuing any beast or fowl impounded. 
(31)  To provide for the support and relief of poor persons residing in the City; to provide who shall have charge of such work and to define his powers and duties; to prohibit and prevent the bringing into the City of any pauper or person likely to become a charge upon the City. 
Note- This function has been assumed by the Department of Social Services, State of Michigan, pursuant to Act 257 of P.A. 1937, as amended. 
(32)  To establish and regulate markets and market places for the sale of meats, fish, vegetables, and other provisions and articles necessary for the sustenance and convenience of the inhabitants. 
(33)  To enact all such ordinances and laws as it may deem proper relative to the building, rebuilding, maintaining and repairing of partition fences by the owners and occupants of adjoining lots, enclosures and parcels of land in the City; and relative to the assigning to the owners or occupants of such adjoining pieces of land, the portion of such partition fences to be maintained by them respectively, and may provide for the recording of such assignments and divisions when made; and may provide for the recovery of damages from any owner or occupant who shall fail to comply with the provisions and requirements of any ordinance relative to such partition fences. The Commission may appoint fence viewers and prescribe their duties and mode of proceeding in all cases relating to partition fences in the City. 
(34)  To receive bequests, gifts and donations of all kinds of property, in fee simple, or in trust for public, charitable or other purposes; and to do all things and acts necessary to carry out the purposes of such bequests, gifts, donations, with power to manage, sell, lease, otherwise handle or dispose of the same, in accordance with the terms of the bequest, gift or donation. 
(35)  To provide by purchase, lease, condemnation, construction, or otherwise, and to establish, hold, equip, maintain, conduct, manage and operate, libraries, reading rooms, playgrounds, public grounds, parks, boulevards, baths, public toilet and comfort stations, markets, market houses, waterworks, municipal lodging houses, infirmaries, hospitals, free employment bureaus, jails, police stations, fire houses, works or plant for the preparation, manufacture, handling or transportation of materials required in the construction, completion, maintenance or repair of any public building, work, improvement or utility, and any and all buildings, establishments, institutions and places which are necessary or convenient for the transaction of public business or for promoting the health, morals or welfare of the inhabitants of the City, or for their regulation or benefit. 
(36)  To purchase, appropriate and own such real estate as may be necessary for public grounds, parks, boulevards, markets, public buildings, public works, and other purposes necessary or convenient for the public good, and for the execution of the powers conferred in this Charter or by the statutes of this State and such buildings and grounds, or any part thereof, except public parks and playgrounds, may be sold or leased by the Commission or exchanged for other lands and buildings for municipal purposes whenever in the opinion of the Commission the same are no longer required for the purposes for which they were acquired or are held without vote of the electors unless such vote be required by State Law. 
(37)  To lay out, establish or vacate and discontinue public parks and grounds within the City; to improve, light and ornament the same; to regulate the use thereof and to protect the same and the appurtenances thereof from obstruction, encroachment and injury; provided, however, that such park or grounds shall not be vacated or discontinued except on a three-fifths vote of the electors voting thereon at any general or special election. 
(38)  To acquire, own, erect, maintain, manage and control real estate, buildings, institutions and works without the corporate limits of the City, and to enforce beyond the corporate limits of the City and over such lands, buildings, institutions and property all ordinances and police regulations that may be necessary for the care, protection, control and management thereof in the same manner and to the same extent as if they were located within the City. 
(39)  To establish and maintain a municipal fuel yard in case the Commission shall deem it necessary. All fuel shall be sold at such price as to insure the reimbursement to the City of all cost and overhead charges, but not with the intention of making any profit for the City. 
(40)  Subject to existing legal grants, and the provisions of the general laws of this State, the Commission shall have supervision and control of all public highways, bridges, streets, avenues, alleys and public ground within the City, shall have power to lay out, establish, open, make, widen, extend, straighten, alter, close, vacate or abolish any highway, street, lane, alley, sewer, drain, water course, bridge or culvert in the City or change the name or grade of any street, and if, in doing so, it shall be necessary to take or use private property, the same may be taken and paid for in the manner provided in this Charter. And the City shall have power to acquire, by construction, or otherwise, a system of trunk sewers and may extend such trunk sewers beyond the territory of the City whenever the Commission shall deem it necessary or expedient so to do in order to secure an outlet, and if the Commission shall deem it for the best interests of the City so to do, permanent flowage rights in trunk sewers owned by neighboring municipalities may be acquired by purchase or contract and such rights shall be considered a part of the sewer system of the City and the cost of acquiring such permanent flowage rights shall be a legal and proper expenditure of City funds. 
Section 2.2. - Additional Powers I. 
    Further, unless otherwise provided or limited in this Charter, the City and its officers shall be vested with any and all powers, privileges, and immunities, expressed and implied, which cities and their officers are, or hereafter may be, permitted to exercise or to provide for in their charters under the constitution and laws of the State of Michigan, including all the powers, privileges, and immunities granted to cities, by the present Charter of the City, and all the powers, privileges, and immunities which cities are permitted to, or may, provide in their charters by Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of 1909, as amended, as fully and completely as though those powers, privileges, and immunities were specifically enumerated in and provided for in this Charter, and in no case shall any enumeration of particular powers, privileges, or immunities in this Charter be held to be exclusive; it being the intent of the Charter Commission in framing this Charter and of the people of the City in adopting it, to include all such powers, privileges, and immunities within the scope of powers granted to and accepted by the City by this Charter and to make the same effective in the City. 
Section 2.3. - Additional Powers II. 
    The City and its officers shall have power to exercise all municipal powers in the management and control of municipal property and in the administration of the municipal government, whether such powers be expressly enumerated or not; to do any act to advance the interests of the City, the good government and prosperity of the municipality and its inhabitants, and through its regularly constituted authority, to pass and enforce all laws, ordinances, and resolutions relating to its municipal concerns, subject to the constitution and general laws of the state and the provisions of this Charter. 
Section 2.4. - Additional Powers III. 
    The City Commission shall have the following additional powers, but this enumeration shall not be exclusive: 
(a)  To refund money advanced or paid on special assessments imposed for water main extensions and for borrowing money for such refunding and for issuing bonds therefor as provided in Section 4(b) of Act 279 of 1909, as amended. 
(b)  To purchase or condemn the franchises, if any exist, and the property used in the operation of companies or individuals engaged in hospital, electric light, gas, heat, water and power business and to contract to purchase, operate, and maintain any existing public utility property for supplying water, heat, light, or power to the City and the inhabitants thereof, in accordance with Section 4-f(1) of Act 279 of 1909 as amended. 
(c)  To provide for a plan of streets and alleys within and for a distance of not more than three miles beyond the municipal limits. 
(d)  To provide for the use, control and regulation of streams, waters and water courses within its boundaries, subject to the restrictions of Section 4-h(4) of Act 279 of 1909, as amended. 
(e)  To provide for the securing by condemnation, agreement or purchase, or by any other means, an easement in property abutting or adjacent to any navigable stream, for any municipal purpose as provided in Section 4-h(5) of Act 279 of 1909, as amended. 
(f)  To acquire, establish, operate, extend and maintain parking facilities as permitted in Section 4-h(6) of Act 279 of 1909, as amended, and to finance the same as a local improvement. 
(g)  To acquire, construct, establish, operate, maintain and extend facilities for the docking of water craft and hydroplanes as permitted in Section 4-h(7) of Act 279 of 1909 as amended. 
(h)  To provide for the regulation of trades, occupations and amusements within the City boundaries, and for the prohibition of such trades, occupations and amusements as are detrimental to the health, morals or welfare of the inhabitants. 
(i)  For the use, advantage, benefit or convenience of the municipality and the inhabitants thereof, the City may acquire by purchase, gift, devise, lease, or condemnation proceedings and may own, have, hold, sell, convey, dispose of, mortgage, or lease any real or personal estate, or interest or easement therein, either within or without its corporate limits. 
(j)  To construct, purchase, own, or operate airport facilities. 
Section 2.5. - Inter-governmental Contracts. 
    The City shall have power to join with any governmental unit, corporation, or agency, or with any number or combination thereof by contract, or otherwise as may be permitted by law, to perform jointly, or by one or more, for or on behalf of the other or others any power or duty which is permitted to be so performed by law or which is possessed or imposed upon each such governmental unit or agency. 
Section 2.6. - Outside Fire Protection. 
    In exercise of the powers contained in Section 2.3 herein, the City Commission shall have the right to contract with persons, firms, corporations, or governing bodies to furnish fire protection to property outside the corporate limits of the City for a fair consideration, if the Commission shall find that the financial interests of the City are advanced by obtaining payments therefor; and/or that the prosperity of the municipality and its inhabitants are advanced through preventing a conflagration which might spread within the City limits or through protecting from fire industrial or commercial properties which employ residents of the City. 
Section 2.7. - Exercise of Power. 
    Where no procedure is set forth in this Charter for the exercise of any power granted to or possessed by the City and its officers, resort may be had to the procedure set forth in any statute of the State of Michigan including statutes passed for the government of townships. If alternate procedures are to be found in different statutes, then the City Commission shall select that procedure which it deems to be most expeditious and to the best advantage of the City and its inhabitants. Where no procedure for the exercise of any power of the City is set forth, either in this Charter or in any statute of the State of Michigan, the City Commission shall prescribe a reasonable procedure for the exercise thereof by ordinance. 
CHAPTER 3. - ELECTIONS 

Section 3.1. - Wards and Precincts. 
    The City of Buchanan shall consist of one ward. The Commission may, by ordinance, establish convenient election precincts; the ward boundaries as existing at the time of the adoption of this Charter shall be the precinct boundaries until changed by the Commission. 
Section 3.2. - Elective Officers and Terms of Office. 
(1)  The City Commission of the City of Buchanan shall consist of five members. On the first Monday in April in 1955, there shall be elected three Commissioners, to take office the second Monday in April in 1955. The candidate receiving the greatest number of votes at that election shall serve until the second Monday in April of 1958. The candidate receiving the second largest vote in that election shall serve until the second Monday in April of 1958. The candidate receiving the third largest vote in that election shall serve until the second Monday in April of 1957. 
Note- The election schedule was altered by Act 239 of P.A. 1970 to set elections on "the Tuesday succeeding the first Monday in November" and applies to Cities pursuant to Section C of the Act. 
(2)  From and after the election of the Commissioners provided for in sub-paragraph (1) above, Commissioners shall be elected in rotation for three year terms, one year the election to include one Commissioner, and the following two years, two Commissioners each. 
    At each regular City election there shall also be elected one Constable for a term of one year commencing on and dating from the Monday next following the date of the regular City election at which he is elected. In the event that the state law is changed so as to permit the appointment of constables, thereafter the Constable herein required to be elected shall be appointed in the manner provided by Section 16.13 of this Charter for the appointment of additional constables, and the requirement that such office be elective shall not apply. 
Note- The office of constable was abolished pursuant to Act 26 of P.A. 1971, by Ordinance No. 197, effective October 12, 1971. 
    At the regular City election in 1950 and every fourth year thereafter there shall be elected two Justices of the Peace for a term of four years commencing on and dating from the first day of July next following their election. 
Note- The office of Justice of the Peace was abolished by State Statute, effective January 1, 1969. 
(Am. 4-5-1954, Eff. 5-27-1949) 
Section 3.3. - Election Date. 
    A regular City election shall be held on the first Monday in April of each year. 
Section 3.4. - Qualifications of Electors. 
    The inhabitants of the City having the qualifications of electors in the State of Michigan, and no others, shall be electors of the City. 
Section 3.5. - Election Procedure. 
    The general election laws of the state shall apply to and control, as near as may be, all procedures relating to registration and City elections, except as such general laws relate to political parties or partisan procedure, or require more than one publication of notice, and except as otherwise provided in this Charter. The election of all City officers shall be on a non-partisan basis. 
Section 3.6. - Special Elections. 
    Special City elections shall be held when called by resolution of the Commission at least thirty (30) days in advance of such election, or when required by this Charter or the general laws of the state. Any resolution calling a special election shall set forth the purpose of such election. No more than two special City elections shall be held in any one fiscal year. 
Section 3.7. - Notice of Elections. 
    Notice of the time and place of holding any City election and of the officers to be elected and the questions to be voted upon, shall, except as herein otherwise provided, be given by the Clerk in the same manner and at the same time as provided in the state election law for the giving of notice by township clerks. 
Section 3.8. - Voting Hours. 
    The polls of all elections shall be opened and closed at the time prescribed by law for the opening and closing of polls at state elections, subject to the statutory right of the City Commission to adjust these hours to local time. 
Section 3.9. - Nominations. 
    The method of nomination of all officers provided for in this Charter who are elected by the electors of the City shall be by petition. Such petitions shall be signed by not less than 30 nor more than 50 qualified registered electors of the City. No person shall sign his name to a greater number of petitions for any one office than there are persons to be elected to said office at said election. Where the signature of any individual appears on more petitions than there are candidates to be elected to said office, the signature of such individual on all petitions shall be invalidated. Nomination petitions shall be filed with the Clerk at least twenty days and not more than thirty days prior to the date of holding the annual election. The Clerk shall publish notice of the last day permitted for filing nomination petitions, at least one week before, and not more than three weeks before, such date. 
Section 3.10. - Form of Petition. 
    The form of petition shall be substantially as that required by state law for state and county officers, except for references to political parties. Official petition forms shall be prepared and furnished by the Clerk. Before the Clerk shall furnish any nomination petitions to any person, he shall enter thereon in ink the name of the person desiring to become a candidate for office, or the person in whose behalf the petition is to be circulated and the name of the office for which he is to be a candidate. 
Section 3.11. - Approval of Petition. 
    The Clerk shall accept for filing only nomination petitions on official blanks containing the required number of signatures for candidates having those qualifications required for elective City officials by this Charter. When a petition is filed by persons other than the person whose name appears thereon as a candidate, it may be accepted for filing only when accompanied by the written consent of the candidate. The Clerk shall, forthwith after the filing of a petition, determine the sufficiency of the signatures on each petition filed. Each petition which is found by the Clerk to contain the required number of signatures of registered electors for candidates shall be marked "In Order", with the date thereof and he shall so notify the candidate whose name appears thereon, in writing. 
Section 3.12. - Public Inspection of Petitions. 
    All nomination petitions shall be open to public inspection in the office of the Clerk beginning five days after the final filing date for such petitions. 
Section 3.13. - Election Commission. 
    An Election Commission is hereby created, consisting of the Clerk, the Mayor, and the City Attorney. The Clerk shall be chairman. The Commission shall appoint the Board of Election Inspectors and have charge of all activities and duties required of it by state law and this Charter relating to the conduct of elections in the City. The compensation of election personnel shall be determined in advance by the City Commission. In any case where election procedure is in doubt, the Election Commission shall prescribe the procedure to be followed. 
Section 3.14. - Form of Ballots. 
    The form, printing, and numbering of ballots or the preparation of the voting machines used in any City election shall conform as nearly as may be to that prescribed by the general laws of the state, except that no party designation or emblem shall appear. If a ballot is used, the names of qualified nominees for each office shall be listed under a separate heading and shall be rotated systematically on the ballot. 
Section 3.15. - Canvass of Votes. 
    The City Commission shall be the board of canvassers to canvass the votes at all City elections. The Commission shall convene on the Thursday next succeeding each election at the hour of 8:00 p.m. at their usual place of meeting and determine the results of the election upon each question and proposition voted upon and what persons are duly elected to the several offices respectively at said election. 
Section 3.16. - Recount. 
    A recount of the votes cast at any City election for any office or upon any proposition may be had in accordance with the general election laws of the state. 
Section 3.17. - Recall. 
    Any elected official may be recalled from office by the electors of the City in a manner provided by the general laws of the state. A vacancy created by the recall of any elected official shall be filled in the manner prescribed by law. 
CHAPTER 4. - PLAN OF GOVERNMENT 

Section 4.1. - Commission-Manager Government. 
    The intent of this Charter is to provide for the commission-manager form of government. 
Section 4.2. - The City Commission. 
    The electors of the City shall elect a City Commission of five members, one of whom shall serve as Mayor, which Commission shall constitute the legislative and governing body of the City and which shall have power and authority, except as in this Charter otherwise provided, to exercise all powers conferred upon or possessed by the City, and shall have the power and authority to adopt such laws, ordinances and resolutions as it shall deem proper in the exercise thereof. In all cases where the word "Commission" is used in this Charter, the same shall be synonymous with the word "Council" or any other term used in any state or federal law in referring to municipal legislative or governing bodies. 
Section 4.3. - Qualifications of Commissioners. 
    Members of the City Commission shall meet the eligibility requirements contained in Section 5.1 of this Charter. The Commission shall be sole judge of the election and qualification of its own members, subject only to review by the court. 
Note- The eligibility requirements regarding residence have been challenged and Court rulings may affect the validity. 
Section 4.4. - Compensation of Commissioners. 
    Members of the Commission including the Mayor shall be compensated at the rate of $125 per year, and may also be allowed reasonable and necessary expenses actually incurred in the services of the City upon order of the Commission. 
Note- The Home Rule Cities Act allows for the establishment of a Compensation Commission by Ordinance which would void this section. 
Section 4.5. - Election of Mayor. 
    The City Commission shall at its first meeting following each regular City election, elect one of its members to serve as Mayor for a term expiring at the first Commission meeting following the next regular City election. 
Section 4.6. - Duties of Mayor. 
(a)  Insofar as required by law, and for all ceremonial purposes, the Mayor shall be recognized as the head of the City. He shall have an equal voice and vote in the proceedings of the Commission, but shall have no veto power. He shall be the presiding officer of the Commission. 
(b)  He shall be a conservator of the peace, and may exercise within the City the powers conferred upon sheriffs to suppress disorder, and shall have the power to command the assistance of all able-bodied citizens to aid in the enforcement of the ordinances of the City, and to suppress riot and disorderly conduct. 
(c)  He shall authenticate by his signature such instruments as the Commission, this Charter, or the laws of the State of Michigan or of the United States shall require. 
(d)  He shall exercise only such powers as the state laws, this Charter, or the Commission shall specifically confer upon or require of him. 
Section 4.7. - Mayor Pro Tem. 
    The City Commission may designate a Mayor Pro Tem. to perform the duties of the Mayor when, because of absence from the City, disability, or otherwise, the Mayor is temporarily unable to perform the duties of his office. 
Section 4.8. - City Manager; Appointment. 
    The Commission shall appoint a City Manager for an indefinite period, and shall fix his compensation. He shall serve at the pleasure of the Commission. The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the City government. He shall be selected on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his training and experience and without regard to his political or religious preferences. If he is not a resident of the City of Buchanan at the time of his appointment, he shall become a resident thereof within ninety days after his appointment, and shall so remain throughout his tenure of office. 
    No member of the Commission shall be eligible for the position of City Manager within two years after the expiration of his last term on the Commission. 
    The City Manager shall not be removed from office during a period of 30 days following any regular City election except by the affirmative vote of four members of the City Commission. 
Section 4.9. - Functions and Duties of City Manager. 
    The functions and duties of the City Manager shall be: 
(a)  To see that all laws and ordinances are enforced; 
(b)  To appoint with the consent of the Commission the heads of all City departments except the City Attorney and City Treasurer and to remove such department heads without the consent of the Commission; 
(c)  To manage and supervise all departments, public improvements, works and undertakings of the City. He shall have charge of the construction, repair, maintenance, and cleaning of streets, sidewalks, bridges, pavements, sewers, and of all public buildings or other property belonging to the City. He shall manage and supervise all City utilities and shall be responsible for the preservation of property, tools, and appliances of the City; 
(d)  To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the City or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise, or in any contract, are faithfully kept and performed; 
(e)  To recommend an annual budget to the City Commission, and to administer the budget as finally adopted under policies formulated by the Commission, and to keep the Commission fully advised at all times as to the financial condition and needs of the City; 
(f)  To recommend to the Commission for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient; 
(g)  To serve as Personnel Director of the City or to delegate such duties to some other officer or employee of the City. No such delegation shall relieve the Manager of any responsibilities for the proper conduct of these duties. 
(h)  To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or as may be required of him by ordinance or by direction of the Commission. 
Section 4.10. - Acting City Manager. 
    The Commission may appoint or designate an Acting City Manager during the period of a vacancy in the office or during the absence of the City Manager from the City. Such Acting City Manager shall, while he is in such office, have all the responsibilities, duties, functions and authority of the City Manager. 
Section 4.11. - Relationship of Council to Administrative Service. 
    The City Manager shall be responsible to the Commission for the efficient administration of all departments of the City government under his jurisdiction. Neither the Commission nor any of its members or committees shall dictate the appointment of any person to office by the City Manager, or in any way interfere with the City Manager to prevent him from exercising his judgment in the appointment of officers and employees in the administrative service. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Commission and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the City Manager, and neither the Commission nor any member thereof shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the City Manager. 
Section 4.12. - City Clerk; Functions and Duties. 
(a)  The City Manager shall appoint a City Clerk who shall be the Clerk of the Commission and shall attend all meetings of the Commission and shall keep a permanent journal in the English language of its proceedings. He shall keep a record of all ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the Commission. 
(b)  He shall be custodian of the City seal, and shall affix it to all documents and instruments requiring the seal, and shall attest the same. He shall also be custodian of all papers, documents, and records pertaining to the City of Buchanan, the custody of which is not otherwise provided for. He shall give to the proper department or officials ample notice of the expiration or termination of any franchises, contracts, or agreements. 
(c)  He shall certify by his signature all ordinances and resolutions enacted or passed by the Commission and perform any other duties required of him by state law, this Charter, or by the City Manager. 
(d)  He shall provide and maintain in his office a supply of forms for all petitions required to be filed for any purpose by the provisions of this Charter, and shall accept no petitions for any purpose set forth in this Charter which are not on the forms provided by him for such purpose. 
(e)  He shall be responsible for the maintenance of a system of accounts of the City which shall conform to any uniform system required by state law and by the Commission. All accounts of the City shall be balanced at the end of each calendar month, and a report made thereof by the Clerk to the Commission and the City Manager. Provided, however, that the Commission may provide for the responsibility of the maintenance of the accounts of the City by some officer other than the Clerk. 
(f)  He shall have power to administer oaths of office. 
Section 4.13. - City Treasurer; Appointments, Functions, and Duties. 
(a)  The City Commission shall appoint a City Treasurer who shall serve at its pleasure, and shall fix his compensation. The work of the City Treasurer shall be supervised by, and under the direction of, the City Manager. 
(b)  The City Treasurer shall have the responsibility for the custody of all moneys of the City, the Clerk's bond, and all evidences of value belonging to the City, or held in trust by the City. 
(c)  He shall receive all moneys belonging to and receivable by the City that may be collected by any officials or employees of the City, including licenses, taxes, assessments, and all other charges belonging to and payable to the City, and shall in all cases give a receipt therefor. He shall disburse all City funds in accordance with the provisions of state law, this Charter, and procedures to be established by the Commission. 
(d)  He shall keep and deposit all moneys or funds in such manner and only in such places as the Commission may determine. He shall report the same in detail to the Clerk. 
(e)  He shall have such powers and duties in regard to the collection and custody of state, county, school district, and City taxes and moneys as may be conferred upon him by this Charter or by state law. 
(f)  He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by this Charter or by the City Commission. He shall at all times cooperate with the City Manager and shall provide such information and reports and perform such duties as are requested by the City Manager so long as they are not inconsistent with the duties of his office as prescribed herein. 
Section 4.14. - City Assessor; Functions and Duties. 
    The City Manager shall appoint a City Assessor who shall possess all the powers vested in, and shall be charged with all the duties imposed upon, assessing officers by the general laws of the state. He shall make and prepare all regular and special assessment rolls in the manner prescribed by this Charter and the general laws of the state. He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him in this Charter or by the Commission or City Manager. 
Section 4.15. - City Attorney; Appointment and Compensation. 
    The Commission shall appoint a City Attorney for an indefinite period who shall serve at its pleasure, and shall fix his compensation. The compensation set by the Commission for the City Attorney shall be in contemplation of the normal duties of that office. Special compensation may be provided at the discretion of the Commission in cases of appeals to, or litigation commenced in, the Federal Courts, the Circuit Court or State Supreme Court, work requiring extensive hearings before quasi-judicial or administrative tribunals, for legal work in connection with the issuance of bonds of the City, and for condemnation proceedings. No such special compensation shall be given by the Commission except in accordance with an agreement between itself and the City Attorney made before the service for which such special compensation is to be paid has been rendered. 
Section 4.16. - City Attorney; Functions and Duties. 
(a)  The City Attorney shall act as legal advisor to, and attorney and counsel for, the Commission and all its members in matters relating to their official duties. He shall give written opinions to any official or department of the City when requested in writing by the Commission or City Manager so to do, and shall file a copy of same with the Clerk. 
(b)  He shall conduct for the City all cases in all courts and before all legally constituted tribunals whenever the City is a party thereto. 
(c)  He shall prepare, or officially pass upon, all contracts, bonds, and other instruments in writing, in which the City is concerned, and shall certify before execution as to their legality and correctness of form. 
(d)  He shall file in the office of the Clerk the original copy of all franchises granted by the City, of all contracts and agreements entered into by or on behalf of the City, and of all papers constituting a part of the proceedings in all courts or legally constituted tribunals to which the City is a party, together with the pertinent data and information concerning the same. 
(e)  He shall be charged with the responsibility of calling to the attention of the Commission and the City Manager all matters of law and changes or developments therein affecting the City. 
(f)  He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by this Charter, by the Commission or by state or federal law. 
(g)  He shall at all times cooperate with the City Manager and shall provide such information and reports and perform such duties as are requested by the City Manager so long as they are not inconsistent with duties of his office as provided herein. 
(h)  Upon the recommendation of the City Attorney, or upon its own motion, the Commission may retain special legal counsel to handle any matter to which the City is a party or in which the City has an interest, or to assist and counsel with the City Attorney therein. 
Section 4.17. - Other Administrative Officers; Functions and Duties. 
    The City Manager shall also appoint a Chief of Police, a Chief of Fire, and such additional officers as the City Commission may create. All such officers shall be appointed and removed in the manner previously provided in this Charter for the appointment of department heads. 
    The functions of each City department, and the duties and responsibilities of the officers and employees thereof, shall be established by law or by ordinance by the Commission except where otherwise provided in this Charter; provided, that the City Manager may prescribe by regulation for duties and responsibilities which are not inconsistent with this Charter, or ordinances or resolutions of the Commission. 
Section 4.18. - Creation and Combination of Departments and Offices. 
    The Commission may create or abolish administrative offices and departments in any manner it deems necessary for the proper operation of the government and may prescribe the duties thereof. The Commission may combine any administrative offices provided in this Charter in any manner not inconsistent with state law. No creation or combination of any administrative offices shall abolish the office of City Manager nor diminish any of the duties or responsibilities of that office as set forth in this Charter. 
Section 4.19. - Board of Public Works. 
    The City Commission shall have authority to create by ordinance, if it deems it necessary, a Board of Public Works. Such Board, if created, shall be composed of five members who shall be freeholders and electors of the City and shall serve without compensation. Terms of the five members of the Board shall be over-lapping. 
    Such Board, if created, shall be charged and entrusted with the following duties, powers and responsibilities subject to the direction of the Commission: 
(1)  The construction, management, supervision, and control of the City water works. 
(2)  The construction, management, supervision, and control of any muncipal electric system. 
(3)  The construction, management, supervision, and control of such other public improvements or works as are designated by ordinance. 
Section 4.20. - Other Independent Boards. 
    The Commission may provide by ordinance, in addition to a Board of Public Works, for independent boards or commissions to operate the following departments of the City, and no others: parks and recreation, cemeteries, libraries, and public housing. Such boards shall, in each case where not inconsistent with state law, be appointed by the City Commission, and shall be for the primary purpose of determining policy with regard to the respective activities under their supervision. Administrative direction by each board or commission of the activities of its department shall be permitted only to the extent provided by ordinance and shall be carried out through the City Manager. For this purpose, in all cases where not inconsistent with state law, the City Manager shall serve as administrative officer of each board or commission provided for in this section, and the appointment and removal of all officers and employees of each shall be in the manner provided for other City departments by this Charter, except that if administrative direction of its department by any board or commission is provided for by ordinance, such board or commission instead of the City Commission shall confirm the appointment of the head of its department. 
    The members of the park, cemetery, and library boards in office at the time that this Charter becomes effective shall continue in office for the term for which they were appointed so long as the management of their respective departments continues to be by Board. The Commission shall, promptly after the effective date of this Charter, modify the ordinances creating any boards which it wishes to maintain so that the provisions of such ordinance will be in conformity with the provisions of this section of the Charter. 
CHAPTER 5. - GENERAL PROVISIONS REGARDING OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL OF THE CITY 

Section 5.1. - Eligibility for Office in City. 
    No person shall be elected or appointed to any office who is in default to the City, or to any other governmental unit of the state, now or heretofore existing. The election or appointment of any such defaulter shall be void. No person shall be eligible to any elective office of the City unless he shall be a qualified elector in the City, and shall have been a resident of the City for at least two (2) years immediately prior to the date of the election at which he is a candidate for office. 
Note- See the note to section 4.3. 
    All administrative officers shall be United States citizens. If not residents of the City at the time of appointment, they shall become a resident thereof within ninety days after appointment and shall so remain throughout their tenure of office. 
Section 5.2. - Vacancies in Office. 
    Any City office shall become vacant upon the occurrence of one or more of the following events before the expiration of the term of such office. 
(a)  For any reason specified by state law creating a vacancy; 
(b)  If the officer of the City shall absent himself continuously from the City for more than sixty days without the permission of the Commission; 
(c)  In the case of any members of the Commission, where such officer shall miss four (4) consecutive regular meetings of the Commission, or twenty-five (25) per cent of such meetings in any fiscal year of the City, unless such absences shall be excused by the Commission and the reason entered in the proceedings of the Commission; 
(d)  If the officer shall be convicted of any act constituting misconduct in office under the provisions of this Charter. 
Section 5.3. - Resignations. 
    Resignations of elective officers shall be made in writing and filed with the Clerk and shall be acted upon by the Commission at its next regular meeting following receipt thereof by the Clerk. Resignations of officers appointed by the Commission shall be made in writing to the Commission. Resignations of officers appointed by the City Manager shall be made in writing to him. All resignations shall be immediately acted upon. 
Section 5.4. - Filling Vacancies in Elective Offices. 
    If a vacancy occurs in any elective office, the Commission shall, within thirty days after such vacancy occurs, appoint a person to fill such vacancy for the unexpired term of the officer who vacated the office. However, if any such vacancy in the position of Commissioner is not fulfilled by appointment within the said thirty days, or if three or more vacancies in the position of Commissioner exist simultaneously, the City Clerk shall forthwith call a special election to be held within sixty days thereafter to fill such vacancy or vacancies for the unexpired terms of the individuals whose offices have become vacant. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, no vacancy in an elective office shall be filled either by appointment or by special election as above provided if the term of office of the person whose office has become vacant expires within ninety days after the vacancy occurs. 
Section 5.5. - Change in Term of Office or Compensation. 
    Except by procedures provided in this Charter, the terms of the elective officials of the City shall not be shortened. The terms of elective officers of the City may not be extended beyond the period for which any such officer was elected except that an elective officer of the City shall, after his term has expired, continue to hold office until his successor is elected and has qualified. The Commission shall not grant or authorize extra compensation to any City officer, agent or contractor, after the service has been rendered or the contract entered into. Nor shall the salary of any elective City officer be increased or decreased after his election during any fixed term of office for which he was elected. 
Note- See the note to section 4.4. 
Section 5.6. - Oath of Office and Bond. 
    Every officer, elected or appointed, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take the oath of office prescribed by Section 2 of Article XVI of the Constitution of the State and shall file the same with the Clerk, together with any bond which he may be required by this Charter or by the Commission to give. In case of failure to comply with the provisions of this section within ten (10) days from the date of his election or appointment, such officer shall be deemed to have declined the office and such office shall thereupon become vacant unless the Commission shall, by resolution, extend the time in which such officer may qualify as above set forth. 
Note- The State of Michigan adopted a new Constitution in 1963 and the correct reference is to Article XI(1). 
Section 5.7. - Surety Bonds. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the Commission may require any officer or employee to give a bond, to be approved by the Commission, conditioned upon the faithful and proper performance of the duties of his office or employment, in such sum as the Commission shall determine. All such officers or employees receiving, disbursing, or responsible for the City funds shall be bonded. 
    All official bonds shall be corporate surety bonds and the premiums thereon shall be paid by the City, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. No bond required by this section shall be renewed upon its expiration or in the event of the reappointment of any officer or employee to a position for which a bond is required, but a new bond shall be furnished. No bond shall be issued for a term exceeding two (2) years. All bonds of all officers or employees shall be filed with the Clerk, except that of the Clerk, himself, which shall be filed with the Treasurer. 
Section 5.8. - Liability and Bond to Continue. 
    The resignation, removal, or discharge of any officer or employee of the City shall not, nor shall the election or appointment of another to his office or employment, exonerate such officer or employee or his sureties from any liability incurred by him or them. 
Section 5.9. - Delivery of Office and Its Effects by Officer to His Successor. 
    Whenever any officer or employee, required by this Charter to be a resident, shall cease to be a resident of the City, resign, or be removed from office, or the term for which any officer has been elected or appointed has expired, he shall, on demand, deliver to his successor in office or to his superior all the books, papers, moneys, and effects in his custody as such officer or employee, and which in any way appertain to his office or employment. Every person violating this provision shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and may be proceeded against in the same manner as public officers generally for a like offense under the general laws of the state, now or hereafter in force and applicable thereto. Every officer and employee of the City shall be deemed an officer within the meaning and provision of such general laws of the state for the purpose of this section. 
Section 5.10. - Pecuniary Interests Prohibited. 
    No officer of the City shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, (other than the common public interest) in the profits of any contract, job, work, or service to be performed for the City; nor shall he stand as surety or give any bail or sign any bail or appearance bond required by the ordinances of the City. The foregoing prohibitions, as the same may apply to any Commissioner, shall not apply if the Commission shall declare in its records, by the unanimous vote of the remaining members of the Commission that the best interests of the City are to be served by the waiving of any such prohibition in a particular case and if competitive purchasing and contracting are used in such case. No officer of the City shall personally, or as an agent, provide any bond which is subject to approval by the Commission. Any officer of the City who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of misconduct in office. 
Section 5.11. - Employment and Removal of Personnel Other Than Officers. 
    Employees of the City, other than those officers provided by this Charter, and other than department heads, shall be employed and removed by department heads with the approval of the City Manager. 
Section 5.12. - Compensation of Employees and Officers. 
    The compensation of all employees and administrative officers of the City except that of the City Manager, City Treasurer, and the City Attorney shall be fixed by the City Manager within the limits of budget appropriations and in accordance with any over-all pay plan adopted by the City Commission. 
    The respective salaries and compensation of officers and employees as fixed by this Charter, by ordinance or resolution of the Commission, or by the City Manager, shall be in full for all official services of such officers or employees for the City or public, and shall be in lieu of all fees, commissions and other compensation receivable by such officers for their services in performance of the duties of their offices; which fees, commissions and compensation shall belong to the City and be collected and accounted for by such officers, and be paid into the City treasury and a statement thereof filed periodically with the City Clerk. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to the Justices of the Peace, the elected Constable, or any representative on the Board of Supervisors who is not a full time officer or employee of the City. 
Section 5.13. - Employee Welfare Benefits; Retirement System. 
    The Commission shall have the power to make available to the administrative officers and employees of the City and its department and boards any recognized standard plan of group life, hospital, health, or accident insurance, either independently of, or as a supplement to, any retirement plan provided for the employees and officers. The Commission shall also have the power to provide for a retirement system for its employees independently of any other employee welfare benefits. 
Section 5.14. - Merit System. 
    Appointments, removals, and promotions of officers and employees of the City shall be based upon the qualifications of the officers and employees and upon their performance of duties without any reference to their political or religious preferences. The Commission may provide for a system of civil service for City employees. 
Section 5.15. - Nepotism. 
    Relatives by blood or marriage of any Commissioner, or of the City Manager, within the second degree of consanguinity or affinity, as defined by civil law, are hereby disqualified from holding any appointive office or any employment during the term for which said Commissioner was elected or during the tenure of office of the City Manager, respectively, unless such relatives are bona fide appointive officers or employees of the City at the time of the election of said Commissioner or at the time of the appointment of the City Manager, respectively. 
CHAPTER 6. - PROCEDURE OF THE COMMISSION 

Section 6.1. - Regular Meetings. 
    The Commission shall hold regular meetings on the second and fourth Mondays of each month; it shall provide by resolution, for the exact time and place of its meetings. 
(1)  Provided that regular meetings of said Commission, occurring on a legal holiday, as defined by the statutes of the State of Michigan, shall be held on the next succeeding business day thereafter. 
Note- Act 335 of P.A. 1919 as amended. The act allows for the transaction of business on a legal holiday; i.e. Commission Meetings. 
(Am. 4-5-1954, Eff. 5-27-1949) 
Section 6.2. - Special Meetings. 
    Special meetings may be called by the City Clerk on the written request of the Mayor, the City Manager, or any two members of the Commission on at least twenty-four hours' written notice to each member of the Commission, served personally or left at his usual place of residence; but any special meeting at which all members of the Commission are present or have waived notice thereof in writing, shall be a legal meeting for all purposes. 
Section 6.3. - Business at Special Meetings. 
    No business shall be transacted at any special meeting of the Commission unless the same has been stated in the notice of such meeting; however, if all the members of the Commission are present at any special meeting, then any business which might lawfully come before a regular meeting may be transacted at such special meeting. 
Section 6.4. - Meetings to be Public. 
    All regular and special meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public and citizens shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard. 
Section 6.5. - Quorum. 
    Three members of the Commission shall be a quorum for the transaction of business at Commission meetings, but in the absence of a quorum, two members may adjourn the meeting to a later date. 
Section 6.6. - Compulsory Attendance at Meetings. 
    The Commission may, by vote of not less than two of its members, compel the attendance of its members and other officers of the City at its regular and special meetings and enforce orderly conduct therein; and any member of the Commission or other officer of the City who refuses to attend such meetings or conducts himself in a disorderly manner thereat shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office. The Chief of Police shall serve as the Sergeant-at-arms of the Commission in the enforcement of the provisions of this section. 
Section 6.7. - Rules of the Commission. 
    The Commission shall determine its own rules and order of business subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  There shall be no standing committees of the Commission. 
(b)  A journal of the proceedings in the English language shall be maintained and shall be signed by the Mayor and Clerk. 
(c)  A vote upon all ordinances and resolutions shall be taken by "Yea" and "Nay" vote and entered upon the records, except that where the vote is unanimous it shall only be necessary to so state. 
(d)  No Commissioner shall vote on any question in which he has a financial interest other than a common public interest or on any question concerning his own conduct, but on all other questions each member who is present shall vote unless excused by unanimous consent of the remaining members present. 
(e)  Any citizen or taxpayer shall have access to the minutes and records of all meetings of the Commission at all reasonable times. 
(f)  The proceedings of the Commission shall be published at least once within 15 days after each meeting in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. The publication of a summary of such proceedings showing the substance of each separate proceeding of the Commission shall be a sufficient compliance with the requirements of this section. 
CHAPTER 7. - LEGISLATION 

Section 7.1. - Prior City Ordinances and Regulations. 
    All bylaws, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City which are not inconsistent with this Charter and which are in force and effect at the time of the adoption of this Charter shall continue in full force and effect until repealed or amended. 
Section 7.2. - Form of Ordinances. 
    All legislation of the City shall be by ordinance or by resolution. The word "resolution" as used in this Charter shall be the official action of the Commission in the form of a motion, and such action shall be limited to matters required or permitted to be done by resolution by this Charter or by state or federal law and to matters pertaining to the internal affairs or concerns of the City government. All other acts of the Commission, and all acts carrying a penalty for the violation thereof, shall be by ordinance. Each ordinance shall be identified by a number and a short title. Each proposed ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form. The style of all ordinances passed by the Commission shall be, "The City of Buchanan ordains:". 
Section 7.3. - Enactment, Amendment, and Repeal of Ordinances. 
    Ordinances may be enacted, amended, or repealed by the affirmative vote of not less than three Commissioners, except that when an ordinance is given immediate effect, Section 7.4 shall govern. Unless by the affirmative vote of three Commissioners, no office shall be created or abolished, no tax or assessment be imposed, no street, alley, or public ground be vacated, no real estate or any interest therein be sold or disposed of, no private property be taken for public use, nor any vote of the Commission be reconsidered or rescinded at a special meeting, nor any money appropriated except as otherwise provided by this Charter. 
    Except in the case of ordinances which are declared to be emergency ordinances, no ordinance shall be finally passed by the Commission until two weeks after the meeting at which it is introduced. A brief description of the subject and contents of the ordinance as introduced shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least one week before final passage, either separately or as part of the published proceedings of the Commission. 
    No ordinance shall be revised, altered, or amended by reference to the title only, but the section or sections of the ordinance revised, altered, or amended shall be reenacted and published at length in a newspaper of local circulation in the City. However, an ordinance may be repealed by reference to its number and title only. 
Section 7.4. - When Ordinances Take Effect. 
    The effective date of all ordinances shall be prescribed therein, but the effective date shall not be earlier than fifteen days after the enactment nor before publication thereof, except that ordinances immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health, or safety may be given earlier effect by the affirmative vote of not less than three Commissioners if three or four Commissioners are present at the meeting, and by the affirmative vote of not less than four Commissioners if five Commissioners are present at the meeting. In case an ordinance is given effect earlier than fifteen days after its enactment, all requirements for publication may be met by posting copies thereof in conspicuous locations in three public places in the City; and the Clerk shall, immediately after such posting, enter in the Ordinance Book under the record of the ordinance a certificate under his hand stating the time and place of such publication by posting, which certificate shall be prima facie evidence of the due publication and posting of the ordinance. 
Section 7.5. - Publication of Ordinances. 
    Each ordinance passed by the Commission shall be published in full at least once within fourteen days after its adoption in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, either separately or as a part of the published proceedings of the Commission. 
    All ordinances and revisions, alterations, or amendments of same shall be recorded by the Clerk in a book to be called "The Ordinance Book," and it shall be the duty of the Mayor and Clerk to authenticate such records by their official signatures thereon. 
Section 7.6. - Penalties. 
    The Commission shall provide in each ordinance for the punishment of those who violate its provisions. No punishment for the violation of any City ordinance or for the Commission by an officer of the City of any act declared by this Charter to constitute misconduct in office by a court of competent jurisdiction shall exceed a fine of five hundred (500) dollars or imprisonment for ninety (90) days, or both in the discretion of the court, except that any officer of the City found guilty of any act, declared by this Charter to constitute misconduct in office, shall, in addition to such fine or imprisonment, or both, forfeit his office. 
Section 7.7. - Ordinances Granting Franchises and Contracts. 
    Every ordinance or resolution granting any franchise or right to occupy or use the streets, highways, bridges, or public places in the City for any purpose shall be complete in the form in which it is finally passed, and remain on file with the Clerk for public inspection for at least two weeks before the final passage or adoption thereof. No exclusive franchise or grant of right to occupy or use the streets, or public places of the City shall ever be granted. 
Section 7.8. - Compilation and Codification of Ordinances. 
    Within two years after the adoption of this Charter and at least once in every ten years the Commission shall direct and complete the compilation or codification and the publication of the Charter and all ordinances of the City then in force in loose-leaf or pamphlet form, and may provide for a reasonable charge for copies thereof. As part of such compilation or codification, all ordinances enacted to meet any emergency or other special situation which no longer exists shall be abrogated. No further publication of any such compilation or codification shall be required for the validity thereof. In case the compilation or codification of the ordinances of the City shall have been maintained current and up-to-date during any ten year period, no re-compilation or re-codification of the ordinances of the City shall be required during or at the end of such period. 
    The copies of the ordinances and of any compilation, code, or codes referred to in the Charter may be certified by the Clerk and, when so certified, shall be competent evidence in all courts and legally established tribunals as to the matter contained therein. 
Section 7.9. - Initiative and Referendum. 
    An ordinance may be initiated by petition, or a referendum on an ordinance enacted by the Commission may be had, by petition, as hereinafter provided. 
Section 7.10. - Initiatory and Referendary Petitions. 
    An initiatory or a referendary petition shall be signed by not less than twenty-five per cent of the registered electors of the City, who have signed said petition within one month before date of filing the petition with the Clerk. Before being circulated for signatures, all such petitions shall be approved as to form by the Clerk. No such petition need be on one paper, but may be the aggregate of two or more petition papers. Each signer of a petition shall sign his name, and shall place thereon, after his name, the date and his place of residence by street and number, or by other customary designation. To each petition paper there shall be attached a sworn affidavit by the circulator thereof, stating the number of signers thereto and that each signature thereon is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and that it was made in the presence of the affiant. Such petition shall be filed with the Clerk who shall, within fifteen days, canvass the signatures thereon to determine the sufficiency thereof. If found to contain an insufficient number of signatures of registered electors of the City, or to be improper as to form or compliance with the provisions of this section, the Clerk shall notify forthwith the person filing such petition and fifteen days from such notification shall be allowed for the filing of supplemental petition papers. When found sufficient and proper, the Clerk shall present the petition to the Commission at its next regular meeting. 
Section 7.11. - Commission Procedure on Petitions. 
    Upon receiving an initiatory or referendum petition from the Clerk, the Commission shall within thirty days either: (a) adopt the ordinance as submitted by an initiatory petition; or (b) repeal the ordinance referred to by a referendary petition; or (c) instead determine to submit the proposal provided for in the petition to the electors. 
Section 7.12. - Submission to Electors. 
    Should the Commission decide to submit the proposal to the electors, it shall be submitted at the next election held in the City for any other purpose, or, in the discretion of the Commission, at a special election. The result shall be determined by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon, except in cases where otherwise required by the Constitution or laws of the State of Michigan. 
Section 7.13. - Ordinance Suspended; Miscellaneous Provisions on Initiative and Referendum Ordinances. 
    The certification by the Clerk of the sufficiency of a referendary petition shall automatically suspend the ordinance in question pending repeal by the Commission or final determination by the electors as the case may be. An ordinance adopted by the electorate through initiatory proceedings may not be amended or repealed by the Commission for a period of two years after the date of the election at which it was adopted and then only by the affirmative vote of four Commissioners. Should two or more ordinances adopted at the same election have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the highest number of votes shall prevail as to those provisions. 
Section 7.14. - Technical Codes. 
    The Commission may adopt in whole or in part any provision of state law or any detailed technical regulations as a City ordinance or code by citation of such provision of state law or by reference to any recognized standard code, official or unofficial, provided that any such provision of state law or recognized official or unofficial standard code shall be clearly identified in the ordinance adopting the same as an ordinance of the City. Where any recognized official or unofficial standard code is so adopted, it may be published by providing and maintaining available to the public not less than fifty (50) copies in book or booklet form at a reasonable charge, and any amendment to or revision of such adopted code or detailed technical ordinance may be published in the same manner. 
Section 7.15. - Zoning Ordinance. 
    The Commission shall, within one year after the effective date of this Charter, pass a zoning ordinance providing for the establishment of districts or zones within which the use of land and structures; the height, the area, the size and location of buildings; and required open spaces for light and ventilation of such buildings; and the density of populations shall be prescribed. 
Section 7.16. - Rules of Ordinance Construction; Severability. 
    In the construction of the ordinances of the City, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City Commission. 
    If any portion of an ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be found to be invalid by a court, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining portions or applications of the ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid portion or application, provided such remaining portions are not determined by the court to be inoperable, and to this end ordinances are declared to be severable. 
CHAPTER 8. - MISCELLANEOUS POWERS AND DUTIES OF COMMISSION: RESTRICTIONS ON POWERS AND DUTIES 

Section 8.1. - Public Health and Safety. 
    Through the departments and agencies of the City government, the Commission shall provide for the public peace and health, and for the safety of persons and property. The Commission shall constitute the Board of Health of the City, and it and its officers shall possess all powers, privileges, and immunities granted to boards of health by state law. 
Section 8.2. - Streets and Alleys. 
    Except insofar as limited by state law and the provisions of this Charter, the Commission shall have power to establish, vacate, and use, and to patrol and regulate the use of, its streets, alleys, bridges, and public places whether such public places be located within or without the limits of the City, and space above and beneath them. Such power shall include, but not be limited to, the proper policing and supervision thereof; to the licensing and regulation, or the prohibition, of the placing of signs, awnings, awning posts, and other things which are of such nature as to impede or make dangerous the use of sidewalks or streets, upon or over the sidewalks or streets of the City; in the licensing and regulation of the construction and use of openings of sidewalks and streets and of all vaults, structures, and excavations under the same. 
    Provided, that when the Commission shall deem it advisable to vacate, discontinue or abolish any highway, street, lane, alley or public ground or any part thereof, it shall appoint a time not less than four weeks thereafter when it shall meet and hear objections thereto; notice of such meetings, with a copy of said resolution shall be given in such manner as shall be prescribed by ordinance or resolution. Objections to such proposed action of the Commission may be filed with the Clerk in writing, and if any such shall be filed, the street, alley or public ground, or any part thereof, shall not be vacated or discontinued, except by a vote of four of the members-elect of the Commission. 
Section 8.3. - Licenses. 
    The Commission shall by ordinance prescribe the terms and conditions upon which licenses may be granted, suspended, or revoked; and may require and exact payment of such reasonable funds for any licenses as it may deem proper. The persons receiving the licenses shall, before the issuing thereof, execute a bond to the City, when required by any ordinance, in such sum and with such securities as described by such ordinance, conditioned for the safe observance of the Charter of the City, and the ordinance under which the license is granted. 
Note- Franchises and licenses are limited by the Constitution of the State of Michigan to a term of thirty (30) years, Article VII, Section 30, and rate provisions are affected by Act 28 of P.A. 1935. 
Section 8.4. - House Trailers. 
    The Commission may, by ordinance, provide for the prohibition or regulation of the use, occupancy, sanitation, and parking of house trailers within the City. The right of the Commission to so regulate any house trailer shall not be abrogated because of any detachment thereof from its wheels or because of placing it on, or attaching it to, the ground by means of any temporary or permanent foundation, or in any manner whatsoever. 
Note- The Supreme Court of the State of Michigan has established certain criteria for enforcement of laws affecting mobile homes and the Mobile Home Commission in promulgating certain rules. 
Section 8.5. - Trusts. 
    All trusts established for sanitary, park, or other municipal purposes shall be used and continued in accordance with the terms of such trust, subject to the common law cy pres doctrine. The City may, in its discretion, receive and hold any property in trust for cemetery, park, or other municipal purposes and shall apply the same to the execution of such trust and for no other purposes, whatsoever, except in cases where the common law cy pres doctrine shall apply. 
Section 8.6. - Investigations. 
    The Commission, or any person or committee authorized by it for the purpose, shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any department, office, or officer of the City and to make investigations as to municipal affairs, and for that purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and compel the production of books, papers, and other evidence. Failure on the part of any officer of the City to obey such subpoena or to produce books, papers, or other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this section shall constitute misconduct in office. If such failure shall be on the part of any employee of the City, it shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
Section 8.7. - Restrictions on Powers of the Commission. 
    The Commission shall not have the power to: 
(a)  Make any contract with or give any official position to any person who is in default to the City; 
(b)  Sell, lease or exchange real property such as land, building and improvements thereon, owned by the City except by unanimous vote of the Commission after public hearing. A public hearing on any proposed sale, lease or exchange of real property shall be held before its final adoption. The Commission shall direct the time and place of said public hearing. The City Clerk shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least two (2) weeks in advance a notice of said public hearing. After the conducting of the public hearing, the Commission, by unanimous vote of the members present may sell, lease or exchange real property belonging to the City, when, in the opinion of the Commission, said property is no longer required for the purpose for which it was acquired or held or that the transfer will otherwise be in the public interest. 
(c)  Sell, lease or exchange personal property such as equipment and vehicles in excess of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) unless approved by the majority vote of the Commission. In connection with the disposal of utility property, however, Section 13.4 shall apply instead of this section, to the extent permitted by state law. 
Note- The sale of sites in the Andrews Farm Industrial Park has been exempted from this Section by Act 62 of P.A. 1963, as amended, and order of the Berrien County Circuit Court. 
(Ref. of 8-8-2000) 
Section 8.8. - Restrictions on Powers to Lease Property. 
    Any agreement or contract for the renting or letting of public property for a period longer than three years shall be subject to the same referendum procedure as is provided in the case of ordinances passed by the Commission. 
CHAPTER 9. - GENERAL FINANCE-BUDGET, AUDIT, PURCHASING 

Section 9.1. - Fiscal Year. 
    The fiscal year of the City and of all its agencies shall begin on the first day of July and end on the thirtieth day of June of the following year. Such year shall also constitute the budget year of the City government. The period from March 1 to June 30 inclusive of the year in which this Charter is adopted shall constitute a fiscal period and budget period for that year only both for the City and all its agencies, in order to accomplish the transition from the fiscal year as existing in the City of Buchanan previous to the adoption of this Charter. 
    On June 30 of the year in which this Charter is adopted, all unencumbered funds of the City shall revert to the general fund of the City. 
Note- The dates and procedures reflected herein have been affected or modified by the Uniform Budgeting and Accounting Act of the State of Michigan, being Act 2 of P.A. 1968, reference to dates and procedures for budgeting must by made in reference to State guidelines. 
Section 9.2. - Budget Procedure. 
    The City Manager shall submit his recommended budget for the ensuing fiscal year to the City Commission on or before the second regular monthly meeting in April. 
Section 9.3. - Budget Documents. 
    The budget document shall present a complete financial plan for the ensuing fiscal year. It shall include at least the following information: 
(a)  Detailed estimates of all proposed expenditures for each department and office of the City, showing the expenditures for corresponding items for the last preceding and current fiscal years, with reasons for increases and decreases recommended, as compared with appropriations for the current year; 
(b)  Statements of the bonded and other indebtedness of the City, showing the debt redemption and interest requirements, the debt authorized and unissued, and the condition of sinking funds, if any; 
(c)  Detailed estimates of all anticipated income of the City from sources other than taxes and borrowing, with a comparative statement of the amounts received by the City from each of the same or similar sources for the last preceding and current fiscal years; 
(d)  A statement of the estimated balance or deficit, as the case may be, for the end of the current fiscal year; 
(e)  An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from current and delinquent taxes and the amount to be raised from bond issues which, together with income from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures; 
(f)  Such other supporting schedules as the Commission may deem necessary. 
Section 9.4. - Budget Hearing. 
    A public hearing on the budget shall be held before its final adoption, at such time and place as the Commission shall direct, and notice of such public hearing and of the fact that the proposed budget is on file in the office of the City Clerk shall be published at least one week in advance by the Clerk. A summary of the proposed budget shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. The complete budget shall also be on file and available to the public for inspection during office hours at the office of the Clerk for a period of not less than one week prior to such public hearing. 
Section 9.5. - Adoption of Budget and Tax Limit. 
    Not later than the second regular meeting in May, the Commission shall by resolution adopt a budget for the next fiscal year and shall appropriate the money needed for municipal purposes during the ensuing fiscal year of the City, and shall provide for a levy of the amount necessary to be raised by taxes upon real and personal property for municipal purposes. This levy shall not exceed 2% of the assessed valuation of all real and personal property subject to taxation in the City, exclusive of any levy required for the payment of principal and interest on outstanding bonds, together with any other levies authorized by state law to be made beyond charter tax rate limitations. 
Section 9.6. - Transfer of Appropriations. 
    No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the City nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except pursuant to the budget appropriation. The Commission may transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance, or any portion thereof, from one department, fund, or agency to another. The balance in any appropriation which has not been encumbered at the end of the fiscal year shall revert to the general fund and be reappropriated during the next fiscal year. 
Section 9.7. - Budget Control. 
    At the beginning of each quarterly period during the fiscal year, and more often if required by the Commission, the City Manager shall submit to the Commission data showing the relation between the estimated and actual income and expenses to date; and if it shall appear that the income is less than anticipated, the Commission may reduce appropriations, except amounts required for debt and interest charges, to such a degree as may be necessary to keep expenditures within the cash income. 
Section 9.8. - Depository. 
    The Commission shall designate a depository or depositories for City funds, and shall provide for the regular deposit of all City moneys. The Commission shall provide for such security for City deposits as is authorized or permitted by the general laws of the state, except that personal surety bonds shall not be deemed proper security. 
Section 9.9. - Independent Audit, Annual Report. 
    An independent audit shall be made of all accounts of the City government at least annually and more frequently if deemed necessary by the Commission. Such audit shall be made by certified public accountants experienced in municipal accounting. An abstract of the results of such audit, which abstract shall show at least a condensed statement of income and expenditures by major sources and a balance sheet, shall be made public by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. An annual report of the City business shall be made available to the public by the City Manager in such form as will disclose pertinent facts concerning the activities and finances of the City government. 
Note- The annual report as provided herein is prepared in conformity with the Charter requirements, State Statutes and Regulations and the standards prescribed by professional organizations. 
Section 9.10. - Purchasing Procedure. 
    The City Manager shall be responsible for all City purchasing. The Commission shall provide by ordinance the necessary procedures governing purchasing and the making of contracts. Such ordinance shall specify an amount below which and purposes for which purchases may be made by the City Manager either without specific authorization or without the necessity of formal competitive bidding, or both. The City Manager shall obtain Commission approval on all contracts or transactions involving the expenditure of $5,000.00 or more. The Commission may also authorize the making of public improvements or the performing of any other City work by any City department or agency without competitive bidding. The Commission, in its discretion, shall have the right to reject any and all bids. 
(Ref. of 11-7-06) 
CHAPTER 10. - TAXATION 

Section 10.1. - Power to Tax. 
    The City shall have the power to assess taxes and lay and collect rents, tolls, and excises. 
Section 10.2. - Subjects of Taxation. 
    The subjects of ad valorem taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for state, county, and school purposes under the general law. Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, City taxes shall be levied, collected and returned in the manner provided by state law. 
Section 10.3. - Exemptions. 
    No exemptions from taxation shall be allowed, except such as are expressly required or permitted to be made by state law. In the case of exemptions made to persons who in the opinion of the Board of Review, by reason of poverty, are unable to contribute towards the public charges, the Board of Review shall require annually, as a condition to the grant of exemption, a written statement under oath of the financial inability of such person or persons to pay taxes, which statement shall be filed with the Board of Review and made a part of its records. 
Section 10.4. - Assessments. 
    Unless otherwise provided by state law, the first day of April in each year shall be the assessment day for both real and personal property in the City. Prior to the first meeting of the Board of Review in each year, the Assessor shall make and complete and certify an assessment roll of all property in the City liable to taxation in accordance with the manner and form provided in the general tax laws of the state. 
Note- Pursuant to the General Property Tax Act of the State of Michigan, Act of 285 of P.A. 1949, as amended, the assessment date for real and personal property is December 31. 
Section 10.5. - Valuing of Real and Personal Property. 
    Said Assessor shall estimate, according to state law and recognized methods of systematic assessment, the value of every parcel of real property and of all taxable personal property of each person and shall record the same appropriately in the roll; provided, however, that lands shall be assessed separately from building improvements thereon, and that the roll shall show separate figures for the value of the land and of the building improvements. Except in the case of uniform general increases in property assessments, in which case notice shall be given by publication, the Assessor shall give notice by first class mail not less than ten days before the first meeting of the Board of Review of any increase in the assessment of any property to the owner of record according to the last assessment roll of the City, but the failure to give any such notice, or of the owner to receive any such notice shall not invalidate any assessment roll or assessment thereon. 
Section 10.6. - Board of Review. 
    The Commission shall annually, in the month of April, appoint three freeholders who are qualified electors of the City, and who may hold other City office or employment, to serve as members of the Board of Review, and shall set their compensation at the time of their appointment. The Assessor shall be the Clerk of the Board and shall keep a record of its proceedings, but he may not be a member of the Board. 
Note- Pursuant to Act 84 of P.A. 1968, the Board of Review shall serve a two-year term, beginning January 1 of each odd-numbered year by appointment of the City Commission. 
Section 10.7. - Meeting of Board of Review. 
    The Board of Review shall convene in its first session on the first Monday in May of each year at such time of day and place as shall be designated by the Commission. It shall remain in session for not less than three days for the purpose of considering and correcting the roll. In each case where the assessed value is increased or any property added to the rolls by the Board, the Clerk shall forthwith give notice to the owners thereof according to the last assessment roll in the City, by first class mail, not later than midnight of the last day of the first meeting of the Board, stating further the date, time, place, and purpose of the second session of the Board; except that in the case of a uniform increase on all assessments, the requirements for notice may be met by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least twice before the second meeting of the Board of the fact that such a uniform increase has been made. 
Note- Pursuant to Act 124 of P.A. 1978, as amended, the Board of Review shall convene on the Tuesday immediately following the First Monday in March. 
    The second session of the Board shall convene on the second Monday of May of each year and shall continue in session on said day until all interested persons have had an opportunity to be heard. At the second session, the Board shall consider only those cases in which the assessed value of property has increased, and in which property was added to the assessment roll at the first session of the Board. If there be no such property in any year, there shall be no second session of the Board. At the conclusion of the second session, and prior to the second Tuesday in May, said Board shall endorse the assessment rolls as provided hereafter. 
Section 10.8. - Notice of Meetings. 
    Notice of the time and place of the sessions of the Board of Review shall be published by the City Clerk in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least ten days prior to the last Monday in April. 
Section 10.9. - Organization and Functions of Board of Review. 
    It shall be the duty of the Assessor, acting as Clerk of the Board, to keep a permanent record of all proceedings, and to enter therein all resolutions and decisions of the Board. A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum, and the Board shall choose its own chairman. The members shall take the constitutional oath of office which shall be filed with the Clerk. For the purpose of revising and correcting assessments, the Board of Review shall have the same powers and perform like duties in all respects as are by the general tax laws conferred upon and required of boards of review in townships. It shall hear the complaints of all persons considering themselves aggrieved by assessments, and if it shall appear that any person or property has been wrongfully assessed, or omitted from the roll, the Board shall correct the roll in such manner as it deems just. In all cases, the roll shall be reviewed according to the facts existing on the assessment day and no change of the status of any property after said day shall be considered by the Board in making its decisions. Except as otherwise provided by state law, no person other than the Board of Review shall make or authorize any change upon, or additions or corrections to, the assessment roll. 
Section 10.10. - Endorsement of Roll. 
    After the Board of Review has completed its review of the assessment roll, and not later than the second Tuesday in May, the majority of its members shall endorse thereon and sign a statement to the effect that the same is the assessment roll of the City for the year in which it has been prepared. The omission of such endorsement shall not affect the validity of such roll. Upon the completion of said roll and from and after midnight following the last day for meeting of the Board of Review, the same shall be the assessment roll of the City for county, school, and City taxes and for any other taxes on real and personal property that may be authorized by law and shall be conclusively presumed by all courts and tribunals to be valid and shall not be set aside except for causes set forth in the general laws of the state. 
Note- Pursuant to Act 285 of P.A. 1949, as amended, the Board of Review shall be completed on or before the first Monday in April. 
Section 10.11. - Clerk to Certify Tax Levy. 
    Within three days after the Commission has adopted the budget for the ensuing year, the Clerk shall certify to the Assessor the total amount which the Commission determines shall be raised by general tax; all amounts of special assessments which the Commission requires to be assessed or reassessed upon any property or against any person; and all other amounts which the Commission may determine shall be charged, assessed, or reassessed against any person or property. 
Section 10.12. - City Tax Roll. 
    After the last day for the meeting of the Board of Review, the Assessor shall prepare a copy of the assessment roll to be known as the "City Tax Roll", and upon receiving the certification of the several amounts to be raised, as provided in the preceding section, the Assessor shall proceed forthwith to spread upon said tax roll the several amounts determined by the Commission to be charged, assessed, or reassessed against persons or property; and shall also proceed to spread the amounts of the general City tax according to and in proportion to the several valuations set forth in said assessment roll. For the purpose of avoiding fractions in computation on any tax roll, the Assessor may add to the amount of the several taxes to be raised not more than the amount prescribed by state law. Any excess created thereby on any tax roll shall belong to the City. 
Section 10.13. - Tax Roll Certified for Collection. 
    After extending the taxes aforesaid and not later than June fifteenth in each year, the Assessor shall certify said tax roll, and the Mayor shall annex his warrant thereto, directing and requiring the Treasurer to collect from the several persons named in said roll the several sums mentioned therein opposite their respective names as a tax or assessment and granting to him, for the purpose of collecting the taxes, assessments, and charges on such roll, all the powers and immunities possessed by township treasurers for the collection of taxes under the general laws of the state. 
Section 10.14. - Taxes Lien on Property. 
    The City taxes thus assessed shall become at once a debt due to the City from the persons to whom they are assessed, and the amounts assessed on any interest in real property shall on the first day of July become a lien upon such real property, and the lien for such amounts and for all interest and other charges thereon shall continue until payment thereof. All personal taxes shall also be a first lien, prior, superior, and paramount, upon all personal property of the persons so assessed from and after the first day of July in each year and shall so remain until paid, which said tax lien shall take precedence over all other claims, encumbrances and liens upon said personal property whatsoever, whether created by chattel mortgage, execution, levy, judgment, or otherwise, and whether arising before or after the assessment of said personal taxes, and no transfer of personal property assessed for taxes thereon shall operate to divest or destroy such lien except where such personal property is actually sold in the regular course of retail trade. 
Section 10.15. - Taxes Due; Notification Thereof. 
    City taxes shall be due on the first day of July of the year when levied and shall be payable as stated in the warrant of the Mayor annexed to said roll. The Treasurer shall not be required to call upon the persons named in the City tax roll, nor to make personal demand for the payment of taxes, but he shall give notice to the taxpayers of the City, at least ten days prior to the due date of such taxes in each year, of the time when said taxes will be due for collection and the penalties for late payment of same, by publication, at least once, in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, or shall give such notice by first class mail addressed to the owners of the property upon which taxes are assessed according to the names of such owners and their addresses as indicated on the tax roll, which notice shall be deemed sufficient for the payment of all taxes on said tax roll. Failure on the part of the Treasurer to give said notice shall not invalidate the taxes on said tax roll nor release the person or property assessed from the penalty provided in this chapter in case of non-payment of the same. 
Section 10.16. - Collection Fees and Interest. 
    All taxes paid on or before August 10 of each year shall be collected by the Treasurer without additional charge. On August 11 he shall add to all taxes paid thereafter a collection fee of one per cent of the amount of said taxes, and on the first day of September and of each succeeding month he shall add an additional one-half of one per cent of said taxes as a collection fee. Such collection fee shall belong to the City and constitute a charge and shall be a lien against the property to which the taxes themselves apply, collectible in the same manner as the taxes to which they are added. 
Note- Delinquent penalties and interest are prescribed by State Statute, see MCLA 211.59. 
    The Mayor may, upon the order of the Commission, extend his warrant for the collection of such tax 30 days from and after August 10 without the payment of additional collection fees. In such case the schedule of fees provided for above shall be delayed 30 days. 
Section 10.17. - Sale of Goods and Chattels. 
    In case any person shall neglect or refuse to pay any tax imposed upon any real or personal property belonging to him, as aforesaid, the Treasurer shall levy the same by distress and sale of the goods and chattels of said person liable to pay the same, wherever such goods and chattels may be found, either in said City or elsewhere within the State, first by giving public notice of such sale in the manner and for the time required by law in the case of such sale made by township treasurers, and for such purpose and for the collection of the taxes aforesaid, the Treasurer may bring suit therefor, and shall have all the powers and perform the like duties so far as applicable as are conferred upon or required of township treasurers in the collection of taxes levied in townships. 
Section 10.18. - Tax Roll to County Treasurer. 
    All City taxes on real property remaining uncollected by the Treasurer on the first day of March following the date when said roll was received by him, shall be returned to the county treasurer in the same manner and with like effect as returns by township treasurers of township, school, and county taxes. Such returns shall be made upon a delinquent tax roll to be prepared by the Treasurer and shall include all the additional charges and fees hereinbefore provided, which charges shall, in such return, be added to the amount assessed in said tax roll against each description. The taxes thus returned shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes returned to the county treasurer are collected under the provisions of the general laws of the state and shall be and remain a lien upon the lands against which they are assessed, until paid. 
Section 10.19. - State, County, and School Taxes. 
    For the purpose of assessing taxes in the City for state, county, and school purposes, the City shall be considered the same as a township, and all provisions of state law relative to the collection of such taxes and the fees to be paid therefor, the accounting therefor to the appropriate taxing units, and the returning of property to the county treasurer for non-payment thereof shall apply to the performance thereof by the Treasurer, who shall perform the same duties and have the same powers as township treasurer under state law. 
CHAPTER 11. - BORROWING POWER 

Section 11.1. - General Borrowing; Debt Limitation. 
    Subject to the applicable provisions of state law and this Charter, the Commission, by proper ordinance or resolution, may authorize the borrowing of money for any purpose within the scope of the powers vested in the City or permitted by the present or future Constitution and laws of the state, and the issuance of bonds of the City or other evidences of indebtedness therefor, and may pledge the full faith, credit, and resources of the City for the payment of the obligation created therefor; provided, however, that nothing herein shall authorize the Commission to issue without an authorizing vote of the electors any bonds which by state law require such a vote. The net bonded indebtedness shall not at any time exceed 10 per cent of the assessed value of real and personal property in the City, provided that in computing such net bonded indebtedness there shall be excluded emergency loans as provided in Section 11.6 of this Charter, bonds issued in anticipation of the payment of special assessments even though they are also a general obligation of the City, mortgage bonds secured only by mortgage on the property or franchise of a public utility, other bonds which are not a lien upon the taxing power of the City, and bonds issued to refund money advanced or paid on special assessments for water main extensions. 
Section 11.2. - Special Assessment Bonds. 
    The Commission shall, subject to the applicable provisions of the general laws of the state, have authority to borrow money in anticipation of the payment of special assessments made for the purpose of defraying the cost of any public improvement, or in anticipation of the payment of any combination of such special assessments, and to issue bonds therefor. Such special assessment bonds may be an obligation of the special assessment district or districts or may be both an obligation of the special assessment district or districts and a general obligation of the City. 
Section 11.3. - Mortgage Revenue Bonds. 
    The City shall have power to issue mortgage bonds beyond the general limits of bonded indebtedness prescribed by law for the acquiring, owning, purchasing, constructing, improving or operating of any public utility; provided, such mortgage bonds issued beyond the general limit of bonded indebtedness prescribed by law shall not impose any liability upon such City but shall be secured only upon the property and revenues of such public utility, including a franchise, stating the terms upon which, in case of foreclosure, the purchaser may operate the same, which franchise shall in no case extend for a longer period than twenty years from the date of the sale of such utility and franchise on foreclosure. Such mortgage bonds shall be sold to yield not to exceed six per centum per annum. A sinking fund shall be created in the event of the issuance of such bonds, by setting aside such percentage of the gross or net earnings of the public utility as may be deemed sufficient for the payment of the mortgage bonds at maturity, provided, however, that no such fund need be created if serial bonds are issued of such a nature that they are paid annually and no sinking fund is required. 
Section 11.4. - Preparation and Record of Bonds. 
    Each bond or other evidence of indebtedness shall contain on its face a statement specifying the purpose for which the same is issued and it shall be unlawful for any officer of the City to use the proceeds thereof for any other purpose, and any officer who shall violate this provision shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office. All bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the City shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the Clerk, under the seal of the City. Interest coupons may be executed with the facsimile signatures of the Mayor and Clerk. A complete and detailed record of all bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the City shall be kept by the Clerk. Upon the payment of any bond or other evidence of indebtedness, the same shall be marked "Cancelled". 
Section 11.5. - Unissued Bonds. 
    No unissued bonds of the City shall be issued or sold to secure funds for any purpose other than that for which they were specifically authorized, and if any such bonds are not sold within three (3) years after authorization, such authorization shall, as to such bonds, be null and void, and such bonds shall be cancelled. 
Section 11.6. - Emergency Loans. 
    In case of fire, flood, or other calamity, the Commission may borrow for the relief of the inhabitants of the City, and for the preservation of municipal property, a sum not to exceed three-eighths of one per centum of the assessed value of all real and personal property in the City, due in not more than three years, even if such loan would cause the indebtedness of the City to exceed the limit fixed in this Charter. 
CHAPTER 12. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS 

Section 12.1. - General Power Relative to Special Assessments. 
    The Commission shall have the power to determine the necessity of any local or public improvement, including the right to declare public parking facilities to be a local improvement and to determine that the whole or any part of the expense of any local or public improvement shall be defrayed by special assessment upon the property especially benefited, and shall also declare by resolution, provided that all special assessments levied shall be based upon or be in proportion to the benefits derived or to be derived. Such resolution shall state the estimated cost of the improvement, what proportion of the cost thereof shall be paid by special assessments, and what part, if any, shall be a general obligation of the City, the number of installments in which assessments may be paid, and shall designate the districts or land and premises upon which special assessments shall be levied. 
Section 12.2. - Detailed Procedure to be Fixed by Ordinance. 
    The Commission shall prescribe by general ordinance the complete special assessment procedure concerning the initiation of projects, plans and specifications, estimates of costs, notice of hearings, making and confirming assessment rolls, in advance of the making of the improvement, and the correction of errors therein, collection of special assessments, and any other matters concerning the making of improvements by the special assessment method, subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
Section 12.3. - Objection to Improvements. 
    If, at or prior to final confirmation of any special assessments, more than fifty per cent of the number of owners of privately owned real property to be assessed for any improvement, or in case of paving or similar improvements more than fifty per cent of the number of owners of frontage to be assessed for any such improvement, shall object in writing to the proposed improvement, the improvement shall not be made by the proceedings authorized by this chapter without a four-fifths vote of the members-elect of the Commission. The restrictions provided in this section shall not apply to sidewalk construction. 
Section 12.4. - Hazards and Nuisances. 
    When any lot, building, or structure within the City, because of accumulation of refuse or debris, the uncontrolled growing of weeds, or age or dilapidation, or because of any other condition or happening, becomes, in the opinion of the Commission, a public hazard or nuisance which is dangerous to the health of safety of the inhabitants of the City or of those of them residing or habitually going near such lot, building, or structure, the Commission may, after investigation, give notice to the owner of the land upon which such hazard or nuisance exists, or to the owner of the building or structure itself, specifying the nature of the nuisance and requiring such owner to alter, repair, tear down, or remove the nuisance promptly and within a time to be specified by the Commission, which shall be commensurate with the nature of the nuisance. If at the expiration of the time limit in said notice, said owner has not complied with the requirements thereof, or in any case where the owner of the land or of the building or structure itself is not known, the Commission may order such hazard or nuisance abated by the proper department or agency of the City which is qualified to do the work required, and the cost of such abatement, to be assessed against the lot, premises, or description of real property upon which such hazard or nuisance was located. Procedure to be followed to make this section fully effective shall be established by ordinance. 
Section 12.5. - Miscellaneous Powers With Regard to Special Assessments. 
    The Commission shall have power to provide for the following in connection with its power of special assessment, but this list shall not be held to be exclusive: 
(1)  To prescribe for the construction of sidewalks by owners of land within the City and to build or cause to be built such sidewalk and assess the cost thereof against the abutting owner and the land improved thereby as a special assessment in case the owner fails to comply with the requirements for the construction of the sidewalk. 
(2)  To provide for the payment of special assessments in annual installments not to exceed fifteen in number, and for an interest charge not to exceed six per cent per year upon such deferred installment, subject to the right of advance payment of any such installment with interest only to the date of payment. 
(3)  To make additional pro rata assessments when any special assessment roll proves insufficient to meet the cost of improvements for which it was made, but the total assessment may not exceed the value of benefits received by the lot or parcel of land against which it is assessed. 
(4)  To place in the City treasury any assessment which proves larger than necessary by five per cent or less; but should the assessment exceed the amount necessary by over five per cent, the entire excess shall be refunded on a pro rata basis to those owners of property upon which payments have been made. No refunds of special assessments may be made which impair or contravene the provisions of any outstanding obligation or bonds secured in whole or in part by such special assessment. In lieu of refund, the Commission may provide that the amount of any excess assessment be allotted as a credit on the last installment of the assessment. 
(5)  To cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the original assessment was made, regardless of the stage of the improvement or the collection of the assessment, whenever the Commission shall deem any special assessment invalid or defective for any reason whatever, or whenever any court of competent jurisdiction shall have adjudged such assessment to be illegal for any reason whatever in whole or in part. All reassessment proceedings shall be made in the same manner as provided for the original assessment. Payments made on the original assessment shall be applied on the reassessment, or refunds may be made if the payments exceed the amount of the original assessment. 
(6)  To cause and require the owners and occupants of any lot or premises to remove all snow and ice from the sidewalks in front of or adjacent to such lot or premises, and to perform such removal and charge the owner or occupant therefor in case he neglects to so do himself. 
Section 12.6. - Special Assessment Accounts. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, moneys raised by special assessments to pay the cost of any local improvement shall be held in a special fund to pay such cost or to repay any money borrowed therefor. Each special assessment account must be used only for the improvement project for which the assessment was levied, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
Section 12.7. - Contested Assessments. 
    Except and unless notice is given to the Commission in writing of an intention to contest or enjoin the collection of any special assessment within thirty days after the date of the meeting of the Commission at which it is finally determined to proceed with the making of the improvement in question, which notice shall state the grounds on which the proceedings are to be contested, no suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of such special assessment; and, regardless of whether or not any public improvement is completed in any special assessment district, no owner of real property located in such district shall be entitled to commence any suit or action for the purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of any such special assessment after he has received a benefit from the substantial completion of that portion of such public improvement for which he is assessed. 
Section 12.8. - Delinquent Special Assessments. 
    Special assessments and all interest and charges thereon, from the date of confirmation of the roll, shall be and remain a lien upon the property assessed of the same character and effect as the lien created by general law for state and county taxes, and by this Charter for City taxes, until paid. From such date and after confirmation as shall be fixed by the Commission, the same collection fees shall be collected on delinquent special assessments and upon delinquent installments of such special assessments beginning on the following August 15 of each year, as are provided by this Charter to be collected on delinquent City taxes. Such delinquent special assessments shall be subject to the same penalties, and the lands upon which the same are a lien shall be subject to sale therefor, the same as are delinquent City taxes and the lands upon which they constitute a lien. 
Note- Delinquent special assessments are certified in the same manner as other taxes on the last day of February pursuant to Act 87 of P.A. 1971, as amended. 
Section 12.9. - Lien Not Destroyed by Judgment. 
    No judgment or decree, or any act of the Commission vacating a special assessment shall destroy or impair the lien of the City upon the premises assessed, for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the same, or as by a regular vote or proceeding might have been lawfully assessed thereon. 
CHAPTER 13. - MUNICIPALLY OWNED UTILITIES 

Section 13.1. - General Powers Respecting Utilities. 
    The City shall possess and hereby reserves to itself all the powers granted to cities by the constitution and general laws of the State of Michigan to acquire, construct, own, operate, improve, enlarge, extend, repair, and maintain, either within or without its corporate limits, including, but not by the way of limitation, public utilities for supplying water, light, heat, power, gas, sewage treatment, and garbage disposal facilities, or any of them, to the municipality and the inhabitants thereof; and also to sell and deliver water, light, heat, power, gas and other public utility services, without its corporate limits to an amount not to exceed the limitations set by state law and constitution. 
Section 13.2. - Rates. 
    The Commission shall have the power to fix, from time to time, such just and equitable rates as may be deemed advisable for supplying the inhabitants of the City and others with water; with electricity for light, heat, and power; and with such other utility services as the City may provide. 
Section 13.3. - Utility Charges-Collection. 
    The Commission shall provide, by ordinance, for the collection of all public utility charges made by the City. With respect to water, the City shall have all the powers granted to cities by Act 178 of the Public Acts of 1939, as amended. When any person or persons, or any firm or corporation, shall fail or refuse to pay to the City any sums due on utility bills, the service or services upon which such delinquency exists shall be shut off or discontinued and suit may be instituted by the City for the collection of the same in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
Section 13.4. - Disposal of Utility Plants and Property. 
    The City shall not sell, exchange, lease, or in any way alien or dispose of the property, easements, or other equipment, privilege, or asset belonging to and appertaining to any utility which it may acquire, unless and except the proposition for such purpose shall first have been submitted, at an election held for that purpose in the manner provided in this Charter, to the electors of the City and approved by them by a three-fifths ( 3 / 5 ) majority vote of the electors voting thereon. All contracts, negotiations, licenses, grants, leases or other forms of transfer in violation of this provision, shall be void and of no effect as against the City. The provisions of this section shall not, however, apply to the sale or exchange of any articles of equipment of any City owned utility as are worn out or useless, or which could, with advantage to the service, be replaced by new and improved machinery or equipment. 
Section 13.5. - Utility Accounts. 
    Separate accounts distinct from any other City accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the City in such manner as to show the true and complete financial results of such utility. Such accounts shall account for all assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses of the utility, including charges for all service furnished to, or rendered by, other City departments or agencies. An annual report showing the financial results of the utility containing at least the information specified in this section, shall be made. Such report, or a summary of it, shall be published in a newspaper of local circulation in the City, and the full report shall be on file in the office of the Clerk for public inspection. 
CHAPTER 14. - CONTRACTS-FRANCHISES-PERMITS 

Section 14.1. - City May Perform Public Work. 
    The Commission shall have power to do any public work or make any public improvement by the employment of the necessary labor and the purchase of the necessary supplies and materials with separate accounting as to each improvement so made, or to do such work by contract duly let after competitive bidding. The Commission shall also have power to do any public work or make any public improvement under any legally constituted plan under which the labor is furnished by any other governmental unit, department, or agency of the United States government or the State of Michigan, or which is wholly or in part financed by them or either of them. 
Section 14.2. - Plans and Specifications. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Charter the responsibility for the preparation of plans and specifications, estimating the cost of advertising for bids, supervision and approval of the work for any public work or public or special improvement is vested in the City Manager. 
Section 14.3. - Contracts. 
    Whenever it becomes desirable for the City to enter into a contract with a second party for any purpose whatever, such instrument shall be drawn or approved as to form by the City Attorney and certified to as to sufficiency of funds by the officer charged with maintenance of the accounting system of the City. The letting and making of such contracts is hereby vested in the Commission, which in its discretion, shall have the power to reject any or all bids. Copies of all contracts shall be filed in the office of the Clerk. 
    When it becomes necessary, in the prosecution of any work or improvement done under contract, to make alterations or modifications in such contract, such alterations or modifications shall be made only upon resolution of the Commission. No such order shall be effective until the price to be paid for the material and work, or both, under the altered or modified contract shall have been agreed upon in writing and signed by the contractor and the City Manager upon authority of the Commission and a copy thereof and of the proceedings authorizing such alteration or modification certified by the Clerk and attached by the Clerk to the original contract on file in his office. 
Section 14.4. - Franchises. 
    No franchise or grant which is not revocable at the will of the Commission shall be granted or become operative until the same shall have been referred to the people at a regular or special election and shall have received the approval of three-fifths of the electors voting thereon. All irrevocable public utility franchises and all renewals, extensions, and amendments thereof shall be granted only by ordinance. No such ordinance shall be approved by the Commission for presentation to the electorate before thirty days after application therefor has been filed with the Commission, nor until a public hearing has been held thereon. No such ordinance shall be submitted to the electors at an election to be held less than thirty days after the grantee named therein has filed with the Clerk his unconditional acceptance of all the terms of such franchise, and it shall not be submitted to a special election unless the expense of holding the election, and the cost of publishing such proposed franchise ordinance in full in advance of the election, as determined by the Commission, shall have been paid to the Treasurer by the grantee. There shall be granted no exclusive franchise nor one for a term longer than thirty years. 
Section 14.5. - Leases, Licenses and Franchises Remain in Effect. 
    All leases, licenses and franchises granted by the City and in force within the City when this Charter becomes law, shall remain in full force and effect until the expiration of the time for which they were respectively granted, has lapsed under conditions contained in the license or franchise granted, or until such license or franchises may have been taken over by the City by purchase, condemnation, grant or otherwise. 
Section 14.6. - Control and Revocation of Franchises. 
    The Commission shall cause to be instituted such actions or proceedings as may be necessary to prosecute a public utility company for violations of its franchise, the City Charter, or ordinances of the City, and may revoke, cancel, or annul all franchises that may have been granted by the City which, for any reason, have become inoperative, illegal, or void and not binding upon the City. 
Section 14.7. - Right of Regulation. 
    All public utility franchises granted after the adoption of this Charter, whether it be so provided in the granting ordinance or not, shall be subject to the following rights of the City, provided, however, that this enumeration is not to be construed as being exclusive or as impairing the right of the Commission to insert in such franchise any provision as may be within the power of the City to impose or require: 
(a)  To repeal the same for misuse, or non-use, or for failure to comply with the provisions thereof; 
(b)  To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard of efficiency; 
(c)  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates; 
(d)  To require conditions and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof; 
(e)  To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the Commission to be conducive to the safety, welfare, and accommodation of the public. 
Section 14.8. - Regulation of Rates. 
    All public utility franchises shall make provision therein for fixing rates, fares, and charges, and for readjustments thereof at periodic intervals at the discretion of the City. The value of the property of the utility used as a basis for fixing such rates, fares, and charges shall in no event include a value predicated upon the franchise, goodwill, or prospective profits. 
CHAPTER 15. - SUPERVISORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Note- Act 261 of P.A. 1966 provides for apportionment of counties into districts and eliminates the effect of this chapter. 

Section 15.1. - Number of Supervisors. 
    Until such time as the City shall be entitled to an additional number of representatives upon its County Board of Supervisors by reason of an increase in population or otherwise under the laws of the state, the City shall continue to be entitled to four representatives upon such Board. 
Section 15.2. - Selection of Supervisors. 
    The Mayor of the City, by virtue of his office, shall be a member of the Board of Supervisors of the county and represent the interest of the City in said Board, and as a member of such Board he shall be entitled to receive the same compensation as other supervisors for attendance upon said Board, and he shall have all the rights, privileges and powers of other members of said Board of Supervisors. The other three representatives on the Board of Supervisors, together with such additional supervisors as the City may from time to time be entitled to, shall be appointed by the City Commission to serve at their pleasure, and shall be qualified electors of the City, provided that nothing herein shall prevent the appointment of City officers, Commissioners, or employees as supervisors. In case any representative of the City on the Board of Supervisors shall be unable to attend the meetings of the Board for any reason, the Commission may appoint a qualified person to discharge the duties of such office during his inability to attend. 
    If the Mayor advises the Commission in writing that he does not wish to serve as Supervisor, the Commission may appoint a representative to serve in his place. 
Section 15.3. - Compensation of Supervisors. 
    Supervisors of the City who are not full-time City employees shall be entitled to retain any compensation and expense allowances paid to them by the county as members of the Board of Supervisors, but shall receive no compensation from the City for their work as Supervisors. In the case of supervisors who are full-time officers or employees of the City, the compensation and expense allowances received from the county for their duties as members of the Board of Supervisors shall be paid into the City treasury in accordance with Section 5.12 of this Charter; however, allowances for expenses directly incurred by these officers or employees for their work as members of the Board of Supervisors shall be paid to them by the City. 
CHAPTER 16. - JUSTICE COURTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Note- The office of Justice of the Peace was abolished by State Statute, effective January 1, 1969. 

Section 16.1. - Present Law. 
    No suit, cause, or prosecution of any kind, commenced or pending before the present Justice Courts of the City shall be in any manner affected by the adoption or taking effect of this Charter; and as to such suit, cause, or prosecution, all of the provisions of the present law applying to the Justice Courts of the City and to appeal therefrom, shall remain in full force and effect. 
Section 16.2. - Justice of the Peace. 
    The Justices of the Peace in office at the time of the adoption of this Charter shall remain in office until the expiration of the terms for which they were elected, with the powers and duties prescribed in this Charter. 
Section 16.3. - Compensation. 
    The Justice of the Peace shall receive as his compensation the statutory fees of that office as provided by the general laws of the state. The Commission may, by resolution, authorize additional compensation to be paid to the Justice, provided that any change in such compensation shall be made at least thirty days prior to the last day for filing petitions for the election of such office. 
Section 16.4. - Power and Jurisdiction-General. 
    The Justices of the Peace of the City shall have, and exercise therein and within the county, the same jurisdiction, powers and duties as are conferred by law on Justices of the Peace in townships and shall be subject to such general laws with respect to such Justices, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. They shall have concurrent jurisdiction with other Justices in the County of Berrien as to all crimes, offenses, and misdemeanors when alleged to have been committed outside of the City but within the County of Berrien. 
Section 16.5. - Jurisdiction in Charter and Ordinance Cases. 
    The Justices of the Peace shall have authority to hear, try, and determine all suits and prosecutions for the recovery and enforcing of fines, penalties, and forfeitures imposed by this Charter and the ordinances of the City, and to punish offenders for the violation of such Charter and ordinances, as, in such Charter or ordinances, is prescribed and directed. 
Section 16.6. - Extended Jurisdiction. 
    The Justices of the Peace shall also have: 
(a)  Concurrent jurisdiction to the amount of $500.00 in all civil matters ex contractu and ex delicto, with such exceptions and restrictions as are provided by law; 
(b)  Such rights, powers, duties, and liabilities not inconsistent with state law or this Charter, as the Commission shall prescribe by ordinance or resolution. 
Section 16.7. - Procedure in Justice Court. 
    The proceedings in all suits and actions before the Justices of the Peace and in the exercise of the powers and duties conferred upon and required of him, shall, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, be according to and governed by the general laws applicable to justice courts and to the proceedings before such courts. 
Section 16.8. - Docket-Entries, Public Inspection. 
    Each Justice of the Peace shall enter in the docket kept by him the title of all suits and prosecutions commenced or prosecuted before him for violations of the ordinances of the City and all the proceedings and the judgment rendered in every such cause and the items of all costs taxed or allowed therein; and also the amounts and date of payment of all fines, penalties, and forfeitures, moneys and costs received by him on account of any such suit or proceeding. Such docket shall be submitted by the Justice at all reasonable times to the examination of any person desiring to examine the same and shall be produced by the Justice to the Commission whenever required. Failure to comply with the requirements of this section shall constitute misconduct in office. 
Section 16.9. - Fines and Penalties. 
    All fines, penalties for forfeitures collected or received by each Justice of the Peace for or on account of violations of the penal laws of the state shall be paid over by such Justice to the county treasurer on or before the first day of the month next after the collection or receipt thereof, and all fines, penalties, forfeitures, and moneys collected or received by each Justice for or on account of violations of any ordinances of the City, shall be paid over by such Justice to the City Treasurer on or before the first day of the month next after the collection or receipt thereof; and the Justice shall take the receipt of the county or City Treasurer therefor and file the same with the Clerk. Any Justice of the Peace failing to comply with the provisions of this section shall forfeit his office and the Commission shall fill the vacancy thereby created in the manner prescribed in this Charter. 
Section 16.10. - Report of Justice. 
    Each Justice shall report, on oath, to the City Treasurer at the time of making the payments provided for in the next preceding section, the name of every person against whom a prosecution has been commenced, or judgment rendered for any of the fines, penalties or forfeitures mentioned in the preceding section, and the amount of all moneys received by him on account thereof, or on account of any such suit or prosecution. 
Section 16.11. - Expenses of Prosecution of State Law. 
    All fines recovered for the violations of the penal laws of the state, when collected and paid into the City treasury, shall be disposed of as provided by law; the expenses of prosecution before the Justices of the Peace of the City for violations of penal laws of the state, and in punishing the offenders, shall be paid by the County of Berrien. 
Section 16.12. - Bond. 
    Each Justice of the Peace, in addition to any other security required by law to be given for the performance of his official duties, shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, give a bond to the City, in a penalty of one thousand dollars, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of Justice of the Peace within and for the City, and the cost thereof shall be paid by the Justice. 
Section 16.13. - Constable. 
    The Constable shall have like powers and authorities in matters of civil and criminal nature and in relation to the services of process, civil and criminal, as are conferred by law on constables in townships. He shall have power also to serve all processes issued for breaches of ordinances of the City. The only compensation of the Constable shall be the statutory fees of that office, and an accounting of such fees shall be made to the City in the manner prescribed by state law or in any rules which may be established for the regulation of the conduct of the Justice Court by the Commission. The bond of the Constable shall be that required of Constables in townships and it shall be a corporate surety bond and the cost thereof shall be paid by the Constable. The City Manager may from time to time appoint any police officer or officers approved by the Justice of the Peace to serve in the capacity of additional Constables. Such Constables shall have like powers and authority as the elected Constable. The cost of the bond of any Constable so appointed shall be paid by the City. Whenever a police officer shall serve as Constable, the statutory fees which he shall receive in such capacity shall be paid into the City Treasury. 
Section 16.14. - Violations Bureau. 
    The Commission shall have power and authority to establish, by ordinance, a Traffic Violations Bureau for the handling of vehicular traffic cases, other than driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquors or narcotics, failure to stop in event of an accident, speeding, or reckless driving. Any person who has received any notice to appear in answer to a traffic charge under the ordinances of the City may, within the time specified in the notice, answer at the Traffic Violations Bureau to the charges set forth in such notice by paying a prescribed fine which cannot be waived by the Bureau, and, in writing, pleading guilty to the charge, waiving a hearing in court, and giving power of attorney to make such a plea and pay such fine in court. Acceptance of the prescribed fine and the power of attorney by the Bureau shall be deemed to be complete satisfaction for the violation, and the violator shall be given a receipt which so states. The creation of such a bureau by the Commission shall not operate so as to deprive any person of a full and impartial hearing in court, should such person so choose. 
CHAPTER 17. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Section 17.1. - City Liability. 
    The City shall not be liable for damages sustained by any person, either to his person or property, by reason of the negligence of the City, its officer, or employees, nor by reason of any defective highway, street, bridge, sidewalk, crosswalk or culvert, or by reason of any obstruction, ice, snow, or other encumbrance upon such street, sidewalk, crosswalk, or public highway, situated in the City, unless such person shall serve or cause to be served, within sixty days after such injury shall have occurred, a notice in writing, upon the City Clerk, which notice shall set forth substantially the time and place of such injury, the extent of such injury as far as the same has become known, the names and addresses of the witnesses known at the time by claimant, and a statement that the person receiving such injury intends to hold the City liable for such damages as may have been sustained by him. No person shall bring any action against the City for any damages to person or property arising out of any of the reasons or circumstances aforesaid, unless he shall have first presented to the Clerk his claim in writing and under oath setting forth particularly the nature and extent of such injury and the amount of damages claimed by reason thereof, which claim shall be presented to the Commission by the Clerk and the Commission be given opportunity to act thereon, either by allowing or refusing to allow the claim. 
    It shall be a sufficient bar and answer in any court to any action or proceeding for the collection of any demand or claim against the City, under this section, that the notice of injury and the verified proof of claim, as in this section required, were not presented and filed within the time and in the manner as herein provided. 
Section 17.2. - No Estoppel By Representation. 
    No official of the City shall have power to make any representation or recital of fact in any franchise, contract, document, or agreement contrary to any public record of the City. Any such representation shall be void and of no effect as against the City. 
Section 17.3. - Records to be Public. 
    All records of the City shall be public and shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times. 
Note- The requirements of this section have been defined and codified by Act 261 of P.A. 1976 "Open Meetings Act" and Act 442 of P.A. 1976 "Freedom of Information Act", and reference should be made to these statutes for the duties and rights as provided. 
Section 17.4. - Amendments. 
    This Charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided in Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of 1909, as amended. Should two or more amendments, adopted at the same election, have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the largest affirmative vote shall prevail as to those provisions. 
Section 17.5. - Vested Rights Continued. 
    After the adoption of this Charter, the City shall continue to be vested with all property, moneys, contracts, rights, credits, effects, and the records, files, books, and papers belonging to it under and by virtue of the previous Charter, and with any additional property and rights as herein prescribed. No right or liability, either in favor of or against the City existing at the time this Charter becomes effective, and no suit or prosecution of any character, shall in any manner be affected by any change, but the same shall stand or proceed as if no change had been made. All debts and liabilities of the City shall continue to be its debts and liabilities, and all fines and penalties imposed at the time of such change shall be collected and all licenses issued by the City shall be and remain in the same manner is if such change had not been made. 
Section 17.6. - Headings. 
    The chapter and section headings used in this Charter are for convenience only and shall not be considered a part of this Charter. 
Section 17.7. - Interpretations. 
(1)  Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context, all words used in this Charter indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of the adoption of this Charter, but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any event or requirement for which provision is made therein, either as a power, immunity, requirement, or prohibition. 
(2)  Words imparting the singular number, only, may extend to and embrace the plural number, and words imparting the plural number may be applied and limited to the singular number; words imparting the masculine gender only, may extend and be applied to females as well as males. 
(3)  Words purporting to give joint authority to two or more public officers or other persons, either as a Board or otherwise, shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it shall be otherwise expressly declared. 
(4)  The word "Person" may extend and be applied to bodies politic and corporate, as well as individuals. The words "written" and "in writing" may be construed to include printing, engraving, typewriting and lithographing, except that this rule shall not apply to provisions requiring written signatures, unless it be otherwise expressly herein provided. 
Section 17.8. - Effect of Illegality of Any Part of Charter. 
    Should any provision or section, or portion thereof, of this Charter be held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, illegal or unconstitutional, such holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of this Charter as a whole or of any remaining portion of such provision or section, it being hereby declared to be the intent of the Charter Commission and of the electors who voted thereon that such unconstitutionality or illegality shall not affect the validity of any other part of this Charter except that specifically affected by such holding. 
CHAPTER 18. - SCHEDULE 

Section 18.1. - Election to Adopt this Charter. 
    This Charter shall be submitted to vote of the qualified electors of the City of Buchanan at a special election to be held on Tuesday, May 24, 1949. This election shall be conducted by the officers under the existing Charter charged with the conduct and supervision of election, following the usual election procedure, and shall be canvassed in the manner provided in the existing City Charter at the time provided in Section 18.4. 
Section 18.2. - Form of Ballot. 
    The form of the ballot for the submission of this Charter shall be as follows: 
Instruction: A cross (x) in the square ? before the word "Yes" is in favor of the proposed charter, and a cross (x) in the square ? before the word "No" is against the proposed charter. 
Shall the proposed charter for the City of Buchanan drafted by the Charter Commission elected on November 2, 1948 be adopted? 
? Yes 
? No 
Section 18.3. - Effective Date of this Charter. 
    For all purposes not otherwise provided for herein, this Charter shall take effect on May 27, 1949, at 7:30 p.m., Eastern Standard Time. At such time, the City Commission first elected under this Charter shall assemble in the existing City Commission Chambers. It shall be called to order by the then existing Mayor, and when the new Commission shall have chosen a Mayor or temporary chairman, the previously existing City Commission shall cease to be and the office of each and every member thereof shall terminate. 
    The term of office of the City Clerk, City Treasurer, and Supervisors, and all other officers of the City by virtue of election under the former Charter of the City, with the exception of Justices of the Peace and Constables, shall terminate and their offices cease to exist at the same time as the previously existing City Commission ceases to exist. All other officers and employees of the City shall continue in their respective offices and employment as though they had been appointed or employed in the manner provided in this Charter and shall in all respects be subject to the provisions of this Charter. 
    The City Commission, forthwith after taking office, shall appoint (1) a City Treasurer, and (2) an Acting City Clerk to serve pending the appointment by the City Manager of a City Clerk. Pending the appointment of the first City Manager, the City Commission may temporarily fix authority and responsibility among officers and departments in order to maintain the operations of the City government. 
Section 18.4. - First Election Under this Charter. 
    For the purpose of nominating and electing officers, this Charter shall take effect on Monday, April 25, 1949, which shall be the first day upon which nomination petitions may be filed with the Clerk for the officers first to be elected under this Charter. All such petitions must be filed not later than 5 P.M. on Wednesday, May 4, 1949, and all nomination procedure shall be as provided in this Charter. The City Clerk shall, on April 1, 1949, make available petition forms for the officers to be elected at the first election under this Charter. 
    The first election of officers under this Charter shall be held on Tuesday, May 24, 1949, in conjunction with the election on the adoption of this Charter. At this election, the electors shall be entitled to vote for not more than five candidates for the City Commission. The two candidates with the first and second highest number of votes respectively shall be declared elected for a term ending in 1951, and the three candidates with the third, fourth, and fifth highest number of votes respectively shall be declared elected for a term ending in 1950. Thereafter, the provisions contained in this Charter on the election and term of Commissioners shall govern. 
    Terms of officers elected at this election shall expire on the Monday next following the date of the regular City election in the year in which the terms of the various officers expire. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of the existing Charter of the City or of this Charter, a canvass of the election to be held on May 24 shall be made on Thursday evening, May 26, at the City Commission Chambers, by the then existing City Commission. 
Section 18.5. - 1949 Budget. 
    In 1949, the Commission may adopt a budget for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 1949, at a later date than that provided in Section 9.5, but not later than June 25, 1949. Any budget previously adopted by the City Commission under the City Charter existing at the time of the adoption of this Charter, shall have no legal effect after June 30, 1949. 
Section 18.6. - Status of Schedule Chapter. 
    The purpose of this schedule chapter is to inaugurate the government of the City under this Charter and shall constitute a part of this Charter only to the extent and for the time required to accomplish this end. 
RESOLUTION OF ADOPTION 
    At an adjourned regular meeting of the Charter Commission of the City of Buchanan held on the 18th day of March, 1949, the following resolution was offered by Commissioner Strayer: 
    RESOLVED, that the Charter Commission of the City of Buchanan does hereby adopt the foregoing proposed Charter for the City of Buchanan, and the Clerk of this Commission is directed (1) to transmit a copy of this Charter to the Governor of the State of Michigan for his approval in accordance with the statutes of the state, (2) to this day file with the City Clerk a copy of this Charter, (3) to have this proposed Charter published in the Berrien County Record on April 28, 1949, and (4) to arrange for the presentation of this Charter to the electors of the City of Buchanan on May 24, 1949, in accordance with the provisions of this Charter and the state laws providing therefor. 
    The resolution was seconded by Commissioner Stark, and adopted by the following vote: 
    YEAS: Commissioners Phil J. Sexton, Milford H. Schultz, John C. Strayer, William Y. Pohly, Harry M. Beistle, Ralph Allen, Caleb J. Wilson, Arthur Johnston, and Harold C. Stark. 
    NAYS: None. 
    The Chairman declared the foregoing resolution carried unanimously and requested the members of the Charter Commission to authenticate said resolution and also the copies of the Charter to be presented to the Governor and filed with the City Clerk by attesting their names thereto in the following manner: 
PHIL J. SEXTON MILFORD H. SCHULTZ CALEB J. WILSON WILLIAM Y. POHLY HAROLD C. STARK JOHN C. STRAYER ARTHUR JOHNSTON RALPH ALLEN HARRY M. BEISTLE  
    All of the Commissioners having attested as to said resolution and also having attested the copies to be signed by the Governor and filed with the City Clerk, the meeting adjourned subject to the call of the Chairman. 
STATE OF MICHIGAN ) ) SS COUNTY OF BERRIEN )  
    Harry A. Post, Clerk of the Charter Commission of the City of Buchanan, being duly sworn says that at an election duly called and held in the City of Buchanan on the 2nd day of November, 1948, the following named persons were duly elected as the Charter Commission to frame a revised Charter for the City of Buchanan, namely: Phil J. Sexton, Milford H. Schultz, John C. Strayer, William Y. Pohly, Harry M. Beistle, Ralph Allen, Caleb J. Wilson, Arthur Johnston and Harold C. Stark, and that the annexed and foregoing Charter was duly framed by March 10, 1949, and the draft was adopted by said Charter Commission by the foregoing resolution which is a true and correct copy thereof, and that the said Charter Commission directed that said Charter be presented to the electors of the City of Buchanan in accordance with the requirements of this Charter and the laws of the State of Michigan. 
    Further deponent sayeth not. 
HARRY A. POST 
Clerk of the Charter Commission of the City of Buchanan  
Dated March 19, 1949 
    Subscribed and sworn to before me this 19th day of March, 1949. 
LEE E. WILSON (Mrs. Lee E. Hath) 
Notary Public, Berrien County, Michigan 
My commission expires April 3, 1950.  
    I do hereby approve the above and foregoing Charter of the City of Buchanan. 
Approved: 
G. Mennen Williams 
Governor of the State of Michigan.  
Dated: March 30, 1949, 11:55 A.M. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of amendments to the Charter. 
Referendum 
Date  Section 
this Charter  4- 5-1954 3.2 6.1  8- 8-2000 8.7 11- 7-2006 9.10  
CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
  

Sec. 1-1. - Code designated and cited. 
    This codification of ordinances shall be known and cited as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Buchanan, Michigan." 
State Law reference- Codification authority, MCL 117.5b, MSA 5.2084(2). 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with the intent of the city commission or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Buchanan, Michigan, adopted November 8, 1948, and shall include any amendment to such charter. 
    City. The word "city" shall denote the City of Buchanan, Michigan. 
    Code. The expressions "Code" or "this Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Buchanan, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1, and as modified by amendment, revision and by the adoption of new chapters, articles, divisions or sections. 
    Commission. The word "commission" shall mean the commission of the City of Buchanan. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done, as provided in this Code or in any order issued pursuant to this Code, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the last day is a Sunday or a legal holiday it shall be excluded; and when the time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a legal holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded. 
    County. The term "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Berrien in the State of Michigan. 
    Gender. Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders. 
    General terms. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited. 
    Joint authority. All words purporting to give joint authority to three or more public officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it is otherwise expressly declared in the ordinance granting the authority. 
    MCL, MSA. The abbreviations "MCL" and "MSA" refer to the Michigan Compiled Laws and Michigan Statutes Annotated respectively, as amended. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Number. Words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the singular. 
    Officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency. Whenever any officer, employee, department, board, commission, or other agency is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Buchanan, Michigan." Whenever, by the provisions of this Code, any officer, employee, department, board, commission or other city agency of the city is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty, reference to such officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency shall mean and include such officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency, or any deputy or authorized subordinate. 
    Person. The word "person" and its derivatives and the word "whoever" shall include a natural person, partnership, association, legal entity or a corporate body or any body of persons corporate or incorporate. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term "person" or "whoever" as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof. 
    Shall/may. Whenever the word "shall" appears in this Code it shall be considered mandatory and not directory, except as otherwise provided. "May" is permissive. 
    State. The term "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Michigan. 
    Tense. Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well as the present and past. 
State Law reference- Rules of construction, MCL 8.3 et seq., MSA 2.212 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Interpretation per state acts. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this Code, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the interpretation of this Code as those governing the interpretation of the Public Acts of Michigan. 
Sec. 1-4. - Application to territorial boundaries. 
    All provisions of this Code are limited in application to the territorial boundaries of the municipal corporation and any territory over which the municipal corporation shall have legal jurisdiction. 
Sec. 1-5. - Headings, captions. 
    Headings and captions used in this Code such as the chapter, article, division and section numbers, are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section and do not limit the subject matter. 
Sec. 1-6. - References and notes. 
    Charter references, cross references, state law references and editor's notes are by way of explanation only and should not be deemed a part of the text of any section of this Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Application to future legislation. 
    All of the provisions of this chapter, not incompatible with future legislation, shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this Code unless otherwise specifically provided. 
Sec. 1-8. - Rules of severability. 
    Each chapter, article, division or section or, whenever divisible, subsection of this Code is hereby declared to be severable, and the invalidity of any chapter, article, division, section or divisible subsection shall not be construed to affect the validity of any other chapter, article, division, section or subsection of this Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Reference to other sections. 
    Whenever in one section reference is made to another section of this Code, such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter be changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision. 
Sec. 1-10. - Reference to offices. 
    Reference to a public officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of the City of Buchanan exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary. 
Sec. 1-11. - Certain provisions saved from repeal. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of the Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance levying annual taxes. 
(3)  Any ordinance appropriating money. 
(4)  Any ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money. 
(5)  Any ordinance establishing utility rates. 
(6)  Any ordinance establishing franchises or granting special rights to certain persons. 
(7)  Any ordinance authorizing public improvements. 
(8)  Any ordinance authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property. 
(9)  Any ordinance annexing or detaching territory. 
(10)  Any ordinance granting or accepting easements, plats or dedication of land to public use. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(12)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades in the city. 
(13)  Any ordinance prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any city officers or employees. 
(14)  Any ordinance prescribing traffic and parking restrictions pertaining to specific streets. 
(15)  Any ordinance pertaining to zoning. 
(16)  Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office. 
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the commission. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriation subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-13. - Enforcement official/agent. 
    If sections of this Code do not directly name a city official who is responsible for carrying out enforcement provisions, the city commission may direct any one of its employees, officers or other agency to perform the stated enforcement provisions. 
Sec. 1-14. - Conflicting regulations. 
    Where there is a difference or conflict between other provisions of this Code, or those contained in lawfully adopted county, state, city, federal or other governmental agency rules, regulations, ordinances or laws, the most liberal interpretation or the most restrictive or the one imposing the most desirable standard shall prevail. 
Sec. 1-15. - General penalty. 
(a)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code for any particular provision or section, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Code, or any rule, regulation or order adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 and costs of prosecution or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and costs and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Each act of violation and every day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any section of this Code whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. 
(c)  The penalty shall be in addition to the abatement of the violating condition, any injunctive relief, or revocation of any permit or license. 
State Law reference- Limitation on penalties, MCL 117.4i, MSA 5.2082. 
Sec. 1-16. - Appearance tickets. 
(a)  It is determined to be in the public interest that the issuance and service of appearance tickets by certain public servants other than police officers in cases of particular violations of the city Code be authorized, as provided by the laws of the state and by the provisions of this section. "Public servants" shall be construed to mean those officers and/or employees of the city designated in this section. 
(b)  Appearance tickets shall be in the form and shall contain such provisions and shall be issued and served as provided by Act No. 366 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1984 (MCL 764.9f, MSA 28.868(6)), as amended. 
(c)  A city officer and/or employee who has reasonable cause to believe that a person has committed a violation or offense of an ordinance or provision of this Code which the officer/employee has been designated by this Code or by the provisions of this section to enforce is authorized to issue and serve upon the violator an appearance ticket. The officer or employee shall first identify himself to the person to whom he proposes to issue and serve an appearance ticket and shall present his credentials upon demand. The authority to issue and serve appearance tickets shall not include the authority to arrest any person. 
(d)  The following city officers and/or employees are authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets, subject to the limitations set forth in subsection (e) of this section: 
(1)  City building inspector. 
(2)  Fire inspector as defined in section 42-3. 
(3)  City code enforcement officer. 
(4)  Any other city officer and/or employee designated by the city commission or the city manager to have the responsibility of enforcement of a specified section or sections of this Code. 
(e)  A city officer/employee authorized to issue and serve an appearance ticket shall be limited in the exercise of that authority to those particular offenses or classes of offenses contained in this Code which he is specifically or by reference charged to enforce, provided that the specific ordinance being enforced contains a provision that allows the individual to issue an appearance ticket. 
(f)  That an appearance ticket may or may not be issued and/or served shall not constitute a bar to such other prosecution of a violator as may be permitted by law; nor shall the issuance and/or service of an appearance ticket constitute a bar to the city to such civil relief as may be available or permitted by law. 
(g)  When a complaint is required by law to be filed with a court in conjunction with the issuance of an appearance ticket, the complaint shall first be authorized by the city attorney and, if authorized, prepared by the city attorney. 
(h)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to interpret, restrict, limit, define or otherwise affect the authority of police officers with respect to the issuance and service of appearance tickets, or to powers of arrest or to any other authority of police officers provided by law or ordinance. 
(i)  A person to whom an appearance ticket has been duly issued and served shall, upon conviction, be guilty of that type of offense as provided for under the specific ordinance for which the appearance ticket has been issued and shall be subject to the penalties provided in the specific ordinance under which the appearance ticket has been issued. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.651-12.655) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Minimum housing standards,  14-126 et seq.; civil emergencies, ch. 26; emergency preparedness,  26-26 et seq.; community development, ch. 30; elections, ch. 34; environment, ch. 38; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; library, ch. 54; offenses affecting governmental functions,  58-26 et seq.; recreation board,  62-26 et seq.; planning, ch. 70; plan commission,  70-26 et seq.; special assessments, ch. 82; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; taxation, ch. 94. 
State Law reference- Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.; open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq.; freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Office of constable abolished. 
    The office of constable created by the Charter of the city, chapter 3, section 3.2, paragraph (2), is abolished instanter and the bond or bonds of any acting constable and/or additional constable is hereby released and discharged. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.401, 12.402) 
Secs. 2-2-2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COMMISSION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-26-2-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONSENT CALENDAR 

Sec. 2-36. - Items included to be of routine nature. 
    When the city manager determines that any item of business requires action by the commission, but is of a routine and noncontroversial nature, he may cause such item to be presented at a regular meeting of the commission as part of a consent calendar. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.001) 
Sec. 2-37. - Consent calendar considered as single item. 
    The consent calendar shall be introduced by a motion to approve the consent calendar, and shall be considered by the commission as a single item. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.002) 
Sec. 2-38. - Debate on items prohibited. 
    There shall be no debate or discussion by any member of the commission regarding any item on the consent calendar, beyond asking questions for a simple clarification. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.003) 
Sec. 2-39. - Items requiring public hearing. 
    All items on the consent calendar which require public hearings shall be open for hearing simultaneously, and the mayor shall announce, or direct the city clerk to announce, the titles of all such items. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.004) 
Sec. 2-40. - Removal of items from calendar. 
    On objection by any member of the commission to inclusion of any item on the consent calendar, that item shall be removed from the consent calendar forthwith. Such objection may be recorded at any time prior to the taking of a vote on the motion to approve the consent calendar. All such items shall be considered individually, in the order in which they were objected to, immediately following consideration of the consent calendar. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.005) 
Sec. 2-41. - Approval of calendar constitutes approval of each item. 
    Approval of the motion to approve the consent calendar shall be fully equivalent to approval, adoption or enactment of each motion, resolution, ordinance or other item of business thereon, exactly as if each had been acted upon individually. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.006) 
Secs. 2-42-2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COUNCILS 

Sec. 2-61. - Municipal officers compensation commission. 
(a)  Created; members; term of office; appointment; vacancies. A municipal officers compensation commission is hereby created. The commission shall consist of five members, each of whom shall be a registered elector of the City of Buchanan. The members of the commission shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by a majority of the city commissioners then elected and serving. The term of office for each member shall be five years, except that of the members first appointed, one each shall be appointed for terms of one, two, three, four and five years. The first members shall be appointed within 30 days after the effective date of this section. Thereafter, members other than the first members shall be appointed before October 1 of the year of appointment. Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by appointment in the same manner. A member or employee of the legislative, judicial, or executive branch of government or a member of the immediate family of a member or employee of the legislative, judicial, or executive branch of government shall not be a member of the commission. 
(b)  Duties. The commission shall determine the salary of each elected municipal official and present such by the second meeting in the month of February. Such determination shall become the said salary unless the city commission, by resolution adopted by two-thirds of the city commissioners then elected and serving, rejects it. The determination of the commission shall be effective 30 days following its filing with the city clerk unless rejected by the city commission. If the determination is rejected, the existing salary shall prevail. The expense allowance or reimbursement paid to elected officials in addition to salary shall be for expenses incurred in the course of city business and accounted for to the city. 
(c)  Organization. The commission shall meet for not more than 15 session days in January of each odd-numbered year and shall make its determination within 45 calendar days after its first meeting. A majority of the members of the commission constitutes a quorum for conduction the business of the commission. The commission shall not take action or make a determination without a concurrence of a majority of the members appointed and serving on the commission. The commission shall elect a chairperson from among its members. As used in this section, "session day" means a calendar day on which the commission meets and a quorum is present. The members of the commission shall not receive compensation, but shall be entitled to actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duties. 
(d)  Open Meetings Act, compliance. The business which the commission may perform shall be conducted at a public meeting of the commission held in compliance with Act No. 267 of the Public Acts of 1976, being MCL 15.261 to 15.275. Public notice of the time, date, and place of the meeting of the commission shall be given in the manner required by Act No. 267 of the Public Acts of 1976. 
(e)  Freedom of Information Act, compliance. A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by the commission in the performance of an official function shall be made available to the public in compliance with Act No. 442 of the Public Acts of 1976, being MCL 15.231 to 15.246. 
(f)  Implementation by resolution; change of procedure, time and method. The governing body shall implement this section by resolution. After one year following the date the ordinance goes into effect the procedure for establishing the compensation of elected officials may be changed by charter amendment or revision. 
(g)  Referendum or other petition; signatures of electors; conduct of election; effectiveness of determination. Not more than 60 days after the effective date of the ordinance, a petition for a referendum on the ordinance may be filed pursuant to the procedure provided in the charter or otherwise by filing a petition with the city clerk containing the signatures of at least five percent of the registered electors of the city on the effective date of the ordinance. The election shall be conducted in the same manner as an election on a charter amendment. If a petition for referendum is filed, a determination of the commission shall not be effective until the ordinance has been approved by the electors. 
(Ord. No. 357,  I, 12-9-02) 
Secs. 2-62-2-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal finance act, MCL 131.1 et seq., MSA 5.3188(1) et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-81-2-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-91. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agent means the city manager or any other officer or employee designated in writing by the manager to act as purchasing agent. 
    Contract includes contracts for services, subject to the exclusion hereinafter mentioned, and shall include any type of service; leases for all grounds, buildings, offices and other space required by the city; and the rental, repair or maintenance of equipment, machinery and other city-owned personal property. The term "contract" shall not include professional and other contract services which may be unique and not subject to competition. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.182) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 2-92. - Purchasing agent. 
    The city manager shall act as purchasing agent of the city, unless he shall designate another officer or employee of the city to act as purchasing agent concurrently with him. Any such designation shall be in writing filed with the clerk. The manager shall from time to time adopt any necessary rules concerning routine requisitions and purchase orders. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.183) 
Sec. 2-93. - General policy. 
    Competitive prices for all purchases and public improvements shall be obtained and the purchase made from, or the contract awarded to, the lowest competent bidder. Formal sealed bids shall be obtained in all transactions involving the expenditure of $1,000.00 or more and the transaction evidenced by written contract submitted to and approved by the city commission. In cases where the commission indicates by formal unanimous resolution of those present at the meeting, based upon the written recommendation of the city manager that it is clearly to the advantage of the city to contract without competitive bidding, it may so authorize. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.184) 
Sec. 2-94. - Purchases or contracts under $1,000.00. 
    Purchases of supplies, materials or equipment, the cost of which is less than $1,000.00 or such other lesser amount which may from time to time be established by the commission by resolution, may be made in the open market, but such purchases shall be based on competitive prices and shall be awarded to the lowest competent bidder as defined in section 2-95. The purchasing agent may solicit prices verbally or by telephone, or may contact prospective bidders by written communication. Where bids are solicited by written communication, a request for such bids shall also be posted in the city hall. A record of all prices shall be kept for six months and shall be available for public inspection. Any or all bids may be rejected. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.185) 
Sec. 2-95. - Award of contract. 
(a)  The purchasing agent shall have the authority to award contracts within the purview of this division. 
(b)  Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest competent bidder. In determining the lowest competent bidder in addition to the price the agent shall consider: 
(1)  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required. 
(2)  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly or within the time specified, without delay or interference. 
(3)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder. 
(4)  The quality of the performance of previous contracts or services. 
(5)  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or services. 
(6)  The financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the services. 
(7)  The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or contractual services to the particular use required. 
(8)  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract. 
(9)  The number and scope of the conditions attached to the bid. 
(c)  If the award is not made to the lowest bidder a full and complete statement of the reasons for placing the order elsewhere shall be prepared by the agent and filed with the other papers relating to the transaction. 
(d)  Tie bids. 
(1)  If the lowest competent bids are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, the contract shall be awarded to the local bidder. 
(2)  Where subsection (d)(1) of this section is not applicable, the agent shall award the contract to one of the tie bidders by drawing lots in public. 
(e)  The agent shall not award the bid to a contractor who is in default on the payment of taxes, licenses or other monies due the city. 
(f)  The agent shall have authority to require a performance bond before entering a contract, in such amount as he shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interest of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.186) 
Sec. 2-96. - Subdivision of contracts, purchases. 
    No contract or purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the requirements of this division. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.187) 
Sec. 2-97. - Purchases or contracts over $1,000.00; competitive bidding procedure. 
    Any expenditure for supplies, materials, equipment, construction project or contract obligating the city, where the amount of the city's obligation is in excess of $1,000.00 or such other lesser amount which may from time to time be established by the commission by resolution, must be approved by the commission and shall be approved only after competitive bidding as provided by the following provisions of this section, unless covered by section 2-98. 
(1)  Such expenditure shall be made the subject of a written contract unless excepted from such requirements by the commission in writing. A purchase order shall be a sufficient written contract in cases where the expenditure is in the usual and ordinary course of the city's business. 
(2)  Notices inviting sealed competitive bids may be published in the official newspaper at least five calendar days prior to the final date for submitting bids. 
(3)  In all cases where sealed bids are invited, a copy of the official notice shall be posted on a public bulletin board in the city hall. The agent shall mail copies of the official notice to such qualified vendors as he may deem necessary to give actual notice to interested bidders and to obtain competitive bidding. 
(4)  Unless prescribed by the commission, the city manager shall prescribe the amount of any security to be deposited with any bid. Such deposit shall be in the form of cash, certified or cashier's check, or bond written by a surety company authorized to do business in the state. The amount of such security shall be expressed in terms of percentage of the bid submitted. Unless fixed by the commission, the manager shall fix the amount of the performance bond and in the case of construction contracts the amount of the labor and materials bond to be required of the successful bidders. 
(5)  Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place designated in the notice requesting bids in the presence of the agent, the clerk, and at least one other city employee. The head of the department most closely concerned with the subject of the contract may also be present. The bids shall thereupon be carefully examined and tabulated and reported to the commission with the recommendation of the agent (as approved by the manager, if the manager is not acting as the agent for this purchase) at the next commission meeting. After tabulation all bids may be inspected by the competing bidders. In lieu of the procedure for opening bids specified in this subsection, the commission may direct that bids be opened at a commission meeting. 
(6)  After the opening of the submitted bids, such bids may not be withdrawn prior to commission action without forfeiture of the bid deposit. 
(7)  When such bids are submitted to the commission, if the commission shall find any of the bids to be satisfactory it shall accept that bid of the lowest competent bidder as described in section 2-95. However, the commission shall have the right to reject any or all bids and to waive irregularities in bidding and to accept bids which do not conform in every respect to the bidding requirements. 
(8)  Section 2-95 shall apply to this section, provided, however, that the word "commission" shall be substituted for the words "agent" or "manager." 
(9)  At the time the contract for a construction project is executed by the contractor, he shall file a bond executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the state, to the city, conditioned to pay all laborers, mechanics, subcontractors and materialmen as well as all just debts, dues and demands incurred in the performance of such work and shall file a performance bond when one is required. The contractor shall also file evidence of public liability insurance in an amount satisfactory to the manager, and shall also agree to save the city harmless from loss or damage caused to any person or property by reason of the contractor's negligence. 
(10)  All bids and deposits of certified or cashier's checks may be retained until the contract is awarded and signed. If any successful bidder fails or refuses to enter into the contract awarded to him within five days after the same has been awarded, or file any bond required within the same time, the deposit accompanying his bid shall be forfeited to the city and the commission may, in its discretion, award the contract to the next lower responsible bidder or the contract may be readvertised. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.188) 
Sec. 2-98. - Exceptions to competitive bidding. 
    Competitive bidding may not be required in the following cases: 
(1)  Where the subject of the contract is other than a public work or improvement and the product or material contracted for is not competitive in nature and/or no advantage to the city would result from requiring competitive bidding, and the commission authorizes execution of a contract without competitive bidding by resolution passed by a unanimous vote of those commissioners present at the meeting. 
(2)  In the employment of professional services. 
(3)  Where the city elects to do the work as provided by the charter. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.189) 
Sec. 2-99. - Conflicts of interest. 
(a)  Any purchase order or contract within the purview of this division in which the agent or any officer or employee of the city is financially interested, directly or indirectly, shall be void, except that before the execution of a purchase order or contract the commission shall have the authority to waive compliance with this section when it finds such action to be in the best interest of the city. However, if such is waived, a letter stating the reason for waiver shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(b)  The agent and every officer and employee of the city are expressly prohibited from accepting directly or indirectly, from any person to which any purchase order or contract is or might be awarded, any rebate, gift, money or anything of value whatsoever. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.190) 
Sec. 2-100. - Emergency purchases. 
(a)  In the event of an apparent emergency, endangering the public peace, health and safety of the city, the manager may purchase directly any supplies, materials or equipment which he deems necessary during the duration of the apparent emergency. Within one week from the date of the purchase, the manager shall send a written detailed explanation of the emergency and of the purchases made during the emergency to the commission. 
(b)  In the event of an emergency, endangering the public peace, health and/or safety of the city, any department head, with the approval of the manager, may purchase directly any supplies, materials or equipment, the immediate procurement of which is necessary to the continuation of the work of the department. Within one week from the date of the purchases, the department head making such purchases shall send a written detailed explanation of the emergency and of the purchases made during the emergency to the manager and the commission. 
(c)  The manager shall have the power to make any additional rules and regulations concerning emergency purchases which he deems necessary. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.191) 
Sec. 2-101. - Inspection, acceptance of materials. 
    The responsibility for the inspection and acceptance of all materials, supplies and equipment shall rest with the ordering department. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.192) 
Sec. 2-102. - Sale of city property. 
    Whenever any city property, real or personal, is no longer needed for corporate or public purposes, the same may be offered for sale in accordance with the restrictions established by section 8.7 of the city Charter; provided, however, that utility plants and property may be disposed of only in accordance with section 13.4 of the Charter. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.193) 
Sec. 2-103. - Cooperative purchasing. 
    The commission or agent shall have the power to enter into purchase contracts with and from other governmental agencies, should there be an opportunity for a saving to the city and/or where the commission determines that it would be in the best interest of the city; provided, however, that the commission shall give its prior approval of such purchases, and that all such purchases shall be in compliance with the provisions of this division and the Charter. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.194) 
Secs. 2-104-2-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TAX ASSESSMENTS 

Sec. 2-116. - Tax day. 
    January 1 shall be the tax day in the city. The taxable status of persons and real and personal property shall be determined as of the tax day. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.061) 
Sec. 2-117. - Assessment roll-Completion date. 
    The city assessor shall, on or before the first Monday in March, make and complete the assessment roll. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.062) 
Sec. 2-118. - Review and correction. 
    The board of review shall meet for the purpose of reviewing and correcting the assessment roll at the city hall between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in March, and shall remain in session for not less than three days. The second session of the board shall convene at the same place and time on the second Monday in March of each year and shall continue in session on that day until all interested persons have had an opportunity to be heard. At the second session, the board shall consider only those cases in which the assessed value of property has increased, and in which property was added to the assessment roll at the first session of the board. If there is no such property in any year, there shall be no second session of the board. The review of assessments shall be completed on or before the first Monday in April. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.063) 
Sec. 2-119. - Statutory authority. 
    This division is adopted pursuant to the provisions of the general property tax act, Act No. 206 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1893 (MCL 211.1 et seq., MSA 7.1 et seq.), as amended. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.064) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Disorderly intoxication,  58-136. 
State Law reference- Liquor control act, MCL 436.1 et seq., MSA 18.971 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic liquor means and includes any spirituous, vinous, malt or fermented liquor, liquid or compound, whether or not medicated, proprietary, patented, and by whatever name called, containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume which is fit for use for beverage purposes. 
    Applicant means any person who seeks approval from the city commission to sell alcoholic beverages. 
    Hotel or motel means a building or buildings which in the judgment of the city commission are to be regularly used and kept open as such in a bona fide manner for the feeding and lodging of guests, where all who conduct themselves properly and who are able and ready to pay for such services are received, if there are any accommodations for them. 
    Licensee means any person who has been granted a license to sell alcoholic beverages in the city by the state liquor control commission. 
    Sale includes exchange, barter, traffic or furnishing any alcoholic beverage. 
    Spirits means any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed with potable water and other substances in solution, and includes, among other things, wine containing an alcoholic content of over 16 percent by volume. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.251) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 6-2. - Enforcement officers. 
    Enforcement of this chapter and inspections under this chapter shall be conducted by the city code enforcement officer, chief of police or such other city employee or employees as may be designated by the city commission from time to time. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.256) 
Sec. 6-3. - Authority of city commission. 
    This chapter shall not operate to limit any power or authority vested in the city or the city commission by virtue of any existing constitutional or statutory provision, and shall be considered to be only supplementary to the exercise or use of such vested authority and not in derogation thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.258) 
Sec. 6-4. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.259) 
Sec. 6-5. - Intoxication, drinking in public places. 
(a)  No person shall drink any beer, wine or intoxicating liquor in any public way, place, park or outdoor area to which the public is admitted, except that beer or wine may be consumed upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Any group, association or organization having a recognized local, national or fraternal affiliation or purpose not for profit, desiring to use such public way, place, park or outdoor area for a particular purpose, such as picnics, parties, entertainment performances, athletic events, or reunions, shall first obtain a permit from the city commission regardless of whether such beer or wine be provided free of charge or for a charge. The group shall obtain a special use license from the state liquor control commission when applicable. 
(2)  Except as defined in subsection (a)(1) of this section, any other group, association or organization desiring to use such public way, place, park or outdoor area for a particular purpose, such as picnics, parties, entertainment performances, athletic events, or reunions, shall first obtain a permit from the city commission provided such beer or wine is furnished free of charge. The group shall obtain a special use license from the state liquor control commission when applicable. 
(3)  Any group, association, or organization defined in subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section, as a condition precedent to obtaining a permit, shall tender proof of a bond in the amount of $1,000,000.00 or proof of insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00 protecting the city from any liability arising out of the furnishing by the group, association or organization of beer or wine; and, further, the group, association or organization shall, in addition, agree to hold the city harmless from any liability arising out of the furnishing by the group, association or organization of any beer or wine. 
(4)  All activities shall be restricted to the areas designated by the city commission or chief of police during the time periods designated by the chief of police and/or the state liquor control commission. 
(5)  No intoxicants shall be consumed within any public way, place, or outdoor area except as purchased or received through the sponsoring organization. 
(6)  No permit shall be issued for any public park or other area which is designed and used primarily for family or youth activities, playgrounds or tot lots. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be drunk, intoxicated or under the influence of narcotics in any place of business, place of amusement or assemblage, or in any public way, park or other public place or places to which the public is customarily admitted and to either endanger directly the safety of another person or of property or to act in a manner that causes a public disturbance. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.061) 
Sec. 6-6. - Furnishing to intoxicated persons, minors. 
    No person shall knowingly sell, give or furnish liquor or beer to any drunk or intoxicated person or disorderly person; nor shall any person sell, give or furnish alcoholic liquor or beer to any person who is under 21 years of age. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.062) 
Sec. 6-7. - Minors prohibited from possessing, transporting alcoholic liquors in motor vehicle. 
    No person under 21 years of age shall possess or transport or have under his control in any motor vehicle, any beer, wine, whiskey, or other spirits, unless such person is working for a licensee of the state liquor control commission and is possessing, transporting or having such alcoholic beverages in a motor vehicle under his control during his regular working hours and in the course of his employment. Any person under the age of 21 years shall be in violation of this section whenever any alcoholic liquors are found in an automobile operated by him, even though he is not the registered owner of the automobile and notwithstanding that such alcoholic liquors were purchased by others or brought into the motor vehicle by others. The mere presence of alcoholic liquors of any type in the automobile, with the knowledge of the driver, shall constitute a violation of this section on the part of the driver. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.063) 
Sec. 6-8. - Open containers in motor vehicle. 
    Any person occupying a motor vehicle in which motor vehicle there is found to be open or unsealed containers of beer, whiskey or other intoxicants shall be guilty of disorderly conduct. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.064) 
Secs. 6-9-6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 

Sec. 6-31. - Qualification of applicants. 
(a)  No application to sell alcoholic beverages by the glass shall be approved if the applicant has been convicted of three or more liquor violations or a felony in any court or before the state liquor control commission within a period of five years preceding the receipt of the application. 
(b)  This article covers these types of licenses. 
(1)  Tavern. Any place licensed to sell at retail beer and wine for consumption on the premises only. 
(2)  Class C license. Any place licensed to sell beer, wine and spirits for consumption on the premises at retail. 
(3)  Class B license. A hotel and/or motel licensed to sell beer, wine and spirits for consumption on the premises at retail. 
(4)  Class A license. A hotel and/or motel licensed to sell beer and wine for consumption on the premises at retail. 
(c)  Required seating capacity. All class C, class B and class A licenses shall have the following accommodations: 
(1)  All motels and/or hotels selling alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises with a class A hotel or class B hotel license shall be required to have 20 or more guestrooms and have a dining table capacity for not less than 100 persons and if additional counter space is provided for the dispensing and sale of alcoholic beverages, such counter space shall accommodate not more than 30 percent of the seating capacity of the entire dining room. 
(2)  All restaurants selling alcoholic liquors for consumption on premises shall have a dining table capacity for not less than 150 persons, and if additional counter space is provided for the dispensing and sale of alcoholic beverages such counter space shall occupy not more than 30 percent of the seating capacity of the dining room. 
(3)  No licensee or applicant for a license shall be considered to have the dining table capacity and seating capacity as defined in subsections (c)(1) and (c)(2) of this section unless the square footage of the dining area shall provide for not less than 15 square feet of space per person seated and unless such establishment shall have combined kitchen and food storage facilities having a square footage equal to at least 75 percent of the square footage of the dining room area. 
(d)  Class B or class C licenses shall be approved by the city commission only when all provisions, requirements and standards of this article are fulfilled. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.252) 
Sec. 6-32. - Application and approval. 
(a)  All applications to sell alcoholic liquors shall be made in the manner and form required by the state liquor control commission. Upon receipt of such application by the city, the city commission shall forthwith refer the application to the chief of police, the fire chief, the health officer and any such other city officer or employee as it may so desire, who shall cause a thorough investigation to be made of the persons and premises involved in the application. The findings of such investigation shall be reported to the city commission. Approval of the city commission shall require a majority vote of the members thereof. 
(b)  The approval given any applicant is not transferable without the consent of the city commission. 
(c)  No approved applicant shall transfer the location of the establishment for which approval was given, without the consent of the city commission. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.255) 
Sec. 6-33. - Suspension or revocation. 
    The city commission shall have the right at any time by resolution to suspend the sale, furnishing or delivery of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises throughout the entire city or any part thereof, whenever the commission deems such action necessary by reason of any public emergency. Violation either of this chapter, the rules and regulations of the state liquor control commission, or of any law or ordinance relative to the use of the premises or the conduct of any licensee may be used as basis to revoke or suspend either the approval granted under this article for a request by the city commission to the state liquor control commission for revocation or suspension of such licenses. The city commission shall, in matters involving revocation or suspension, by resolution direct that a hearing be held before the city commission upon not less than three days' written notice to the approved licensee involved. Service of such notice may be made personally upon the licensee, or by posting a copy of the resolution at the premises where the licensee's sales of alcoholic liquors are conducted or at his usual place of abode. A majority vote of the members of the city commission shall be required for the revocation or suspension of any license. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.257) 
Secs. 6-34-6-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 6-56. - General condition. 
    Every establishment dispensing alcoholic beverages shall be maintained in good safe repair. Any establishment which is structurally unsafe or is not provided with adequate ingress and egress or which constitutes a fire hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to human life or constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance shall not be approved as a licensed establishment. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.253) 
Sec. 6-57. - Sanitation. 
    The following sanitation standards are required for premises licensed under this chapter: 
(1)  All licensees, and their agents, servants and employees shall wear clean clothing and be clean about their person. No person who has an infectious disease shall be employed where food or beverages are prepared, handled, stored or served. All persons employed shall have a health card. 
(2)  All licensed establishments shall be equipped with two tanks and one power spray or three tanks for the purpose of washing, rinsing, disinfecting and sterilizing all bar and table service. 
(3)  All dishes, glasses, mugs, steins, cups and table service used in the serving of food or beverages shall be effectively washed and cleansed in clean hot water of not less than 110 degrees Fahrenheit. Such water shall contain an effective detergent or cleaning agent. Immediately after washing and before using, the dishes, glasses and utensils shall be effectively sanitized. "Effectively washed and cleansed" shall mean, without limiting the generality of the phrase, free of film and foreign material including lipstick, lip marks and fingerprints. 
(4)  Following sanitization, all dishes, glasses, silverware and utensils shall be drained in an inverted position on sanitary drain racks, traps or boards, with protection from flies, dust and other contamination during storage. 
(5)  All bars, tables, counters, coolers, extra bar tap rods, refrigerators, and all other fixtures or equipment and all basements, rooms, or other places used to serve or store food, beer, wine, or liquor shall be kept in a clean and sanitary manner at all times. 
(6)  All open windows, doors, and other openings to the outside shall be screened and protected against insects. 
(7)  All licensed establishments dispensing alcoholic beverages shall provide properly designated flush toilets for each sex. Such toilets shall be so constructed as to assure complete privacy as to segregation of sexes. 
(8)  Toilets shall be easily accessible to any room where drinks are served with no entrance through a kitchen or other room where food is prepared. 
(9)  Each toilet shall have adequate outside ventilation provided by an exterior window at least three square feet in area, fully openable, or a vertical duct not less than 48 square inches in area, leading to the exterior of the building, or a forced air exhaust system by mechanical means. 
(10)  The minimum floor space of each toilet shall be five feet in width and seven feet in length. 
(11)  Such toilet shall have close-fitting tight doors and shall have a nonabsorbent interior finish on floors, walls and ceilings. 
(12)  Toilets for men shall have the following equipment for every 100 patrons or fraction thereof, based on dining table capacity of the establishment: one wash bowl with running water (hot and cold); two intermittent or flush-type wall urinals; one flush stool complete with cover, which shall be segregated from the urinals by a partition and door. In addition, they shall have individual sanitary towels, ample soap and sanitary toilet paper, and a metal receptacle for accumulated wastes. 
(13)  Toilets for women shall have the same equipment as for men excepting urinals, in lieu of which an additional stool shall be required for each 100 patrons or fraction thereof, based on dining table capacity. 
(14)  All toilets and washrooms including walls, floors, ceilings and fixtures, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. Walls and ceilings shall be light colored. All such toilets and washrooms shall be adequately lighted. 
(15)  All licensed establishments shall be connected with a public sewerage system, or to sanitary facilities acceptable under local codes. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.253) 
Sec. 6-58. - Safety. 
    The following safety standards are required for premises licensed under this chapter: 
(1)  All licensed establishments dispensing alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises shall have at least two exits. Exit doors shall open outward. During business hours no exit door shall be locked, bolted or otherwise fastened so that the door cannot be opened from the inside by the use of an ordinary door latch or knob or by pressure on the door or on a panic release device. Every exit doorway from an area with an occupant load of more than 100 persons shall be marked with an exit sign. Exit sign letters shall be at least six inches in height. Exits shall be illuminated at all times with light having an intensity of not less than one footcandle at floor level. 
(2)  The number of persons permitted in any building or portion thereof used for dispensing alcoholic beverages shall not exceed that number which will allow a minimum of 15 square feet per occupant. 
(3)  Aisles leading directly to exit doorways shall not be obstructed by tables or chairs or other objects. Ready access to each exit doorway by aisles shall be provided. 
(4)  No decorative material shall be used which will ignite and allow flames to spread over the surface when exposed to a match flame test applied to a piece removed from the material. Testing shall be done in a safe place with the following procedure: The piece of material shall be exposed to a flame from a common match held in a horizontal position, one-half inch underneath the piece, and at a constant location for 15 seconds; if the material ignites it may not be used as decoration. Fireproofing treatments shall be renewed as often as may be necessary to maintain the flameproof effect. 
(5)  It shall be the duty of the owner and the occupant of each licensed establishment dispensing alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises to provide and maintain in good working condition suitably approved fire detecting devices or extinguishing appliances as may be acceptable under state regulations. Such devices or appliances may consist of one or more of the following: automatic fire alarm system, automatic sprinkler, or water spray system, standpipe and hose, fixed or portable fire extinguishers of a type suitable for the probable class of fire, or suitable asbestos blankets, manual or automatic covers, or carbon dioxide or other inert gas extinguishing systems. Any of the foregoing devices or appliances installed shall be maintained in operative condition at all times and it shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant to reduce the effectiveness of the protection so required. It shall be the duty of the owner and occupant of each building or part of a building housing a hotel, motel or restaurant having a class A, class B or class C license to properly train sufficient regular employees in the use of the fire appliances so that such appliances can be quickly put in operation. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.253) 
Sec. 6-59. - Illumination. 
    The minimum intensity of illumination prevailing in all parts of establishments licensed under this chapter providing alcoholic liquors for consumption on premises, at tabletop level, shall be one footcandle. However, such regulation shall not apply to cabarets during the actual floor shows or stage performances, provided that during such floor shows or stage performances, lights shall not be dimmer more than a total of two hours between 8:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.253) 
Sec. 6-60. - Ventilation. 
    All buildings or portions of buildings customarily used for dispensing or consuming alcoholic liquors shall be provided with light and ventilation by means of windows or skylights with an area not less than one-eighth of the total floor area or shall be provided with artificial light and a mechanically operated ventilating system which provides at least four changes of air per hour. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.253) 
Sec. 6-61. - Conduct on the premises. 
(a)  No licensee under this chapter, or agent, servant, or employee of a licensee, shall: 
(1)  Either directly or indirectly sell, furnish or deliver any alcoholic liquor, beer or wine to any person unless such a person shall have attained the age of 21 years; nor shall any licensee, either directly or indirectly by himself, or by any agent, servant or employee, at any time sell, furnish or deliver any alcoholic beverage to any person who is under the influence of intoxicating beverages. 
(2)  Be in an intoxicated condition upon the licensed premises or allow an intoxicated person to frequent, loiter or be employed upon the licensed premises. 
(3)  Refuse, fail or neglect to cooperate with any law enforcement officer in the performance of such officer's duties. 
(4)  Allow in or upon his licensed premises any improper conduct, disturbances, lewdness, indecent, profane or illegal language, songs, entertainment, literature, pictures or advertising materials; or cause to have printed or distributed any lewd, indecent or illegal literature, pictures or advertising material. 
(5)  Suffer or allow in or upon licensed premises the annoying or molesting of patrons or employees by other patrons, or employees. 
(6)  Permit the licensed premises to be frequented by or become the meeting place, hangout or rendezvous for known prostitutes or those who are known to engage in the use, sale or distribution of narcotics or any other illegal activity or business. 
(7)  Allow, upon licensed premises, slot machines, pinball machines, punch or pullboards, dice games, or any gambling or gaming devices, machines or apparatus, or gambling or gaming of any kind whatsoever. The presence of any such device, machine or apparatus upon the premises of any licensed establishment shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection. 
(8)  Serve to or permit any patron to consume an alcoholic beverage unless such patron is either seated or standing at a bar or seated at a table or counter. 
(9)  Have or maintain any rooms in connection with the licensed premises, excepting rooms used for toilets and kitchens; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to premises operated as a hotel or motel. No licensee shall have or permit any inside connection, entrance, doorway or aperture, between licensed premises and the premises of another person. 
(10)  Permit the sale of alcoholic beverages upon any portion of the premises which shall have been leased, sold or the right to possession of which shall have been transferred to another person not licensed. 
(11)  No license shall be approved for the sale of spirits to any establishment operating for the sale or dispensing of alcoholic liquors to men only. 
(b)  Every licensee shall have posted in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises a plainly visible printed list or menu showing the various types and prices of alcoholic drinks which he offers for sale. 
(c)  Any person under the age of 21 years purchasing or offering to purchase beer or wine, or any alcoholic liquor, who represents himself falsely to be over the age of 21 years, or who gives false information regarding his age to any police officer, licensee, agent, servant or employee in charge of any place where beer, wine and other alcoholic liquors are sold or any other person who makes false representation in order to procure the sale or furnishing of beer, wine or other alcoholic liquors to a person under the age of 21 years, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties provided in this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.254) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Gambling,  58-138. 
State Law reference- Offenses relating to public exhibitions and entertainment, MCL 750.463 et seq., MSA 28.718 et seq.; offenses concerning coin-operated devices, MCL 752.811, MSA 28.643(101). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC ENTERTAINERS AND SERVERS 

Sec. 10-26. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate public commercial entertainers and servers involving dancing, monologues, pantomimes and other personal type of body exhibitions, contortions or display, and personal service provided by any waitress, barmaid, waiter, bartender, performer, or other person by establishments within the city where such public commercial entertainment and personal service of customers is presented, promoted, permitted or provided, to thereby prohibit any illegal shows, or personal exhibitions or displays. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.292) 
Sec. 10-27. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing, the city, through its city commission, reserves the right to revoke any entertainment license issued under the terms of this article in the event of a violation of any of the regulations contained in this article. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.295) 
Sec. 10-28. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  No person shall permit or allow any form of commercial public entertainment or personal service by any waitress, barmaid, waiter, bartender, performer or other person of customers to be presented or provided within his establishment, nor shall any such person engage in, present or provide any form of public entertainment or personal service of customers within the city involving any lewd, obscene, illegal or unduly sexually stimulating dancing, monologues, pantomimes, or other type of body exhibitions, contortions, display or personal service. Waitresses and barmaids with no covering on their breasts, and waitresses, barmaids, waiters or bartenders without substantial covering of the genital area are specifically prohibited. 
(b)  The prohibited conduct, display or personal service prohibited by this section is hereby defined as that which, when taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest in sex, which portrays sexual conduct in a patently offensive way, and which taken as a whole does not have serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value, so that the average person applying contemporary community standards would find that such conduct, display or personal service appeals to the prurient interest. 
(c)  The proprietor of any establishment offering public entertainment and the performer and the personal server shall have the burden of proving compliance with the foregoing provisions in the event of any controversy concerning the same. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.293) 
Sec. 10-29. - Conditions for allowance. 
    Any establishment within the city wherein public commercial entertainment by performers, or personal service of customers is permitted shall comply with the following regulations prior to the allowance or presentation of such entertainment: 
(1)  No such entertainment or personal service shall be allowed within any establishment where intoxicating liquors or beer or wine are served unless the entertainer or personal server is at least 21 years of age. 
(2)  The establishment shall be equipped with separate male and female dressing rooms adequate in size to comfortably accommodate the performers and servers, and located in close proximity to the area set aside for performances and serving. In no event shall such dressing rooms be less than 64 square feet in area. 
(3)  The area utilized for performances shall be separated from the area occupied by patrons and customers by either a raised stage, railing or other permanent divider-type construction. 
(4)  No performer or personal server shall be allowed to dance, mingle, eat or drink with patrons or customers in the establishments during the period of their employment in the establishment and the proprietor shall be responsible for enforcing compliance with such regulation. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.293) 
Sec. 10-30. - License. 
    No entertainment performance or personal service shall be permitted until an annual license therefor has first been obtained from the city clerk. Such license shall not be issued until the building inspector for the city has inspected the premises and ascertained that all physical requirements have been complied with and the police and fire departments have reported favorably on previous operations, if any, of the establishment. A license fee as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time shall accompany any application for an annual entertainment permit to help defray the cost of administering this article. All licenses shall expire on May 1 of each year, subject to renewal under the terms and conditions contained in this article. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.293) 
Secs. 10-31-10-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - POOL, BILLIARDS, AMUSEMENT ARCADES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-51. - Gaming and gambling prohibited. 
(a)  All gaming and gambling in the city is hereby prohibited, and it shall be unlawful for any person to play any game of billiards, dice, pool, cards or any game whatever for the purpose of winning or obtaining money, stakes or valuable thing, and it shall be unlawful for any person to bet on or as to the result of any game, whether such game be played for gain or not, and whether or not such person shall be engaged in such game, or contest. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or knowingly offer to be kept, in any house, building, yard or dependency thereof by him owned or occupied, any device, machine, billiard or pool table, cards, dice, card tables or any other appliance or device for the purpose of gaming therewith. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.321) 
Sec. 10-52. - Enforcement; duties of police. 
    The chief of police or his authorized representative shall be charged with enforcement of this article and shall make periodic inspections in the enforcement thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.326) 
Sec. 10-53. - Type of room required; minors not permitted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit any patron to use for play at cards any room from or off the main part of the place of business by a partition of a height greater than five feet, which partition shall provide an open space between its top and the ceiling of the room. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to allow a minor below 18 years of age to play at cards, to frequent or remain in any establishment where card playing is licensed under this article. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to allow any minor of school age to play at video, electronic or other computer-type games or pool or billiards or frequent his establishment during regular school hours. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.324) 
Sec. 10-54. - Hours of play. 
    All play in any room or place in which tables or games are maintained and licensed under this article shall be stopped at 12:00 midnight, and shall not be commenced before 8:00 a.m. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.325) 
Secs. 10-55-10-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-66. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this division upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.327) 
Sec. 10-67. - Investigation of applicant; recommendation by chief of police; appeal. 
    Prior to the granting of a license under this division it shall be the duty of the police department to conduct an investigation into the character, record and habits of all such applicants for license and the chief of police may at his discretion certify or refuse to certify his approval of such license in writing. Upon refusal of the chief of police to certify a license, the applicant may appeal to the city commission for a review of the findings of the chief of police. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.326) 
Sec. 10-68. - License fee. 
    Every person engaging in or intending to engage in the business of keeping or operating any billiard or pool table or amusement center or arcades or card table shall, on or before February 1 each year, pay to the city treasurer in advance a license fee as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time for the keeping of such billiard or pool or amusement center or arcades or card tables for the year commencing on February 1 and ending on the January 31 thereafter. This license fee shall not be prorated for any period of operation less than one year and shall be issued to the individual responsible for operating the establishment and shall not be transferable. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.322) 
Sec. 10-69. - Issuance; display, posting. 
(a)  On receipt of the license fee provided for in section 10-68 and upon the written consent of the police department upon the license form, following investigation and inspection, the city clerk shall issue a license to the person paying the fee, which license shall entitle the person to engage in the described business until the following January 31 unless the license is revoked as provided in this division. 
(b)  The person procuring the license and engaging in such business shall cause the license to be posted up in a conspicuous place in the room in which the business is carried on. The license is not transferable. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.323) 
Sec. 10-70. - Causes for revocation. 
    The city commission shall have the power to revoke any license issued under this division for any one of the following causes: violation of the provisions of this division; failure of the licensee to maintain an orderly establishment free of disorderly persons; or false statements made during application for a license. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.327) 
Sec. 10-71. - Certain establishments exempted. 
    The licensing provisions of this division shall not apply to places operated by the city for recreational purposes, nor shall the licensing provision apply to establishments closed to the general public. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.328) 
Chapter 12 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011.08/385, adopted Aug. 22, 2011, amended the Code by the addition of Ch. 12,  12-1, 12-4, 12-6 and 12-7. At the editor's discretion, these provisions have been renumbered consecutively as  12-1-12-4. 

Sec. 12-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal means any vertebrate animal other than human beings, including, but not limited to, cats and dogs. 
    Animal run means an area designated or used for the exercising or possessing of animals. 
    At large means off the premises of the owners, harborer, keeper, possessor, or person in charge of the dog, cat, or animal, and not under the restraint by leash, controlled by a person of suitable age and size. 
    Cat means an animal of the species Felix catus . 
    Dog means an animal of the species Canis familiaris . 
    Domestic chicken means female chickens (hens) that may, where permitted, be kept and maintained for the noncommercial production of eggs, education, companionship or recreation. No other types of fowl or poultry shall be considered domesticated chickens. 
    Owner means a person having a property interest in an animal, or who keeps or harbors the animal in his or her care or custody, or who permits the animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by the person. 
(Ord. No. 2011.08/385, 8-22-11; Ord. No. 2016.10/402, 10-10-16) 
Sec. 12-2. - Animals running at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal, licensed or unlicensed, wearing a collar or not wearing a collar, to allow such animal to run at large or go beyond the premises of its owner unless properly restrained on a leash not exceeding 12 feet in length. This section does not apply to working dogs such as service dogs and guard dogs, and such other working dogs which are actively engaged in activities for which such dogs are trained and are under the reasonable control of its owner. A person who violates this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-15, general penalty, of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011.08/385, 8-22-11) 
Sec. 12-3. - Control and removal of animal excrement. 
    An owner, harborer, keeper, possessor or person in charge of any animal which discharges its excrement upon any parking lot, public thoroughfare, sidewalk, street, highway, road, boulevard, school property, cemetery, passageway, bypass, play area, park, or any place where people congregate or walk, or upon any public property whatsoever, or upon any private property without the permission of the owner of such property, shall be in violation of this section unless such person has in his immediate possession an appropriate device and uses such device for the transmission of such excrement immediately by a person to a suitable receptacle or location. A person who violates this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-15, general penalty, of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011.08/385, 8-22-11) 
Sec. 12-4. - Cleanliness of yards and runs. 
    Yards and animal runs shall be kept free of animal excrement and maintained in a sanitary manner so as not to be a nuisance because of odor or attraction for insects and vermin. A person who violates this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-15, general penalty, of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011.08/385, 8-22-11) 
Sec. 12-5. - Keeping of domestic chickens. 
    Domestic chickens may be kept in single family residential districts within the city in compliance with the provisions below. 
(1)  A maximum of six domestic chickens may be kept: roosters are prohibited. 
(2)  All domestic chickens shall be kept as follows: 
a.  All domesticated chickens shall be kept outside of a habitable structure in a predator-proof enclosure, a portion of which must be a covered predator-resistant henhouse with a minimum of two square feet per bird, and a portion of which must be a completely fenced in area, a minimum of six square feet per bird and constructed of material such as wire and/or mesh material. 
b.  Henhouses shall be enclosed on all sides and shall have a roof and doors. Access doors must be able to be shut and locked at night. Opening windows and vents must be covered with predator and bird resistant wire of less than one inch openings. 
c.  All henhouses and fenced enclosures must be properly ventilated, clean, dry and odor free, kept in a neat and sanitary condition at all times, in a manner that will not disturb the use or enjoyment of neighboring lots due to noise, odor or other adverse impact. 
d.  A henhouse and fenced enclosure must provide adequate ventilation, adequate sun and shade and must be constructed in a manner to prohibit access by rodents, wild birds and predators, including dogs and cats. 
e.  All henhouses and fenced enclosures shall be located not less than 25 feet away from any residential structure (other than the permit holder's residence) and not less than 20 feet from any property line. 
f.  All domestic chickens shall be kept in a required rear yard. No domestic chickens shall be kept in a required front yard. 
g.  All food for domestic chickens must be kept either indoors or in a weather resistant container designed to prevent access by animals. Uneaten food shall be removed daily. 
(3)  Sanitation, nuisance, and humane treatment . 
a.  The henhouse and fenced in area must be kept free from trash and accumulated domestic chicken manure. 
b.  Provision must be made for the sanitary storage and removal of domestic chicken manure. All manure for composting or fertilizing shall be contained in a well aerated garden compost pile located at least 20 feet from any property line. All other manure not used for composting or fertilizing shall be removed. 
c.  No person shall keep chickens within the city in such a manner that a nuisance is created. 
d.  No perceptible odor from the domestic chickens or their enclosure shall be present at any property line. 
e.  Slaughtering of domestic chickens is prohibited. 
f.  Breeding of domestic chickens is prohibited. 
g.  No domestic chickens shall be used or trained for fighting for amusement, sport or financial gain. 
(4)  Permit required. 
a.  An annual no fee permit issued by the city shall be required for the keeping of domesticated chickens. Any material misstatement or omission shall be grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of the permit. 
b.  The permit authorizes the keeping of domesticated chickens only upon the property identified in the permit. An applicant for a permit must be the property owner or have written permission from the property owner to be eligible to obtain a permit. The permittee must occupy the residence on the property where the domestic chickens are kept as his or her personal primary residence. 
c.  Only one permit shall be issued for any eligible property of record in the city. In the event that the permittee is absent from the property for longer than 60 days the permit shall automatically terminate and become null and void. 
d.  The first permit year shall extend from the date of issuance through December 31 of that year. Thereafter the permit year shall be January 1 through December 31. 
(5)  The sale of domestic chickens and/or their eggs is prohibited on the property. 
(Ord. No. 2016.10/402, 10-10-16) 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; planning, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; subdivisions, ch. 90; housing service charge in lieu of property tax,  94-26 et seq.; utilities, ch. 102. 
State Law reference- State construction code act, MCL 125.1501 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Installation and maintenance of house numbering. 
(a)  Purpose and authority. 
(1)  The city commission determines that emergency personnel, such as police, fire and ambulance, are hampered in their efforts to respond to emergencies because some homeowners do not have their houses marked with visible numbers. Response time of emergency personnel could be greatly enhanced if all homes in the city were properly marked with house numbers visible to emergency crews. 
(2)  This section is intended to mandate that all homes in the city have visible house numbers and to protect the health and welfare of all city citizens in case emergency personnel need to respond to an emergency at the home. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, certain terms and words are herein defined as follows: 
(1)  Clearly visible means visible by a person with normal or corrected 20/20 vision. 
(2)  City means the City of Buchanan, Michigan, government. 
(3)  Homeowner means the owner of residential property in fee simple. For rental units, "homeowner" means the landlord or other owner. "Homeowner" does not include the owner of commercial or industrial property which is not used for residential purposes. 
(4)  Painted means the use of permanent paint in sufficient color contrast to the surrounding color to make the paint readable. Reflective paint is the preferred method, although other types of paint are permissible if visible at all times. 
(5)  Residential purpose means that the building houses at least one person. 
(6)  House numbers means Arabic numerals, to wit: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 0. 
(c)  House numbering required. All homeowners in the city are required to display and maintain in a conspicuous manner, a clearly visible, numeric designation of the house, as assigned by the municipality. As used in this subsection, "conspicuous" is defined as follows: 
(1)  Home mail delivery. For all houses where the United States Postal Service delivers mail directly to the house (and not left in a mailbox not attached to the house), house numbers must be permanently attached to or painted on the house in a size sufficient to be clearly visible from the public highway, street or roadway closest to the front of the house. It is recommended that these numbers be four inches and reflective to light, but in no event will the house numbers be less than three inches in height. The numbers must also be of a color sufficiently in contrast with the background color in order to be clearly visible. 
(2)  Other mail delivery. For all houses where the United States Postal Service delivers mail to a mailbox not located on or in a home, house numbers must be permanently attached to the house or on a post which allows them to be clearly visible by a person traveling on the roadway closest to the post or mailbox. It is recommended that these numbers be four inches and reflective to light, but in no event will the house numbers be less than three inches in height. The numbers must also be of a color sufficiently in contrast with the background color in order to be clearly visible. 
(3)  No mail delivery. For all houses where the United States Postal Service does not deliver mail, house numbers must be permanently attached to or painted on the house in a size sufficient to be clearly visible from the public highway, street or roadway closest to the front of the house. It is recommended that these numbers be four inches and reflective to light, but in no event will the house numbers be less than three inches in height. The numbers must also be of a color sufficiently in contrast with the background color in order to be clearly visible. 
(4)  Houses 75 feet or more from the road. If the house is not visible from the roadway or is located more than 75 feet from the roadway, house numbers must be displayed at or near the place where the driveway comes from the public roadway with the same recommendations and restrictions as subsections (1) through (3) above. 
(d)  Penalties. A homeowner violating the provisions of this section shall be responsible for a civil infraction, and upon being found responsible thereof, shall pay a fine of $25.00 for the first offense and a fine of $50.00 for second and each subsequent offense. This section shall be prosecuted by the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 339,  1-4, 11-27-95) 
Secs. 14-2-14-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 14-26-14-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 347.99, adopted May 10, 1999, repealed former Div. 2,  14-36-14-40, and enacted similar provisions to read as herein set out. Former Div. 2 derived from Ord. No. 324, adopted July 10, 1992, and Ord. No. 335, adopted Aug. 8, 1994. 

Sec. 14-36. - Code adopted. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Section 3(k), P.A. 1909, No. 279, effective Sept. 1, 1909, as amended, the city hereby adopts, by reference, the Uniform Building Code, 1997 edition, published by International Conference of Building Officials (ICBO); the Uniform Building Code Standards, 1997 edition, the Uniform Building Appendix, 1997 edition, International One and Two Family Dwelling Code Appendix, 1998 edition, published by International Code Council; and the Uniform Fire Code, 1997 edition, published by International Fire Code Institute; Uniform Fire Code Appendix, 1997 edition as established by the provisions of Act 230 of 1972 as amended; and further, the city adopts, by reference, all future amendments of the Uniform Building Code, 1997 edition, the Uniform Building Code Standards, 1997 edition, and the Uniform Building Code Appendix, 1997 edition, as such amendments are provided for in Act 230 of 1972, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 347.99,  1, 5-10-99) 
Sec. 14-37. - References in code. 
    References in the uniform publications, mentioned above, to "state" and "this state" shall mean the State of Michigan; references to "municipality" and "this city" shall mean the City of Buchanan; references to "municipal charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Buchanan, and references to "local ordinances" shall mean the ordinances of the City of Buchanan. 
(Ord. No. 347.99,  2, 5-10-99) 
Sec. 14-38. - Amendments to code. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to change the building permit fees contained in the Uniform Building Code by resolution of the city commission. Such fees shall be available for inspection and distribution in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  The city hereby amends section 106, "Permits," subsection 106.4.4, "Expiration," of the Uniform Building Code, 1997 edition, by adding the following additional paragraph: 
    The forgoing provisions notwithstanding, all permits issued by the building official under provisions of this code shall expire 18 months following their date of issuance, Such permits may be extended for one additional period of up to 12 months by the building official, upon written request and payment of a fee equal to 25 percent of the original fee by the permit holder. 
(Ord. No. 347.99,  3, 5-10-99) 
Sec. 14-39. - Notice of location of uniform publications. 
(a)  Printed copies of the Uniform Building Code, 1997 edition, the Uniform Building Code Standards, 1997 edition, and the Uniform Building Appendix, 1997 edition shall be kept in the office of the city clerk and shall be available for inspection by, and distribution to, the public at all times. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall forbid the city from charging a reasonable fee for the distribution of the copies of the above-mentioned uniform publications. 
(Ord. No. 347.99,  4, 5-10-99) 
Sec. 14-40. - Conflicting ordinances repealed. 
    Ordinance No. 324, adopted the tenth day of July 1992, and Ordinance No. 335, adopted the twenty-fourth day of August 1994, of the City of Buchanan, are hereby repealed. All other ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this division are, to the extent of such inconsistency, hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 347.99,  5, 5-10-99) 
Sec. 14-41. - Penalties for violation. 
    Any violation or failure to comply with the provisions of this division, including any violations of the above-mentioned uniform codes as currently established or subsequently amended, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $100.00, and cost of prosecution and/or by imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed 90 days. Each day a person is in violation of this division shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 347.99,  6, 5-10-99) 
Secs. 14-42-14-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STATE CONSTRUCTION CODE 

Sec. 14-51. - Agency designated. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the State Construction Code, in accordance with section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the building official of the City of Buchanan is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the City of Buchanan under Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, State of Michigan. The City of Buchanan assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act throughout its corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 2006.03/370,  1, 3-13-06) 
Sec. 14-52. - Code appendix enforced. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the State Construction Code, in accordance with section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code shall be enforced by the enforcing agency within the City of Buchanan. 
(Ord. No. 2006.03/370,  2, 3-13-06) 
Sec. 14-53. - Designation of regulated floodprone hazard areas. 
    The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) flood insurance study (FIS) entitled Berrien County Michigan (and incorporated areas), dated April 17, 2006, and the flood insurance rate map(s) (FIRMS) panel number(s) 26021-0384C, 0403C, and 0405C of 438, dated April 17, 2006, are adopted by reference and declared to be part of section 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2006.03/370,  3, 3-13-06; Ord. No. 371.04/06,  3, 4-24-06) 
Secs. 14-54-14-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOVING, WRECKING BUILDINGS 

Sec. 14-61. - Moving of buildings. 
    No building shall be moved into, or from one lot to another lot, in a district when such building is not of a type permitted in that district. No building shall be moved for relocation within the city unless such building shall conform to existing city ordinances or unless adequate bond or cash deposit is given the city to insure rehabilitation of the building to substantial conformity with city ordinances and with buildings in the area in which it is to be moved. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  22.081) 
Sec. 14-62. - Wrecking of buildings. 
    Wrecking of buildings shall be conducted in such a manner as not to create a nuisance to persons on public streets or adjoining property. In wrecking any building the upper story shall be completely removed before starting removal of the story below and all material shall be lowered to the ground immediately upon displacement. Work shall be accomplished in accordance with safe practice. The building inspector shall require guard lights, fences, walkways or other safeguards which, in his opinion, may be necessary for protection of the public. Burning of combustible rubbish and debris from wrecking operations shall be prohibited except in isolated areas and then only when a written permit is obtained from the chief of the fire department. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  22.082) 
Sec. 14-63. - Permits. 
(a)  A building permit shall be required for the wrecking of a building and for the moving of a building through or within the city. Except the building inspector may forego the requirement for a building permit on moving or wrecking of buildings of a width of ten feet or less and a length of 20 feet or less when, in his opinion, there are no hazards involved and the moving or wrecking can be accomplished without inconvenience to the public and further, that the building, if moved, will meet the requirements of section 14-61. 
(b)  A condition of issuance of a building permit for wrecking or moving a building shall be compliance by the applicant of all provisions of this division and continued compliance throughout the operation. In the event of noncompliance the building permit shall be revoked by the building inspector and action commenced as if no permit has been obtained. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  22.083) 
Sec. 14-64. - Insurance. 
(a)  Any person moving a building over public property or right-of-way shall show evidence that he carries liability insurance in an amount of not less than $100,000.00 and property damage insurance in an amount of not less than $100,000.00. 
(b)  Any person wrecking a building, where in the opinion of the building inspector, due to the height of building, proximity to a public right-of-way or proximity to another building, the public or any individual may be endangered, shall show evidence that he carries liability and property damage insurance in an amount proper to the hazard involved. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  22.084) 
Sec. 14-65. - Cash deposit. 
    A cash deposit in an amount established by resolution of the city commission shall be deposited with the city treasurer prior to the issuance of a permit for moving or wrecking a building. Such deposit is to guarantee the removal of all debris as a result of the moving or wrecking, to guarantee the filling of the basement or any other excavation and the leveling of the lot and to cover any damage suffered or expenses incurred by the city as a result of the moving or wrecking operation. The making of such cash deposit shall not prevent the city from the collection of further damages in excess of the amount deposited if further damages are sustained. Such work covered by the above deposit is to be accomplished within the time set by the building inspector at his discretion at the time of permit issuance but in no case more than one year. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  22.085) 
Sec. 14-66. - Notice to utilities. 
    The contractor and/or owner shall be held strictly accountable for notice to utilities to discontinue service to buildings and for ensuring that service is actually discontinued prior to wrecking or moving a building. All sewer connections shall be removed to at least three feet below grade and plugged or capped with concrete. Water services, if of iron, shall be shut off at the main for which a charge set by resolution of the city commission from time to time will be made. If services are of copper they shall be shut off at the curb box. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  22.086) 
Secs. 14-67-14-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOUSING CODE 

Sec. 14-86. - Adopted. 
    The Uniform Housing Code, 1991 Edition, is hereby adopted by reference, subject to the modifications contained in this article. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.001) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Sec. 14-87. - References in code. 
    References in the Uniform Housing Code adopted in this article to "city" shall mean the City of Buchanan; references to "city council" shall mean city commission; reference to "building official" shall mean the city building inspector and code enforcement officer. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.002) 
Sec. 14-88. - Amendments. 
    The Uniform Housing Code adopted in this article is amended as follows: 
    A subsection (A) is hereby added to section 203, chapter 2, as follows: 
A.  The zoning board of appeals shall assume the additional title and authority of "the housing advisory and appeals board" as referred to in this section 203. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.003) 
Secs. 14-89-14-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-111. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "roominghouse," "rooming units," "premises," "structure" are used they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
    Accessory structure means a detached structure located on or partially on any premises which is not used or not intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants. 
    Appropriate authority means that person within the governmental structure of the corporate unit charged with the administration of the appropriate code. 
    Approved means approved by the local or state authority having such administrative authority. 
    Ashes means the residue from the burning of combustible materials. 
    Building inspector means the inspector charged with the administration and enforcement of this article or his regularly authorized deputy. 
    Central heating system means a single system supplying heat to one or more dwelling unit or more than one rooming unit. 
    Chimney means a vertical masonry shaft of reinforced concrete, or other approved noncombustible, heat resisting material enclosing one or more flues, for the purpose of removing products of combustion from solid, liquid or gas fuel. 
    Dormitory means a room in any dwelling used for sleeping purposes by four or more unrelated persons. 
    Dwelling means any enclosed space which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided that temporary housing as defined in this section shall not be regarded as a dwelling. 
    Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling or forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 
    Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the local or state authority having such administrative authority. 
    Family means an individual or two or more persons related by blood or marriage or a group of not more than five persons (excluding servants), who need not be related by blood or marriage, living together in a dwelling unit. 
    Flush water closet means a toilet bowl flushed with water, under pressure with a water sealed trap above the floor level. Such toilet bowls have a smooth, easily cleanable surface. 
    Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, serving and nonconsumption of food. 
    Guest means any person who shares a dwelling unit in a nonpermanent status for not more than 30 days. 
    Habitable room means a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, furnace rooms, pantries, kitchenettes and utility rooms of less than 50 square feet, foyers or communicating corridors, stairways, closets, storage spaces and workshops, hobby and recreation areas in unsealed or uninsulated parts of structure below ground level or in attics. 
    Health officer means the legally designated health authority of the city. 
    Heated water means water heated to a temperature of not less than 120 degrees Fahrenheit. 
    Household means a family and/or one or more unrelated persons, who share the same dwelling and use some or all of its cooking and eating facilities, including servants and not more than two boarders. 
    Infestation means the presence within or around a dwelling of any insects, rodents or other pests. 
    Kitchen means any room containing any or all of the following equipment, or area of a room within three feet of such equipment: sink and/or other device for dishwashing, stove or other device for cooking, refrigerator or other device for cool storage of food, cabinets and/or shelves for storage of equipment and utensils, and counter or table for food preparation. 
    Multiple dwelling means any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units and/or rooming units. 
    Occupant means any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking or eating in, or actually having possession of a dwelling unit or a rooming unit; except that in dwelling units a guest will not be considered an occupant. 
    Operator means any person who has charge, care, control or management of a building, or part thereof, or in which dwelling units or rooming units are let. 
    Ordinary summer conditions means a temperature ten degrees below the highest recorded temperature in the locality for the preceding ten-year period. 
    Ordinary winter conditions means a temperature 15 degrees above the lowest recorded temperature in the locality for the preceding ten-year period. 
    Owner means any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others: 
(1)  Has legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(2)  Has charge, care, or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or an executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this article and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner. 
    Permissible occupancy means the maximum number of persons permitted to reside in a dwelling unit or rooming unit. 
    Plumbing means and includes all of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents, and any other similar supplies fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines. 
    Premises means a platted lot or part thereof or unplatted lot or parcel of land or plot of land, either occupied or unoccupied by any dwelling or nondwelling structure, and includes any such building, accessory structure or other structure thereon. 
    Privacy means the ability of a person or persons to carry out an activity commenced without interruption or interference, either by sight or sound, by unwanted persons. 
    Refuse means all putrescible or nonputrescible solids (except body wastes) including garbage, rubbish, ashes and dead animals. 
    Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking purposes. 
    Roominghouse means any dwelling or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units, and/or one or more dormitory rooms. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes) consisting of either: 
(1)  Combustible wastes such as paper, cardboard, plastic containers, yard clippings and wood; or 
(2)  Noncombustible wastes such as tin cans, glass and crockery. 
    Safety means the condition of being free from danger and hazards which may cause accidents or disease. 
    Space heater means a self-contained heating appliance of either the circulating type or the radiant type, and intended primarily to heat only one room. 
    Supplied means paid for, furnished by, provided by, or under the control of the owner or operator. 
    Temporary housing means any tent, trailer, mobile home, or any other structure used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable, and which is not attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utility system on the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.211-18.250) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 14-112. - Legislative findings. 
    It is hereby found that there exists and may in the future exist, within the city, premises, dwellings, their structure, equipment, sanitation maintenance, use or occupancy which affect or are likely to affect adversely the public health (including the physical, mental and social well-being of persons and families), safety and general welfare. To correct and prevent the existence of such adverse conditions, and to achieve and maintain such levels of residential environmental quality as will protect and promote public health, safety and general welfare, it is further found that the establishment and enforcement of minimum housing standards are required. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.202) 
Sec. 14-113. - Purposes. 
    It is hereby declared that the purpose of this article is to protect, preserve and promote the physical and mental health and social well-being of the people, to prevent and control incidence of communicable diseases, to regulate privately and publicly owned dwellings for the purpose of maintaining adequate sanitation and public health, and to protect the safety of the people and to promote the general welfare by legislation which shall be applicable to all dwellings now in existence or hereafter constructed. It is hereby further declared that the purpose of this article is to ensure that the quality of housing is adequate for protection of public health, safety and general welfare, including establishment of minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities for light, ventilation and thermal conditions; for safety from fire and accidents; for the use and location and amount of space for human occupancy, and for an adequate level of maintenance; determination of the responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants of dwellings; and provision for the administration and enforcement thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.203) 
Secs. 14-114-14-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 14-126. - Authority of building inspector generally. 
    The building inspector is hereby authorized to collect and disseminate information concerning techniques of maintenance, repair and sanitation in housing, and concerning the requirements of this article and applicable rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.481) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 14-127. - Building inspector to develop plans for inspections. 
    The building inspector is hereby authorized and directed to develop and adopt plans for the inspection of dwelling units subject to the provisions of this article, including: 
(1)  A plan for the periodic inspection of multiple dwellings and roominghouses. 
(2)  A plan for the systematic inspection of dwelling units contained in such contiguous areas within this city as may from time to time be designated by the building inspector. 
(3)  A plan for the inspection of each apartment or room in a multiple dwelling or roominghouse unit for each time the apartment or room is relet or rerented. There shall be no fee for this inspection. It is the responsibility of the owner or his agent to notify the building inspector prior to the reletting or rerenting of an apartment or room in order that the inspection may be completed. Failure of the owner or agent to notify the building inspector upon rerenting or reletting or to refuse to allow the inspection to be completed shall subject the owner or agent or both to the penalties provided in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.391) 
Sec. 14-128. - Inspections authorized. 
    The building inspector is hereby authorized and directed to make inspection pursuant to one or more of the plans for inspection authorized by section 14-127; or in response to a complaint that an alleged violation of the provisions of this article or of applicable rules or regulations pursuant thereto has been committed; or when the building inspector has valid reason to believe that a violation of this article or any rules and regulations pursuant thereto has been committed. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.401) 
Sec. 14-129. - Hours for inspection. 
    The building inspector is hereby authorized to enter and inspect between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. all dwellings, dwelling units, and roominghouses, rooming units and dormitory rooms subject to the provisions of this article for the purpose of determining whether there is compliance with its provisions. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.402) 
Sec. 14-130. - Purpose of inspection. 
    The building inspector is hereby authorized to inspect the premises surrounding dwellings, dwelling units, roominghouses, rooming units and dormitory rooms subject to this article, for the purpose of determining whether there is compliance with its provisions. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.403) 
Sec. 14-131. - Inspection by appointment. 
    The building inspector and the owner, occupant or other person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, roominghouse or dormitory room subject to this article may agree to an inspection by appointment at a time other than the hours provided by this article. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.404) 
Sec. 14-132. - Proper identification and procedures. 
    The owner, occupant or other person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, roominghouse or dormitory room upon presentation by the building inspector of proper identification, a copy of any relevant plan of inspection pursuant to which entry is sought, and a schedule of the official entry shall provide free access to every part of the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or dormitory room or to the premises surrounding any of these. Before making inspection within a contiguous area pursuant to a plan authorized in section 14-127, the building inspector shall first consult with organizations representative of property owners and other residents of such contiguous area, if any such organizations exist. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.405) 
Sec. 14-133. - Confidential evidence. 
    The building inspector shall keep confidential all evidence not related to the purposes of this article and any rules and regulations pursuant thereto which he may discover in the course of the inspection. Such evidence shall be considered privileged, and shall not be admissible in any judicial proceeding without the consent of the owner, occupant, or other person in charge of the dwelling unit or rooming unit so inspected. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.406) 
Sec. 14-134. - Interference with building inspector. 
    If any owner, occupant or other person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, or a multiple dwelling or roominghouse refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes with, restricts or obstructs entry and free access to every part of the structure or premises where inspection authorized by this article is sought, the building inspector may seek in a court of competent jurisdiction an order that such owner, occupant or other person in charge cease and desist with such interference. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.407) 
Sec. 14-135. - Authority of city commission. 
    The city commission is hereby authorized to make, adopt, revise and amend such rules and regulations as it deems necessary for the carrying out of the purposes of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.421) 
Sec. 14-136. - Failure to meet requirements; issuance of notice. 
    Whenever the building inspector determines that any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, or the premises surrounding any of these, fails to meet the requirements set forth in this article or in applicable rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto, he shall issue a notice setting forth the alleged failures, and advising the owner, occupant or other person in charge that such failures must be corrected. This notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing. 
(2)  Set forth the alleged violations of this article or of applicable rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto. 
(3)  Describe the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit where the violation is alleged to exist or to have been committed. 
(4)  Provide a reasonable time, not to exceed 60 days, for the correction of any violation alleged. 
(5)  Be served upon the owner, occupant or other person in charge of the dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit personally, or by registered mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the last known place of the owner, occupant or other person in charge. If one or more persons to whom such notice is addressed cannot be found after diligent effort to do so, service may be made upon such person or persons by posting a notice in or about the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit described in the notice, or by causing such notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation for a period of three consecutive days. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.431) 
Sec. 14-137. - Reinspection. 
    At the end of the period of time allowed for the correction of any violation alleged, the building inspector shall reinspect the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit described in the notice issued pursuant to section 14-136. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.432) 
Sec. 14-138. - Second notice. 
(a)  If upon reinspection the violation alleged is determined by the building inspector not to have been corrected, he shall issue a second notice of violation which shall constitute an order requiring that the then existing failures to meet the requirements of this article, or of applicable existing rules or regulations issued pursuant thereto, shall be corrected within a reasonable time allowed, but not to exceed 60 days after the date of such reinspection if the person served with such notice does not request a reconsideration or petition for a hearing on the matter in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(b)  The building inspector shall cause a copy of the second notice to be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit where the violations are alleged to exist, and shall serve it in the manner provided in sections 14-136. 
(c)  The building inspector, after the expiration of time granted the person served with such second notice to seek reconsideration or a hearing in the manner provided by this division, or after a final decision adverse to such person served has been rendered by the housing appeals board or by the court to which an appeal has been taken, shall cause the second notice to be recorded in the office of the county register of deeds. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.433-18.435) 
Sec. 14-139. - Subsequent transferees; liability. 
    All subsequent transferees of the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit in connection with which a second notice has been so recorded shall be deemed to have notice of the continuing existence of the violations alleged, and shall be liable to all penalties and procedures provided by this article and by applicable rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto to the same degree as was their transferor. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.436) 
Sec. 14-140. - Penalty for second notice. 
    Any owner, occupant or other person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit who has received the second order or notice of a violation of this article may be subject to a civil penalty of $100.00 per day for each day the violation continues after expiration of the specified reasonable consideration period, or to 30 days in jail, or both, provided that no such penalty shall be applicable while a reconsideration, hearing or appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction is pending in the matter. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.451) 
Sec. 14-141. - Repairs may be undertaken by city commission. 
    Wherever an owner or other person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit fails, neglects or refuses to make repairs called for by a second order or notice of violation issued pursuant to section 14-138, the city commission may undertake such repairs when in its judgment a failure to make them will endanger the public health, safety or welfare, and the cost of such repairs will not exceed 50 percent of the fair market value of the structure to be repaired. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.461) 
Sec. 14-142. - Designated agent for service of notice. 
    Notice of the intention to make such repairs shall be served upon the owner or other person in charge pursuant to section 14-136; or upon the city manager as designated agent for service; or upon the resident agent of owner as designated agent for service. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.462) 
Sec. 14-143. - Notice of intent of city to make repairs; cooperation of owner, occupant. 
    Every owner or other person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit who has received notice of the intention of the city commission to make repairs shall give entry and free access to the agent of the city commission for the purpose of making such repairs. Any owner or other person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit who refuses, impedes, interferes with, hinders or obstructs entry by such agent pursuant to a notice of intention to make repairs shall be subject to a civil penalty of $25.00 for each such failure to comply with this section. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.463) 
Sec. 14-144. - Special assessment for unpaid debts. 
    When repairs are made at the direction of the city commission pursuant to this division, cost of such repairs shall constitute a debt in favor of the City of Buchanan, against the owner of the repaired structure. If such owner fails, neglects or refuses to pay the city the amount of this debt, the amount of this debt shall be charged to the property by special assessment to the tax roll. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.464) 
Sec. 14-145. - Application for reconsideration. 
    Any person aggrieved by a notice of the building inspector issued in connection with any alleged violation of this article or applicable rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto, or by any order requiring repair or demolition pursuant to section 14-142 or 14-143, may apply to the housing board of appeals for a reconsideration of such notice or order within 21 days after it has been issued. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.501) 
Sec. 14-146. - Informal conference with board of appeals. 
    The housing board of appeals shall set a time and place for an informal conference on the matter within ten days of the receipt of such application, and shall advise the applicant of such time and place in writing. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.502) 
Sec. 14-147. - Applicant permitted to present his grounds. 
    At the informal conference held pursuant to section 14-146, the applicant shall be permitted to present his grounds for believing that the order should be revoked or modified to one or more representatives of the housing board of appeals. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.503) 
Sec. 14-148. - Decision of board of appeals. 
    Within ten days following the close of the informal conference, the housing board of appeals shall advise the applicant whether or not it will modify or set aside the notice of order issued by the building inspector. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.504) 
Sec. 14-149. - Cases requiring immediate action. 
(a)  Whenever in the judgment of the building inspector an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health, safety or welfare, he may, without notice, conference or hearing, issue an order directing the owner, occupant or other person in charge of the structure to which the provisions of this article or applicable rules and regulations pursuant thereto apply, to take such action as is necessary to correct or abate the emergency; or if circumstance warrant, may himself act to correct it. 
(b)  The owner, occupant or other person in charge of such structure shall be granted a conference on the matter upon his request, as soon as practicable, but such conference shall in no case stay the abatement or correction of such emergency. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.521, 18.522) 
Secs. 14-150-14-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS 

Sec. 14-161. - Responsibilities defined. 
    Every owner remains liable for violations of duties imposed upon him by this article even though an obligation is also imposed on the occupants of his building, and even though the owner has, by agreement, imposed on the occupant the duty of furnishing required equipment or of complying with this article. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.301) 
Sec. 14-162. - Maintenance of building. 
    Every owner, or his agent, in addition to being responsible for maintaining his building in a sound structural condition, shall be responsible for keeping that part of the building or premises which he occupies or controls in a clean, sanitary and safe condition, including the shared or public areas in the building containing two or more dwelling units. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.302) 
Sec. 14-163. - Sanitary facilities. 
    Every owner shall, where required by this article, the health ordinance or the health officer, furnish and maintain such approved sanitary facilities as required, and shall furnish and maintain approved devices, equipment or facilities for the prevention of insect and rodent infestation, and where infestation has taken place, shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests when such extermination is not specifically made the responsibility of the occupant by law or ruling. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.303) 
Sec. 14-164. - Disposal of garbage. 
    Every occupant of a dwelling unit, in addition to being responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling unit or premises which he occupies and controls, shall dispose of all his rubbish, garbage, and other organic waste in a manner required by the garbage and refuse ordinance and approved by the health officer. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.304) 
Sec. 14-165. - Approved devices and equipment. 
    Every occupant shall, where required by this article, the garbage and refuse ordinance or the health officer, furnish and maintain approved devices, equipment or facilities necessary to keep his premises safe and sanitary. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.305) 
Sec. 14-166. - Supplying facilities or containers for garbage. 
    Every owner of a dwelling containing three or more dwelling units shall supply facilities or containers for the sanitary and safe storage and/or disposal of rubbish and garbage. In the case of single- or two-family dwellings, it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to furnish such facilities or containers. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.306) 
Sec. 14-167. - Screens and storm doors. 
    The owner of a dwelling unit shall be responsible for providing and hanging all screens and double or storm doors and windows whenever the same are required under the provisions of this article or any rule or regulations adopted pursuant thereto. Maintenance or replacement of screens, storm doors and windows once installed in any one season becomes the responsibility of the occupant. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.307) 
Sec. 14-168. - Extermination of insects. 
    Every occupant of a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of insects, and/or rodents on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination wherever his dwelling unit is the only one infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a rodentproof or reasonable insectproof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more dwelling units in any dwelling or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.308) 
Sec. 14-169. - Plumbing fixtures. 
    Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean, sanitary and operable condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.309) 
Secs. 14-170-14-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR HOUSING FACILITIES 

Sec. 14-181. - Compliance. 
    No person shall occupy as owner, occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein, which does not comply with the following requirements of this division. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.330) 
Sec. 14-182. - Room for food preparation. 
    Every dwelling unit shall have a room or portion of a room in which food may be prepared and/or cooked, which shall have adequate circulation area, and which shall be equipped with the following: A kitchen sink in good working condition and properly connected to a water supply system which is approved by the appropriate authority and which provides at all times an adequate amount of heated and unheated running water under pressure, and which is connected to a sewer system approved by the appropriate authority; a stove, or similar device, for cooking food; and a refrigerator, or similar device, for the safe storage of food at temperatures less than 50 degrees Fahrenheit but not less than 32 degrees Fahrenheit under ordinary maximum summer conditions for safe, sanitary and efficient operation; provided that such stove, refrigerator and/or similar devices need not be installed when a dwelling unit is not occupied and when the occupant is expected to provide same on occupancy, and that sufficient space and adequate connections for the same and efficient installations and operation of such stove, refrigerator and/or similar devices are provided. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.331) 
Sec. 14-183. - Bathroom facilities. 
    Every dwelling unit shall be provided with a water closet, a lavatory and a bathtub or shower. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.332) 
Sec. 14-184. - Access to exits. 
    Every dwelling unit or guestroom shall have access directly to the outside or to a public corridor. All buildings or portions thereof shall be provided with exits, exitways and appurtenances as required by the Uniform Building Code. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.333) 
Sec. 14-185. - Handrails. 
    Structurally sound handrails shall be provided on any steps containing five risers or more. If steps are not enclosed, handrails and banisters spaced no more than six inches apart shall be provided. Porches and/or balconies located more than three feet higher than the adjacent area shall have structurally sound protective handrails, 30 to 36 inches high, and, if unenclosed, banisters spaced no more than six inches apart. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.334) 
Sec. 14-186. - Ventilation, heating and electrical equipment. 
    All ventilation, heating and electrical equipment in any dwelling unit or dwelling shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Building Code. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.335) 
Sec. 14-187. - Heating facilities. 
    Every dwelling shall have heating facilities capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms in every dwelling unit located therein to a temperature of at least 70 degrees Fahrenheit, at a distance of 36 inches above floor level under ordinary winter conditions. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.336) 
Sec. 14-188. - Use of space heaters. 
    No owner or occupant shall install, operate or use an unvented space heater employing a flame. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.337) 
Sec. 14-189. - Premises to be kept in good repair. 
    Every foundation, roof and exterior wall, door, skylight and window shall be reasonably weathertight, and dampfree and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. Floors, interior walls and ceilings shall be sound and in good repair. All interior or exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by paint or other protective covering or treatment using nontoxic materials where readily accessible to children. Walls shall be capable of affording privacy for the occupants. Every premises shall be graded, drained, free of standing water and maintained in a clean, sanitary and safe condition. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.338) 
Sec. 14-190. - Rodentproof maintenance. 
    Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway or similar devices shall be kept rodentproof and reasonably watertight, and shall be kept in working condition and good repair, and every dwelling or dwelling unit shall be generally maintained to prevent and eliminate rodent harborage. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.339) 
Sec. 14-191. - Screen requirements. 
    During that portion of the year when there is a need for protection against mosquitoes, flies and other flying insects, every door opening directly from a dwelling unit to outside space shall have supplied properly fitting screens having at least 16-mesh and self-closing devices, and every window or other device with openings to outdoor space, used or intended to be used for ventilation, shall likewise be supplied with screens; except that such screens shall not be required during such period in rooms deemed by the building inspector to be located high enough in the upper stories of a building as to be free from such insects, or in rooms located in areas of this city which are deemed by the building inspector to have so few insects as to render screens unnecessary. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.340) 
Sec. 14-192. - Construction and installation regulations. 
    All plumbing, chimney, bathroom facility, piece of equipment or utility which is present in a dwelling or dwelling unit or which is required under this article shall be constructed and installed in conformance with the appropriate statutes, ordinances and regulations of this city and the state. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.341) 
Sec. 14-193. - Fire protection. 
    All construction and materials, ways and means of egress, and installation and use of equipment shall conform to applicable state and local laws dealing with fire protection. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.342) 
Secs. 14-194-14-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DENSITY, SPACE, USE AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 14-206. - Compliance. 
    No person shall occupy or let to be occupied any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein, unless there is compliance with the requirements in this division. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.370) 
Sec. 14-207. - Maximum density of occupancy. 
    The maximum density of occupancy of any dwelling unit by persons shall not exceed either: 
(1)  Square feet per occupant. For first occupant, 150 square feet of floor space and at least 100 square feet of floor space for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be calculated on the basis of total habitable room area; or 
(2)  Total number of persons. A total number of persons equal to two times the number of its habitable rooms. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.371) 
Sec. 14-208. - Occupant limitations. 
    Not more than one family, plus two occupants unrelated to the family, except for guests or domestic employees, shall occupy a dwelling unit unless a permit for a roominghouse has been granted by the appropriate authority. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.372) 
Sec. 14-209. - Below grade space. 
    No space located partially or totally below grade shall be used as a habitable room of a dwelling unit, unless the floor and those portions of the walls below grade are of waterproof and dampproof construction. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.373) 
Secs. 14-210-14-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 38. 

Sec. 14-231. - Code adopted. 
    The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1991 Edition, as published by the International Conference of Building Officials, is hereby adopted by reference, subject to the modifications contained in this article. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.051) 
Sec. 14-232. - References in code. 
    In the uniform code adopted in this article references to the "city" shall mean the City of Buchanan; references to the "city council" shall mean the city commission; and references to the "building official" shall mean the city building inspector and code enforcement officer. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.052) 
Sec. 14-233. - Amendments. 
    The uniform code adopted in this article is amended as follows: 
    A subsection (c) is hereby added to section 205, Chapter 2, as follows: 
(c)  The zoning board of appeals shall assume the additional title and authority of the board of appeals as referred to in this section 205. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.053) 
Secs. 14-234-14-255. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS 

Sec. 14-256. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Private swimming pool means a permanently constructed receptacle for water, or an artificial pool of water having a depth at any point of more than two feet, and intended for the purpose of immersion, or partial immersion therein of human beings, and including all appurtenant equipment, constructed, installed and maintained permanently in or above the ground outside of a building, used for a single-family dwelling unit, or intended to be used as a swimming pool in connection with a single-family residence and available only to the family or the householder of such residence and his guests. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.701) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 14-257. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall do any of the acts or things prohibited or neglects or refuses to do any of the acts or things required by this article or in any way violates any of its provisions shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and for each and every offense shall be punished as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.712) 
Sec. 14-258. - Permit-Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to proceed with the construction, installation, enlargement or alteration of any private residential swimming pool and appurtenances thereto within the city unless a permit therefor is first obtained. If any part of the swimming pool or equipment is connected to the city sewer lines, an additional permit shall be obtained. 
(b)  There shall be no cross connection of the city water supply with any other source of water supply from the pool. The line from the city water supply to the pool shall be protected against backflow of polluted water by means of an air-gap and shall discharge at least six inches above the maximum high water level of the makeup tank or the pool. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.702) 
Sec. 14-259. - Same-Application. 
    A permit shall be applied for and issued from the building inspection department before construction shall begin on any swimming pool. The application for the permit shall be accompanied by a complete and detailed set of plans and specifications of the swimming pool and all appurtenant equipment. Before any permit shall be issued, such plans and specifications shall be approved by the building inspection department, and before any swimming pool shall be used, a final inspection and approval must be had from the building inspection department. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.703) 
Sec. 14-260. - Materials and design. 
(a)  Materials. Private residential swimming pool walls and floor shall be constructed of any material which will provide a tight tank and easily cleaned surfaces. The walls shall be of a smooth surface. The floor or bottom surface of the pool shall have a finish as smooth as practicable. 
(b)  Structural design. Residential swimming pools shall be designed to withstand the water pressure from within and to resist the pressure of the earth or groundwater when the pool is empty. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.704) 
Sec. 14-261. - Safety precautions; fence, enclosure. 
    All swimming pools to be constructed or which are already constructed shall be enclosed by a fence which shall be at least four feet in height, and which shall be of a type not readily climbed by children. The gates shall be of a self-closing and latching type, with the latch on the inside of the gate, not readily available for children to open; provided, however, that if the entire premises of the residence are enclosed, this provision may be waived by the building department upon inspection and approval of the residence enclosure. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.705) 
Sec. 14-262. - Water circulation. 
(a)  All privately owned swimming pools shall be equipped with a water circulating system powered by a motor driven pump to circulate completely the water within such pool every 24 hours. The water in such circulating system shall be forced through an approved filter of sufficient size to filter adequately the water passing into the pool. 
(b)  The construction of the pool shall be made in such a manner that all scum, splash, and deck water shall not return to the pool except through the filter system. 
(c)  The pool shall be kept free at all times of floating materials, sediment and debris. 
(d)  A provision shall be made for positive germicidal or bacterial control by the use of chlorine, bromide, or other such disinfectant agents as may be approved by the building inspection department. Such disinfecting agents shall be applied to the pool water at a uniform rate. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.706) 
Sec. 14-263. - Electrical requirements. 
    All electric wiring installed and provided for or used in conjunction with private residential swimming pools shall be in conformity with the city building and electrical codes. 
(1)  Electric wiring. No electric wires or conductors shall cross, either overhead or underground, any part of a private residential swimming pool, nor shall any electric wiring be installed parallel to any pool wall closer than five feet, if underground, unless enclosed in rigid conduit, or within five feet, if overhead. 
(2)  Underwater lights. All underwater lights must be watertight, self-contained units with their own ground connection running from a waterproof junction box to a proper grounding facility or medium. All underground electric wires supplying current to the light or lights, within a distance of five feet of the pool wall or walls, must be enclosed in rigid conduits. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.708) 
Sec. 14-264. - Shielding of lights. 
    Lights used to illuminate any swimming pool or family pool shall be so arranged and shaded as to reflect away from adjoining premises. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.709) 
Sec. 14-265. - Inspection. 
    The building inspector shall have the right at any reasonable hour to inspect any swimming pool for the purposes of determining that all provisions of this article are fulfilled and complied with. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.710) 
Sec. 14-266. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by or any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected by a decision of the building inspector may appeal to the zoning board of appeals to be heard regarding an alleged error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the building inspector in the enforcement of sections 14-260 through 14-264. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.711) 
Secs. 14-267-14-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 14-291. - Adopted. 
    A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code , 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the property maintenance code of the City of Buchanan, in the State of Michigan for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said property maintenance code on file in the office of the city clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 14-292. 
(Ord. No. 330,  1, 7-26-93; Ord. No. 352,  1, 3-12-01; Ord. No. 2011.04/383,  1, 4-11-11; Ord. No. 2016.09/401,  1, 9-12-16) 
Sec. 14-292. - Amendments. 
    [The 2015 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code adopted in section 14-291 is amended and revised in the following respects]: 
Section 101.1 Insert: THE CITY OF BUCHANAN Section 103.5 Insert: Cost incurred plus fifteen percent (15%) Section 106.3 Delete: or civil infraction as determined by the local municipality Section 111.1 Insert: Construction Board of Appeals Section 111.2 Insert: Construction Board of Appeals Section 112.4 Insert: not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00 Section 302.4 Insert: Eight (8) inches Section 304.14 Insert: May 1-November 1 Section 602.3 Insert: October 1-July 1 Section 602.4 Insert: October 1-July 1  
(Ord. No. 330,  2, 5, 7-26-93; Ord. No. 352,  2, 3-12-01; Ord. No. 2009.05/380, 5-26-09; Ord. No. 2011.04/383,  2, 4-11-11; Ord. No. 2016.09/401,  2, 9-12-16) 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Cable communications, ch. 20; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 66; secondhand goods, ch. 74; traffic and vehicles, ch. 98. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means any person, copartnership, association or corporation applying for a license under this article, or any person applying for a driver's permit under this article, as the case may be. 
    Cruising means the movement of unoccupied taxicabs over the public streets in search of, or soliciting prospective passengers for hire; except that an unoccupied taxicab proceeding to answer a telephone call for taxicab service from an intending passenger, and a taxicab returning by the most direct route, after having discharged a passenger or passengers, to the garage where the taxicab is housed, or to a taxicab stand, shall not be considered cruising. 
    For hire means for remuneration or reward of any kind, paid or promised, either directly or indirectly. 
    Rate cards means the card required by this article for display within each taxicab for which a license has been issued, describing the schedule of fares charged by such taxicab. 
    Stand means a space reserved for the sole use of taxicabs. 
    Taxicab means and includes any vehicle operating on the public streets, alleys and quasi- public places of the city, not operating on a fixed route, and accepting passengers for transportation for hire on call or demand between such points as may be directed by the passenger or passengers. Taxicab shall specifically exclude a limousine livery service, dial-a-ride and any publicly operated transit vehicle operating along a fixed route. 
    Waiting time means the time when a taxicab is not in motion from the time of acceptance of a passenger or passengers to the time of discharge. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.621, 12-29-92) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 18-27. - Penalty. 
    Any violation or failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.626, 12-29-92) 
Secs. 18-28-18-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUSINESS LICENSE 

Sec. 18-41. - Required. 
    No person or business entity shall operate or cause to be operated any taxicab in the city without having first obtained a license to operate such taxicab as provided in this division. No business license shall be required of any taxicab operated, or cause to be operated, in the city by any person or business entity whose principal office and principal business operation for the taxicab service are located at least four miles outside of the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.622(1), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-42. - Application. 
    Any person desiring a license to operate a taxicab on the streets of the city shall file with the city clerk a sworn application therefor on forms to be furnished by the city, which application shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name, age, residence and present occupation of the person applying for such license; if the applicant is a partnership, the names, addresses and occupations of all partners shall be given, and if the application is a corporation, the names, addresses and occupations of all officers and directors thereof shall be given. 
(2)  The make, body style, year, serial and engine number, state license plate number, seating capacity and weight of the taxicab for which such license is being applied for. 
(3)  Whether there are any unpaid or unbonded judgments of record against the applicant and, if so, the title of all actions and the amount of all judgments unpaid or unbonded, and the court in which the same were rendered. 
(4)  The experience of the applicant, both in the city and elsewhere, in the operation of taxicabs or other common carriers. 
(5)  Whether or not the applicant for such license, or if a partnership or corporation, any of the partners, officers or directors thereof, has ever been charged with, convicted of or plead guilty to any felony, crime or misdemeanor, and if so, the date, nature of the offense and the court in which such charge was made, conviction was obtained or plea of guilty was entered. 
(6)  The place or places within the city, or elsewhere, where the person applying for such license proposes to establish his office, and from which he proposes to operate such taxicab. 
(7)  The number of taxicabs for which the applicant holds licenses at the date of the application. 
(8)  Whether the applicant is the owner of the taxicab for which a license is being applied for, and if not, the name of the owner thereof. 
(9)  Whether there are any liens, mortgages or other encumbrances, including conditional sales contracts, on such taxicab, and, if so, the amount and character thereof and the name of the holder thereof. 
(10)  Such other information as the city commission may in its discretion require. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.622(2), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-43. - Investigation; action by city commission. 
(a)  The city clerk shall transmit each application for a license under this division to the chief of police, who shall cause an investigation to be made of the character, fitness and qualifications of the person applying for such license, and the fitness of the proposed taxicab for use as such. The chief of police shall thereupon transmit such application, together with his recommendation thereon, to the city commission. 
(b)  If the city commission shall determine that the person applying for such license is a suitable person and the taxicab proposed to be licensed is a suitable vehicle for such purposes, it may issue a license therefor. 
(c)  The city commission may refuse to issue a license to any applicant when, in the judgment of the commission, there are licensed a sufficient number of taxicabs to adequately serve the needs of the city, or there are existing transportation facilities reasonably sufficient to serve the public demand, or the use of the streets for the city by additional taxicabs would interfere with the public use of the streets or congest traffic and parking, or the additions of more taxicabs would lessen the ability of all cabs to earn a fair return on capital invested. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.622(3), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-44. - Insurance prerequisite to issuance. 
(a)  No license shall be issued under this division until the person applying therefor shall obtain and file with the city a policy of liability insurance issued by a responsible insurance company authorized to do business in the state, providing insurance coverage for each taxicab for which a license is applied for. 
(b)  Such policy of insurance shall insure the applicant against liability for personal injury to passengers in such taxicab, or to members of the general public, resulting from an accident in which such taxicab may be involved through the recklessness or negligence of its driver, operator or owner, as well as against any damage to property. 
(c)  Such policy shall provide minimum insurance protection for each taxicab in the amount as provided by resolution of the city commission, as established from time to time. 
(d)  Such policy of insurance shall provide for continuing liability thereunder to the full amount thereof, notwithstanding any recovery thereon, and that the insolvency or bankruptcy of the insured shall not release the company. 
(e)  Such policy shall further provide that it shall not be canceled, surrendered or revoked by either party except after ten days' written notice to the city, furnished by the insurance company issuing such policy. 
(f)  The cancellation, surrender or other termination of any insurance policy issued and filed with the city in compliance with this section shall automatically terminate the licenses of all taxicabs covered by such insurance policy unless another policy complying with the section shall be in effect and deposited with the city at the time of such cancellation or termination. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause or permit to be operated any taxicab on the streets of the city without having fully complied with the terms of this section. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.622(4), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-45. - Issuance. 
    Licenses granted by the city commission under this division shall be issued by the city clerk upon the payment of fees required as required by resolution of the city commission as established from time to time, provided that no license shall be issued until the applicant has deposited with the city the policy of liability insurance required by section 18-44(c) and until the policy has been approved by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.622(5), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-46. - Transferability. 
    Licenses issued under this division may be transferable from the licensee to the purchaser of the cab for which a license has been issued after such transfer has first been approved by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.622(6), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-47. - Change of ownership. 
    Change of ownership of or title to any taxicab or taxicabs shall automatically revoke any license or licenses previously issued for the operation of such taxicab or taxicabs, and the purchaser thereof shall not operate such taxicab or taxicabs until he has applied for and been granted a transfer of license under the terms of this division and has complied with all the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.622(7), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-48. - Suspension, revocation. 
    Licenses under this division may be suspended or revoked for any violation of this division, including, but not limited to, false statements made in the procurement of the license, by written order of the chief of police. The fact that the owner ceased to operate any taxicab for a period of 30 consecutive days without having obtained permission for cessation of such operation from the chief of police shall be an additional ground for revoking a taxicab license. Any suspension or revocation of a license by the chief of police for a violation of this division shall be appealable to the city commission, provided, that the city commission may overturn such suspension or revocation of license only if it finds by majority vote that the provisions of this division have, in fact, been met. The city commission may not overturn such suspension or revocation of license by waiving or granting a variance of the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.622(8), 12-29-92) 
Secs. 18-49-18-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DRIVER'S LICENSE 

Sec. 18-61. - Required. 
    No person shall drive a taxicab on the streets of the city without having first obtained a taxicab driver's license from the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.623(1), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-62. - Application. 
    Any person desiring to drive a taxicab upon the streets of the city shall file with the city clerk a sworn application for a taxicab driver's license, which application shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name, age, residence and present occupation of such applicant, and his place or places of residence two years preceding the date of the application. 
(2)  The experience which the applicant has had in operating automobiles, taxicabs or other vehicles used in carrying passengers for hire or on contract. 
(3)  Whether or not such applicant has ever been charged with, convicted of, or plead guilty to any felony, crime or misdemeanor, and, if so, the date, nature of the offense and the court in which such charge was made, conviction was obtained or plea of guilty entered. 
(4)  Whether any chauffeur's license or operator's permit issued to him has ever been suspended or revoked, and, if so, for what cause. 
(5)  Such other information as the city commission may, in its discretion, require. 
(6)  Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall, at his own expense, be required to submit to a medical examination by a duly licensed physician of his own choosing, and the results of such examination shall be reduced to writing by such physician on a form to be provided by the city; such form, completely filled out by the examining physician, shall be attached to the application for a taxicab driver's license before the same shall be received by the city clerk. 
(7)  Each applicant shall file with such application a recently taken photograph of his face and shoulders, two inches by two inches in size. 
(8)  Each applicant shall also file with such application a fingerprint card taken by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.623(2), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-63. - Investigation. 
    Upon the filing of an application for a taxicab driver's license, the city clerk shall transmit the same to the chief of police, who shall cause an investigation to be made of the character and fitness of such applicant. If, in the opinion of the city commission, the applicant is a proper person to receive a taxicab driver's license, the chief of police shall approve the issuance thereof; provided, however, that no taxicab driver's license shall be issued to any person who has not attained the full age of 18 years and who does not hold a chauffeur's license from the state. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.623(3), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-64. - Issuance. 
    If the application for a taxicab driver's license is approved by the city commission, the chief of police shall return the application, together with his approval endorsed thereon, to the city clerk, who shall issue to the applicant a taxicab driver's license. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.623(4), 12-29-92; Ord. No. 2010.01/381, 1-11-10) 
Sec. 18-65. - Fees. 
    A fee for each taxicab driver's license shall be provided by resolution of the city commission as established from time to time. The fee for replacement of the badge shall be the same as for renewal. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.623(5), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-66. - Transferability. 
    Taxicab driver's licenses issued under this division shall be nontransferable. It shall be unlawful for any person holding a taxicab driver's license to transfer, or attempt to transfer, such license or any badge or card issued under this division to any other person; and it shall be unlawful for any person holding such license to knowingly permit any other person to have the same or the badge thereof in his possession; and it shall be unlawful for any person to wear or have in his possession while operating a taxicab in the city a taxicab driver's license, or any badge or card, issued to any other person. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.623(6), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-67. - Renewal. 
    A driver applying for a renewal of his license shall make application therefor on a form furnished by the city, and shall file the same with the clerk, who shall transmit it to the chief of police, who shall make an investigation and if he is satisfied that the applicant license should be renewed, shall endorse his approval upon such application and return it to the clerk, who shall issue the renewal. Not more than two such renewals shall be granted without an additional physical examination. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.623(7), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-68. - Temporary license. 
    Anything in this division to the contrary notwithstanding, a temporary taxicab driver's license may be issued by the city clerk for a maximum period of 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.623(8), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-69. - Suspension, revocation. 
    Licenses under this division may be suspended or revoked for any violation of this division, including, but not limited to, false statements made in the procurement of the license, by written order of the chief of police. The fact that the owner ceased to operate any taxicab for a period of 30 consecutive days without having obtained permission for cessation of such operation from the chief of police shall be an additional ground for revoking a taxicab license. Any suspension or revocation of a license by the chief of police for a violation of this division shall be appealable to the city commission, provided, that the city commission may overturn such suspension or revocation of license only if it finds by majority vote that the provisions of this division have, in fact, been met. The city commission may not overturn such suspension or revocation of license by waiving or granting a variance of the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.623(9), 12-29-92) 
Secs. 18-70-18-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - VEHICLE CONSTRUCTION AND EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 18-81. - General construction. 
(a)  All bodies of taxicabs shall have four doors, two leading into the passenger's compartment and two leading into the driver's compartment, so constructed that they may be opened from the inside and the outside. Each door shall be constructed with a double or safety lock. Doors leading into the passenger's compartment shall be so equipped that when one or both of the doors are not fully closed the light upon the dash immediately in front of the driver shall be illuminated and remain illuminated until such doors shall be fully closed. 
(b)  The windshield and all windows in both the driver's compartment and the passenger compartment shall be of nonshatterable glass. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(1), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-82. - Spare tire. 
    Every taxicab shall be equipped with at least one spare tire which shall, at all times, be kept inflated to the required pressure. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(2), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-83. - Heater. 
    Every taxicab shall be equipped with a heater in the passenger compartment with a shutoff appliance thereon, sufficient to heat the interior of the cab adequately in cold weather. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(3), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-84. - Rear view mirror. 
    Every taxicab shall be equipped with an adjustable rear vision mirror installed within the driver's compartment so as to enable the operator to obtain a reasonably clear view towards the road. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(4), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-85. - Speedometer. 
    Every taxicab shall be equipped with a standard speedometer properly installed, maintained in good working order and exposed to view. No taxicab shall be operated in taxicab service while the speedometer is out of repair or disconnected. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(5), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-86. - Card frame. 
    Every taxicab shall be equipped with a card frame for the proper display of the owner's memorandum certificate, rate card and driver's identification card. The card frame shall be placed on the center of the partition between the driver's compartment and the passenger's compartment and shall face the passenger and be so located as to be at all times in plain view of such passenger. The card frame shall be incapable of being opened by the passenger, shall be covered with shatterproof glass and shall be illuminated after sundown with a light as required by section 18-88, so placed as to throw a continuous, steady light thereon, so that the card may be plainly read by the passenger. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(6), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-87. - Tariff taximeter. 
    The city commission may, if deemed advisable, require all taxicabs to be equipped with a single tariff taximeter, of a type approved by the city commission, such meter to be so placed, connected, sealed, illuminated and inspected as deemed necessary to insure its accuracy, and the owner shall be held responsible for the accuracy and use of same. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(7), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-88. - Lights. 
    Every taxicab shall be equipped with the following lights: 
(1)  A passenger compartment light adequate to illuminate the interior of the passenger compartment and so constructed as to be automatically turned on by the opening of each rear door, and with a switch easily accessible to the passenger. 
(2)  A dash light in front of the driver's seat so connected with each of the doors leading into the passenger compartment that the light shall be illuminated only when either of the doors is not fully closed. 
(3)  A card frame light which shall be illuminated after sundown so as to permit the passenger to read the memorandum certificate, rate card and driver's identification card. 
(4)  Commission may require "vacant" or "busy" lighted sign in front. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(8), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-89. - Maintenance. 
    The owner of each taxicab licensed under this article shall examine and inspect such taxicab as to its mechanical condition, especially as to brakes, power and lights, in such manner and with frequency as to ensure safety and dependability to patrons and the public, and each taxicab licensed under this article shall be maintained at all times in a dependable, workable and safe condition. Record of such inspections, defects found and repairs made shall be kept on file by the owner of each taxicab licensed under this article, and such records shall during ordinary business hours be open for inspection by the city. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(9), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-90. - Inspection. 
    Each taxicab licensed under this article shall be subject to inspection by a member of the division of police at any time, and if such inspection discloses that any provision of this article has been violated, the chief of police may immediately suspend the license for such taxicab until the cause for such suspension has been removed, and such suspension shall be reported by the chief of police to the city manager. If the cause for such suspension is not corrected within ten days, the city manager may request the city commission to revoke the license for the taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(10), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-91. - Radio equipment. 
    No taxicab shall be equipped with a radio or any other equipment which is not, in the opinion of the city commission, reasonably useful and necessary in the furnishing of safe, adequate and convenient taxicab service, but radio-telephone dispatching equipment shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(11), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-92. - Seatbelts and child restraint carriers and/or seats. 
    All taxicabs shall be equipped with seatbelts and child restraint carriers and/or seats as required under both state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(12), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-93. - Suspension, revocation. 
    Licenses under this division may be suspended or revoked for any violation of this division, including, but not limited to, false statements concerning the construction and equipment of and on the taxicab, by written order of the chief of police. The fact that the owner ceased to operate any taxicab for a period of 30 consecutive days without having obtained permission for cessation of such operation from the chief of police shall be an additional ground for revoking a taxicab license. Any suspension or revocation of a license by the chief of police for a violation of this division shall be appealable to the city commission, provided, that the city commission may overturn such suspension or revocation of license only in the event that it finds by majority vote that the provisions of this division have, in fact, been met. The city commission may not overturn such suspension or revocation of license by waiving or granting a variance of the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(13), 12-29-92) 
Secs. 18-94-18-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RULES OF OPERATION 

Sec. 18-106. - Responsibility of licensee. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to whom a taxicab license has been issued to cause, allow or permit any such licensed taxicab to be driven or operated upon the streets of the city by any driver not properly licensed in accordance with this article or to cause, allow or permit such cab to be so driven until he has complied with each and every provision of this article. A violation of this section shall be punishable under section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(1), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-107. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 2010.01/381, adopted Jan. 11, 2010, repealed  18-107, which pertained to rate of fare, manner of charging, and derived from Ord. No. 327, adopted Dec. 29, 1992. 
Sec. 18-108. - Baggage. 
    No extra charge shall be made for taxicab service for the transportation of ordinary hand baggage carried by passengers. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(3), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-109. - Designation, identification. 
(a)  Each taxicab shall bear on the outside of each passenger door, in painted letters not less than two inches nor more than six inches in height, the name of the owner and in addition may bear an identifying design approved by the city commission and the business telephone number of the owner and no other legend than the name of the owner, the approved design and the telephone number may be used on the passenger door. Any name, legend, design or any printed matter proposed for use elsewhere on the taxicab shall be submitted to, and approved by the city commission before so used. 
(b)  Each taxicab company shall assign a number for each of its cabs and each cab shall bear on each side and on the rear thereof such number so assigned, in numbers at least six inches in height. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(4), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-110. - Sanitation. 
    Every owner of a taxicab or taxicabs shall clean the exterior and clean and disinfect the interior of such taxicab or taxicabs at least once in every 24 hours. Each cab must be inspected and approved by an inspector of the police department before it is first operated. Each taxicab must be reinspected on an annual basis by an inspector of the police department before it shall continue to operate for that additional year beyond the initial inspection. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(5), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-111. - Operator to be owner, employee or lessee. 
(a)  No taxicab shall be operated except by the owner thereof or by a duly authorized agent, employee or lessee of the owner to whom such owner pays a fixed and definite wage or a fixed commission or percentage on the gross amount received from the operation of such taxicab or a combination wage and commission; or by a lessee of the owner who has entered into any contract agreement or understanding with such driver who pays to such owner a fixed or determined sum per day for the use of such taxicab and is entitled to all, or a portion of the proceeds of operation over and above the fixed or determinable sum. 
(b)  No lessee of any taxicab shall enter into any contract, agreement or understanding with any driver, by the terms of which such driver pays to such lessee a fixed or determined sum per day for the use of such taxicab and is entitled to all, or a portion of the proceeds of operation over and above the fixed or determinable sum. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(6), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-112. - Cab service brokers prohibited. 
    No person shall enter into any contract, agreement or understanding with any owner whereby the person is assured a fixed income from the owner regardless of the earnings of any taxicab operated by the owner, and in return for which the person agrees to permit such owner to use any trade name or distinctive color or emblem on any taxicab and/or to permit such owner to use, in common with other owners, telephone facilities, stands, garaging and repair facilities, or administrative or other services, commonly required in connection with the operation of taxicabs. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(7), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-113. - Report of accident. 
    All accidents arising from or in connection with the operation of taxicabs which result in death or injury to any person, or in damage to any property shall be reported immediately to the police department. A violation of this section shall be punishable under section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(8), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-114. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 2010.01/381, adopted Jan. 11, 2010, repealed  18-114, which pertained to dress of drivers, and derived from Ord. No. 327, adopted Dec. 29, 1992. 
Sec. 18-115. - Hours of drivers. 
    No driver of a taxicab shall be on duty or drive more than 12 hours out of any 24 hours. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(10), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-116. - Smoking, alcoholic liquor, illegal drugs prohibited. 
    No driver of a taxicab shall have in his possession a lighted cigarette, cigar or pipe while any passenger is being carried therein. No driver of a taxicab shall have in his possession in the taxicab, at any time, alcoholic liquor or illegal drugs. A violation of this section shall be punishable under section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(11), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-117. - Lost articles. 
    Every driver of a taxicab shall thoroughly search the interior of such taxicab at the termination of each trip for any articles of value which may be left in such taxicab by a passenger. Any article found therein shall be immediately returned to the passenger owning it, if he is known, otherwise it shall be deposited with the owner of the cab at the conclusion of the driver's tour of duty. A report of the finding and deposit of such articles shall be made by the owner immediately to the division of police. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(12), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-118. - Solicitation of passengers by driver. 
    No driver shall solicit passengers for a taxicab except when sitting in the driver's compartment of such taxicab or while standing immediately adjacent to the curb side thereof. The driver of any taxicab shall remain in the driver's compartment or immediately adjacent to his vehicle at all times when the vehicle is upon the public street, except that, when necessary, a driver may be absent from his taxicab for not more than 30 consecutive minutes, and provided further that nothing contained in this section shall be held to prohibit any driver from alighting to the street or sidewalk for the purpose of assisting passengers into or out of such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(13), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-119. - Prohibited manner of solicitation. 
    No taxicab driver shall solicit patronage in a loud or annoying tone of voice or by any sign or in any manner annoy any person or obstruct the movement of any person or follow any person for the purpose of soliciting patronage. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(14), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-120. - Receipt and discharge of passengers on sidewalk only. 
    Drivers of taxicabs must not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway but shall pull up to the righthand sidewalk, or in the absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme righthand side of the road and there receive or discharge passengers, except upon one-way streets where passengers may be discharged at either the righthand or lefthand sidewalk, or side of the roadway in the absence of a sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(15), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-121. - Cruising prohibited. 
    No driver shall cruise in search of passengers at any time and whenever a taxicab is unoccupied the driver shall proceed at once by the most direct route to the garage where the vehicle is housed or to the nearest unoccupied stand. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(16), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-122. - Solicitation of other common carrier passengers prohibited. 
    No owner, driver or any other person shall solicit patronage of persons assembled at the terminal of any other common carrier, except when doing so by the use of an authorized taxicab stand pursuant to section 18-128, nor at any other intermediate points along any established route of such carrier, once such persons have assembled for the purpose of using the services of said common carrier. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit or interfere with the response to any call for a taxicab made by signal from a pedestrian. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(17), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-123. - Acceptance of additional passengers. 
    Whenever any taxicab is occupied by a passenger, the driver shall not be permitted to pick up or carry any other passenger, or make any other type of pickup in the cab except by the express request of the person who has first engaged the cab. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(18), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-124. - Restriction on number of passengers. 
    No driver shall permit more persons to be carried in a taxicab than the seating capacity of the passenger compartment. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(19), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-125. - Operation along certain routes prohibited. 
    No owner or driver of a taxicab shall cause or permit such taxicab to be operated along routes in a manner similar to that of mass transportation vehicles operating along definite routes or between specific termini. When there is nearby a suitably located taxicab stand, any owner or driver who operates, causes to be operated or permits to be operated any taxicab persistently and repeatedly to and from, around or in the vicinity of any theater, railroad station, hotel or any other place of public gathering, or repeatedly along a street, shall be construed to be operating such taxicab along routes and such operation is hereby prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(20), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-126. - Rights of passengers. 
    No driver or owner of a taxicab shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person upon request by signal or telephone call, unless the taxicab is previously engaged. When proceeding to pick up a passenger in answer to a call, the driver shall not pick up any passenger or make any interim trips but must proceed directly to the call address except in case of an injured person or emergency case. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(21), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-127. - Stands. 
    The chief of police shall have, by traffic control order, pursuant to the uniform traffic code, the power to establish such taxicab stands as in his judgment are necessary for the proper service of the public. The city manager shall have the power to change the location of or to abolish any taxicab stand established under the terms of this section. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(22), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-128. - Purchase and delivery of alcoholic liquor, beer, wine or illegal drugs prohibited. 
    No taxicab shall be used for the purpose of obtaining the purchase or delivery of alcoholic liquor, beer, wine or illegal drugs and any such use shall be sufficient reason to revoke the license of the driver. Drivers are prohibited from purchasing alcoholic liquor, beer, wine or illegal drugs for any purpose or person while on duty as cab drivers. No passenger in the taxicab shall possess or use, in the taxicab, any alcoholic liquor, beer, wine or illegal drugs. A violation of this section shall be punishable under section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(23), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-129. - Operation while under influence of alcoholic liquor, beer or wine prohibited. 
    No taxicab driver shall be permitted to operate a taxicab while under the influence of alcoholic liquor, beer or wine, whether consumed while on duty or prior to going on duty. Any such violation shall be sufficient reason to revoke the taxicab license of the driver. A violation of this section shall be punishable under the provisions of section 5.15 of the uniform traffic code in chapter 98. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(24), 12-29-92) 
Sec. 18-130. - Suspension, revocation. 
    Licenses under this division may be suspended or revoked for any violation of this division by written order of the chief of police. The fact that the owner ceased to operate any taxicab for a period of 30 consecutive days without having obtained permission for cessation of such operation from the chief of police shall be an additional ground for revoking a taxicab license. Any suspension or revocation of a license by the chief of police for a violation of this division shall be appealable to the city commission; provided, that the city commission may overturn such suspension or revocation of license only if it finds by majority vote that the provisions of this division have, in fact, been met. The city commission may not overturn such suspension or revocation of license by waiving or granting a variance of the requirements of this division. Additionally, violations of those sections of this division, punishable under section 5.15 of the uniform traffic code or any applicable state statute, as specifically set forth in such sections, shall also be charged. 
(Ord. No. 327,  20.624(25), 12-29-92) 
Secs. 18-131-18-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MEDICAL MARIHUANA FACILITIES 

Sec. 18-141. - Purpose. 
(a)  An article to implement the provisions of the Michigan Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, Public Act 281 of 2016, which authorizes the licensing and regulation of commercial medical marihuana facilities and affords the city the option whether or not to allow commercial medical marihuana facilities; to regulate commercial medical marihuana facilities by requiring a permit and compliance with requirements as provided in this article, in order to maintain the public health, safety and general welfare of the community at large; retain the character of neighborhoods; and mitigate potential impacts on surrounding properties and persons. 
(b)  Nothing in this article is intended to grant immunity from criminal or civil prosecution, penalty, or sanction for the cultivation, manufacture, possession, use, sale, or distribution of marijuana, in any form, that is not in compliance with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, Initiated Law 1 of 2008, MCL 333.26421 et seq.; the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq.; the Marihuana Tracking Act, MCL 333.27901 et seq.; and all other applicable rules promulgated by the State of Michigan. 
(c)  As of the effective date of this article, marijuana remains classified as a Schedule 1 controlled substance under the Federal Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. Sec. 801 et seq., which makes it unlawful to manufacture, distribute, or dispense marijuana, or process marijuana with intent to manufacture, distribute, or dispense marijuana. Nothing in this article is intended to grant immunity from any criminal prosecution under federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 2017.07/404,  1, 7-17-17) 
Sec. 18-142. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article: 
    Any term defined by the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq., shall have the definition given in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act. 
    Any term defined by the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq., shall have the definition given in the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act. 
    Any term defined by the Marihuana Tracking Act, MCL 333.27901 et seq., shall have the definition given in the Marihuana Tracking Act. 
    Grower means a licensee that is a commercial and/or agricultural entity located in this state that cultivates, dries, trims, or cures and packages marihuana for sale to a processor or provisioning center. 
    Licensee means a person holding a state operating license issued under the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq. 
    Marijuana or marihuana means that term as defined in the Public Health Code, MCL 333.1101 et seq.; the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq.; the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq.; and the Marihuana Tracking Act, MCL 333.27901 et seq. 
    Marijuana facility means an enterprise at a specific location at which a licensee is licensed to operate under the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq., including a marijuana grower, marijuana processor, marijuana provisioning center, marijuana secure transporter, or marijuana safety compliance facility. The term does not include or apply to a "primary caregiver" or "caregiver" as that term is defined in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq. 
    Permit means a current and valid permit for a commercial medical marihuana facility issued under this article, which shall be granted to a permit holder only for and limited to a specific permitted premises and a specific permitted property. 
    Permit holder means the person that holds a current and valid permit issued under this article. 
    Permittee means a person holding a City of Buchanan operating permit issued under the provisions of this article. 
    Permitted premises means the particular building or buildings within which the permit holder will be authorized to conduct the facility's activities pursuant to the permit. 
    Permitted property means the real property comprised of a lot, parcel or other designated unit of real property upon which the permitted premises is situated. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, limited liability limited partnership, or other legal entity. 
    Processor means a licensee that is a commercial entity located in Michigan that purchases marihuana from a grower and that extracts resin from the marihuana or creates a marihuana-infused product for sale and transfer in packaged form to a provisioning center. 
    Provisioning center means a licensee that is a commercial entity located in Michigan that purchases marihuana from a grower or processor and sells, supplies, or provides marihuana to registered qualifying patients, directly or through the patients' registered primary caregivers. Provisioning center includes any commercial property where marihuana is sold at retail to registered qualifying patients or registered primary caregivers. A noncommercial location used by a primary caregiver to assist a qualifying patient connected to the caregiver in accordance with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq., is not a provisioning center for purposes of this article. 
    Safety compliance facility means a licensee that is a commercial entity that receives marihuana from a marihuana facility or registered primary caregiver, tests it for contaminants and for tetrahydrocannabinol and other cannabinoids, returns the test results, and may return the marihuana to the marihuana facility. 
    Secure transporter means a licensee that is commercial entity located in this state that stores marihuana and transports marihuana between marihuana facilities for a fee. 
    True party of interest means: 
(1)  For an individual or sole proprietor and spouse. 
(2)  For a partnership and limited liability partnership: all partners and their spouses. For a limited partnership and limited liability limited partnership all general and limited partners and their spouses. For a limited liability company: all members, managers and their spouses. 
(3)  For privately held corporation: all corporate officers or persons with equivalent titles and their spouses. 
(4)  For a publicly held corporation: all corporate officers or persons with equivalent titles and their spouses. 
(5)  For a multilevel ownership enterprise: any entity or person that receives or has the right to receive a percentage of the gross or net profit from the enterprise during any full or partial calendar or fiscal year. 
(6)  For a nonprofit corporation: all individuals and entities with membership or shareholder rights in accordance with the articles of incorporation or the bylaws and their spouses. 
(7)  For a trust: the names of the beneficiaries. However, "true party of interest" does not mean: 
a.  A person or entity receiving reasonable payment for rent on a fixed basis under a bona fide lease or rental obligation, unless the lessor or property manager exercises control over or participates in the management of the business. 
b.  A person who receives a bonus as an employee if the employee is on a fixed wage or salary and the bonus is not more than 25 percent of the employee's pre-bonus annual compensation or if the bonus is based on a written incentive or bonus program that is not out of the ordinary for the services rendered. 
(Ord. No. 2017.07/404,  2, 7-17-17; Ord. No. 2018.10/409,  1, 10-8-18) 
Sec. 18-143. - Authorization of facilities and fee. 
(a)  The maximum number of each type of marihuana facility allowed in the city shall be as follows: 
Facility Number Grower: Class A - 500 marijuana plants 5 Class B - 1,000 marijuana plants 5 Class C - 1,500 marijuana plants 5 Processor 5 Secure transporter 5 Provisioning center 5 Safety compliance facility 5  
(b)  At least every year after adoption of this article, city commission shall review the maximum number of each type of marihuana facility allowed and determine whether this maximum number should be changed. The review and its findings shall be recorded in the minutes of the relevant meeting of the city commission. 
(c)  A nonrefundable fee shall be paid by each marihuana facility permitted under this article in an annual amount of not more than $5,000.00 as set by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 2017.07/404,  3, 7-17-17) 
Sec. 18-144. - Requirements and procedure for issuing permits. 
(a)  No person shall operate a medical marihuana facility in the City of Buchanan without a valid medical marijuana facility ("MMF") permit issued by the city pursuant to the provisions of this [section]. Application for each medical marihuana facility permit required by this section shall be made in writing to the city clerk, and must be approved by the city commission and the State of Michigan, prior to commencing operation. 
(b)  An application for a medical marihuana facility permit required by this section shall contain the following information. This information is required for the applicant, manager of the medical marihuana facility, and all persons who are true parties of interest in the medical marihuana facility for which a medical marihuana facility permit is being sought: 
(1)  The appropriate nonrefundable permit application fee in the amount determined by the city. 
(2)  If the applicant is an individual, the applicant's name, date of birth, SSN, physical address including residential and any business address(es) attached to the individual, copy of government issued photo identification, email address, and one or more phone numbers, including emergency contact information, and if applicable federal EIN. 
(3)  If the applicant is not an individual, the names, dates of birth, SSN's, physical addresses, including residential and any business address(es), copies of government-issued photo identification, email addresses, and one or more phone numbers of each stakeholder and/or general partner of the applicant, including designation of the highest ranking stakeholder and/or general partner as an emergency contact person and contain information for the emergency contact person, articles of incorporation, assumed name registration documents, Internal Revenue Service SS-4, EIN confirmation letter(s), and a copy of the operating agreement of the applicant, if a limited liability company a copy of the partnership agreement, if a partnership, or a copy of the by-laws or shareholder agreement, if a corporation. 
(4)  The name and address of the proposed medical marihuana facility and any additional contact information deemed necessary and requested by the city. 
(5)  For the applicant, for each stakeholder and/or general partner of the applicant, an affirmation under oath as to whether they are at least 18 years of age and have never been indicted for, charged with, arrested for, or convicted of, pled guilty or nolo contendere to, forfeited bail concerning, or had expunged any criminal offense under the laws of any jurisdiction, either felony or controlled-substance-related misdemeanor not including traffic violations, regardless of whether the offense has been expunged, pardoned, reversed on appeal or otherwise, including the date, name and location of the court, arresting agency, and prosecuting agency, the case caption, the docket number, the offense, the disposition, and the location and length of incarceration. 
(6)  Before hiring a prospective agent or employee of the applicant, the holder of a permit shall conduct a background check of the prospective employee. If the background check indicates a pending charge or conviction within the past ten years for a controlled-substance-related felony, the applicant shall not hire the prospective employee or agent without written permission from the city commission. 
(7)  A signed release authorizing the police department to perform a criminal background check to ascertain whether the applicant, each stakeholder of the applicant, each managerial employee and employee of the applicant meet the criteria set forth in this article, the cost of which will be charged to the applicant. 
(8)  The name, date of birth, physical address (residential and any business address(es), copy of photo identification, and email address for any managerial employee or employee of the medical marihuana facility, if other than the applicant. 
(9)  An affirmation under oath as to whether the applicant or stakeholder has ever applied for or has been granted any commercial license or certificate issued by a licensing authority in Michigan or any other jurisdiction that has been denied, restricted, suspended, revoked, or not renewed and a statement describing the facts and circumstances concerning the application, denial, restriction, suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal, including the licensing authority, the date each action was taken, and the reason for each action. 
(10)  One of the following: 
a.  Proof of ownership of the entire premises wherein the medical marihuana facility is to be operated; or 
b.  Written consent from the property owner for use of the premises in a manner requiring a permit under this article along with a copy of the lease for the premises. 
(11)  Proof of an adequate premises liability and casualty insurance policy in the amount not exceeding the requirements addressed in the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act or applicable state laws, covering the medical marihuana facility and naming the city as an additional insured party, available for the payment of any damages arising out of an act or omission of the applicant or its stakeholders, agents, employees, or subcontractors. 
(12)  A description of the security plan for the medical marihuana facility, including, but not limited to, any lighting, alarms, barriers, recording/monitoring devices, and/or security guard arrangements proposed for the facility and premises. The security plan must contain the specification details of each piece of security equipment. 
(13)  A crisis response plan. 
(14)  A floor plan of the medical marihuana facility, as well as a scale diagram illustrating the property upon which the medical marihuana facility is to be operated, including all available parking spaces, and specifying which parking spaces, if any, are handicapped-accessible, and the location of the material safety data sheets and any chemical storage. 
(15)  A list of any chemicals being stored on the premises. 
(16)  An affidavit that neither the applicant nor any stakeholder of the applicant is in default to the city. Specifically, that the applicant or stakeholder of the applicant has not failed to pay any property taxes, special assessments, fines, fee or other financial obligations to the city. 
(17)  An affidavit that the transfer of marihuana to and from medical marihuana facilities shall be in compliance with the MMMA and the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act or other applicable state laws. 
(18)  A staffing plan. 
(19)  Any proposed text or graphical materials to be shown on the exterior of the proposed medical marihuana facility. 
(20)  A patient education plan where applicable. 
(21)  A business plan which contains but is not limited to the applicant's experience in operating other similarly permitted or licensed businesses and the applicant's general business management experience. 
(22)  A location area map of the medical marihuana facility and surrounding area that identifies the relative locations and the distances (closest property line to the subject medical marihuana facility's building) to the subject medical marihuana facility to the closest real property comprising a public or private elementary, vocational or secondary school; and church or religious institution if recognized as a tax-exempt entity as determined by the city assessor's office. 
(23)  A facility sanitation plan to protect against any marihuana being ingested by any person or animal, indicating how the waste will be stored and disposed of, and how any marihuana will be rendered unusable upon disposal. Disposal by on-site burning or introduction in the sewerage system is prohibited. 
(24)  Verification, with copies of actual bank statements, showing that the applicant has liquid funds in the applicant's name in the amount needed to complete the medical marihuana facility, in immediately available funds. 
(25)  A completed application for a special use permit from the City of Buchanan Planning Commission with all required documents and fees. 
(26)  As it relates to a grower facility, the following additional items shall be required: 
a.  A grower plan that includes at a minimum a description of the grower methods to be used, including plans for the growing mediums, treatments and/or additives; 
b.  A production testing plan that includes at a minimum a description of how and when samples for laboratory testing by a state approved safety compliance facility will be selected, what type of testing will be requested, and how the test results will be used; 
c.  An affidavit that all operations will be conducted in conformance with MMMA, the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act or other applicable state laws and such operations shall be cultivated on the premises at any one time more than the permitted number of marihuana plants per the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, as amended, and the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act; 
d.  A chemical and pesticide storage plan that states the names of chemicals and pesticides to be used in the grower and where and how pesticides and chemicals will be stored in the facility, along with a plan for the disposal of unused pesticides and chemicals; 
e.  All growing must be performed within an enclosed, locked facility which may include indoors or in an enclosed greenhouse. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a completed medical marihuana facility permit application meeting the requirements of this section and confirmation that the number of existing permits does not exceed the maximum number established by this section, the city clerk shall refer a copy of the application to each of the following for their review and approval, the police department or their designee, the fire department or their designee, the building department, the zoning administrator and the city treasurer or their designee. Once applications are verified by each department to be sufficiently complete and comprehensive, the city clerk shall forward the applications to the city commission. 
(d)  The city attorney or their designee has addressed any requests for an opinion from city staff during its review process. 
(e)  Permittees shall report any other change in the information required by subsection (b) above, to the city within ten days of the change. Fees shall be set by commission resolution for any stakeholder added after the original application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 2017.07/404,  4, 7-17-17; Ord. No. 2018.10/409,  2, 10-8-18) 
Sec. 18-145. - Medical marihuana permit stacking for class C growers. 
    A medical marihuana class C grower who has received a medical marihuana facility permit from the city may apply for and be granted multiple (stacked) class C grow permits-each authorizing the grower to grow up to 1,500 additional marihuana plants at their existing location, based on their capability and capacity to accommodate multiple MMF permits, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  A permitee who applies for stacked class C grow permits will be subject to an additional application and application fee of $1,500.00 for each stacked class C grow permit. Approved stacked class C grow permits shall be considered an enhancement to the original class C MMF permit granted by the city. 
(2)  Stacked class C grow permits shall only be issued to the same MMF permittee that previously received approval for its original class C grow permit. 
(3)  Applications to stack class C grow permits shall contain all documentation required by the city to show that the permitee has the capability and capacity to accommodate stacked permits. 
(4)  If approved, permitees shall submit expansion plans to the building inspector, zoning administrator, fire chief and public services director. 
(5)  The permitee must comply with all city ordinances and zoning requirements. 
(6)  The permitee must comply with all State of Michigan rules and regulations applicable to medical marihuana "stacking" for class C grow MMF permits. 
(Ord. No. 2018.10/409,  3, 10-8-18) 
Editor's note- Former  18-145-18-158 have been renumbered as  18-146-18-159 to facilitate inclusion of Ord. No. 2018.10/409,  3, adopted Dec. 8, 2018, as new  18-145. 
Sec. 18-146. - Permit renewal. 
(a)  A medical marijuana facility permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance, unless revoked as provided by law. Upon the expiration of an existing permit, the permit will be renewed by the city for one year if: 
(1)  There are no uncured administrative and/or legal violations in the prior year, including complaint log reviews and verification that taxes are paid; 
(2)  The applicant has paid the annual permit fee for the renewal period; 
(3)  Any stakeholder changes have been fully disclosed to the city; and 
(4)  The applicant has applied for a state MMF license. 
(b)  A valid medical marijuana facility permit may be renewed on an annual basis by submitting a renewal application upon a form provided by the city and payment of the annual permit fee. Application to renew a marijuana facility permit shall be filed at least 30 days prior to the date of its expiration. 
(c)  The renewal application for a medical marihuana permit shall be subject to the same scrutiny and evaluation process as the inaugural permit application. 
(Ord. No. 2017.07/404,  5, 7-17-17; Ord. No. 2018.10/409,  4, 10-8-18) 
Editor's note- See the editor's note to  18-145 regarding the renumbering of this section. 
Sec. 18-147. - Permit application evaluation. 
(a)  The city commission shall assess all applications. 
(b)  In its application deliberations, the city commission shall assess each application in each of the following categories: 
(1)  The applicant's experience in operating other similarly permitted or licensed business. 
(2)  The applicant's general business management experience. 
(3)  The applicant's general business reputation. 
(4)  The integrity, moral character, and reputation; personal and business probity; financial ability and experience; and responsibility or means to operate or maintain a medical marihuana facility. 
(5)  The financial ability of the applicant to purchase and maintain adequate liability and casualty insurance. 
(6)  The sources and total amount of the applicant's capitalization to operate and maintain the proposed medical marihuana facility. 
(7)  Whether the applicant or stakeholder has been indicted for, changed with, arrested for, or convicted of, pled guilty or nolo contendere to, forfeited bail concerning, or had expunged any relevant criminal offense under the laws of any jurisdiction, either felony or misdemeanor, not including traffic violations, regardless of whether the offense has been expunged, pardoned, or reversed on appeal or otherwise. 
(8)  Past convictions of the applicant or stakeholder involving any of the following, but not limited to: 
a.  Gambling; 
b.  Prostitution; 
c.  Weapons; 
d.  Violence; 
e.  Tax evasion; 
f.  Fraudulent activity; and 
g.  Serious moral turpitude. 
(9)  A felony or misdemeanor of such nature that it may impair the ability of the applicant or stakeholder to operate a licensed business in a safe and competent manner. 
(10)  Whether the applicant or stakeholder or any business entity in which the applicant or stakeholder has or had an ownership interest in has filed, or had filed against it, a proceeding for bankruptcy within the past seven years. 
(11)  Whether the applicant or stakeholder has been served with a complaint or other notice filed with any public body regarding payment of any tax required under federal, state, or local law that has been delinquent for one or more years. 
(12)  Whether the applicant or stakeholder has a history of noncompliance with any regulatory requirements in this state or any other jurisdiction. 
(13)  As it relates to operation of a provisioning center, the applicant's type of service and product that will be offered and the overall theme and atmosphere of the proposed provisioning center. 
(c)  The city commission shall assess each application within the aforementioned categories as described in subsections (b)(1)-(13) and may issue a license to the applicant if an applicant has satisfactorily met all requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2017.07/404,  6, 7-17-17; Ord. No. 2018.10/409,  5, 10-8-18) 
Editor's note- See the editor's note to  18-145 regarding the renumbering of this section. 
Sec. 18-148. - Permits generally. 
(a)  To the extent permissible, all information submitted in conjunction with an application for a permit or permit renewal required by this article is confidential and exempt from disclosure under the Michigan Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 et seq. 
(b)  Permittees may transfer a permit issued under this article to a different location upon receiving written approval from the city. In order to receive approval to transfer a permit location, the permittee must make a written request to the city clerk, indicating the current permit location and the proposed permit location. Upon receiving the written request, the city clerk shall refer a copy of the written request to each of the following for their approval: fire department or their designee, the building department, the police department or their designee, the zoning administrator, the planning commission and the city commission. No permit transfer shall be approved unless each such individual or department gives written approval that the permittee and the proposed permit location meet the standards identified in this article. 
(c)  Permittees may transfer a permit issued under this article to a different individual or entity upon receiving written approval by the city clerk. In order to request approval to transfer a permit to a different individual or entity, the permittee must make a written request to the city clerk, indicating the current permittee and the proposed permittee. Upon receiving the written request, the city clerk shall consider the request as a new application for a permit and the procedures set forth in sections [18-143-18-147] shall be followed. 
(d)  Permittee shall report any other change in the information required by this article to the city clerk within ten business days of the change. Failure to do so may result in suspension or revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017.07/404,  7, 7-17-17; Ord. No. 2018.10/409,  6, 10-8-18) 
Editor's note- See the editor's note to  18-145 regarding the renumbering of this section. 
Sec. 18-149. - Minimum operational standards of provisioning centers. 
    The following minimum standards for provisioning centers shall apply: 
(1)  No provisioning center shall be open between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.; 
(2)  Consumption of marihuana shall be prohibited on the premises of a provisioning center, and a sign shall be posted on the premises of each provisioning center indicating that consumption is prohibited on the premises; 
(3)  Provisioning centers shall continuously monitor the entire premises on which they are operated with surveillance systems that include security cameras. The video recordings shall be maintained in a secure, off-site location for a period of 14 days; 
(4)  Unless permitted by the MMMA and Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act or applicable state law, public or common areas of the provisioning center must be separated from restricted or non-public areas of the provisioning center by a permanent and locked barrier. Unless permitted by the MMMA and Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act or applicable state law, no marihuana is permitted to be stored, displayed, or transferred in an area accessible to the general public; 
(5)  All marihuana storage areas within the provisioning center must be separated from any customer/patient areas by a permanent and locked barrier. Unless permitted by the MMMA and Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act or applicable state law, no marihuana is permitted to be stored in any area accessible by the general public or registered customer/patients. Marihuana may be displayed in a sales area only if permitted by the MMMA or required by the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act and if required all displays to be in compliance with all federal, state and local laws and regulations; 
(6)  Any usable marihuana remaining on the premises of a provisioning center while the provisioning center is not in operation shall be secured in a safe that is permanently affixed to the premises; 
(7)  Drive-through window on the premises of a provisioning center shall not be permitted; 
(8)  Provisioning center shall not allow the sale, consumption, or use of alcohol or tobacco products on the premises; 
(9)  No provisioning center shall be operated in a manner creating noise, dust, vibration, glare, fumes, or odors detectable to normal senses beyond the boundaries of the building on which the provisioning center is operated; 
(10)  The permit and state license required by this article shall be prominently displayed on the premises of a provisioning center; 
(11)  Disposal of marihuana shall be accomplished in a manner that prevents its acquisition by any person who may not lawfully possess it and otherwise in non-conformance with local and state laws and regulations; 
(12)  All marihuana delivered to a patient shall be packaged and labeled as provided by state laws; 
(13)  All registered patients must present both their Michigan medical marihuana patient/caregiver identification card and a government issued photo identification prior to entering restricted/limited areas or non-public areas of the provisioning center, and if no restricted/limited area is required, then promptly upon entering the provisioning center; 
(14)  The premises shall be open, at all times, to any Michigan Medical Marihuana Licensing Board investigators, agents, auditors, or the state police without a warrant and without notice to the holder of the license, enter the premises, offices, facilities, or other places of business of a licensee, if evidence of compliance or noncompliance with the MMMA and Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act or applicable state laws is likely to be found and consistent with constitutional limitations, for the following purposes: 
a.  To inspect and examine all premises of medical marihuana facility. 
b.  To inspect, examine, and audit relevant records of the licensee and, if the holder of the license or any of the managerial employees or employees fails to cooperate with an investigation, impound, seize, assume physical control of, or summarily remove from the premises all books, ledgers, documents, writings, photocopies, correspondence, records, and videotapes, including electronically stored records, money receptacles, or equipment in which the records are stored. 
c.  To inspect the person, and inspect or examine personal effects present in a medical marihuana facility, of any holder of state operating license while that person is present in a medical marihuana facility. 
d.  To investigate alleged violations of the MMMA and Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act or applicable state laws. 
(15)  It shall be prohibited to display any signs that are inconsistent with local laws or regulations or state law; 
(16)  It shall be prohibited to use advertising material that is misleading, deceptive, or false, or that is designed to appeal to minors; 
(17)  It shall be prohibited to use the symbol or image of a marihuana leaf in any exterior building signage; 
(18)  No licensed provisioning center shall place or maintain, or cause to be placed or maintained, an advertisement of marihuana in any form or through any medium within 1,000 feet of the real property comprising a public or private elementary, vocational or secondary school; 
(19)  Certified laboratory testing results that meets the MMMA and Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act or applicable state laws must be available to all provisioning center patients/customers upon request; 
(20)  All provisioning centers shall comply with all applicable requirements of the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2017.07/404,  8, 7-17-17; Ord. No. 2018.10/409,  6, 10-8-18) 
Editor's note- See the editor's note to  18-145 regarding the renumbering of this section. 
Sec. 18-150. - Minimum operational standards of a grower facility. 
    The following minimum standards for grower facilities shall apply: 
(1)  The grower facility shall comply at all times and in all circumstances with the Michigan Marihuana Act, the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, and the general rules of the department of licensing and regulatory affairs, as they may be amended from time to time; 
(2)  The premises shall be open for inspection upon probable cause that a violation of this article has occurred, during the stated hours of operation and at such other times as anyone is presented on the premises; 
(3)  Any grower facility shall maintain a log book and/or database indicating the number of marihuana plants therein. Each marihuana plant will be tagged as required by the MMMA and Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act; 
(4)  All marihuana shall be contained within an enclosed, locked facility; 
(5)  All necessary building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical permits shall be obtained for any portion of the structure in which electrical wiring, lighting and/or watering devices that support the grower, growing or harvesting of marihuana are located; 
(6)  The portion of the structure storing any chemicals such as herbicides, pesticides, and fertilizers shall be subject to inspections at any time and approval by the fire department to ensure compliance with all applicable statutes, codes and ordinances; 
(7)  The dispensing of marihuana at the grower facility shall be prohibited; 
(8)  All persons working in direct contact with marihuana shall conform to hygienic practices while on duty, including but not limited to: 
a.  Maintaining adequate personal cleanliness; 
b.  Washing hands thoroughly in adequate hand-washing areas before starting work at any other time when the hands may have become soiled or contaminated; 
c.  Refraining from having direct contact with marihuana if the person has or may have an illness, open lesion, including boils, sores or infected wounds, or any other abnormal source of microbial contamination, until the condition is corrected. 
(9)  Litter and waste shall be properly removed and the operating systems for waste disposal shall be maintained in an adequate manner so that they do not constitute a source of contamination in the areas where marihuana is exposed; 
(10)  Floors, walls and ceilings shall be constructed in such a manner that they may be adequately cleaned and kept clean and in good repair; 
(11)  There shall be adequate screening or other protection against the entry of pests. Rubbish shall be disposed of so as to minimize the development of odor and minimize the potential for the waste becoming an attractant, harborage or breeding place for pests; 
(12)  Any building fixtures and other facilities shall be maintained in a sanitary condition; 
(13)  Each grower facility shall provide its occupants with adequate and readily accessible toilet facilities that are maintained in a sanitary condition and good repair; 
(14)  Marihuana that can support the rapid growth of undesirable microorganisms including but not limited to mold shall be held in a manner that prevents the growth of these microorganisms; 
(15)  Grower facilities shall be free from infestation by insects, rodents, birds, or vermin of any kind; 
(16)  Exterior signage or advertising identifying the facility as a grower facility shall be prohibited; 
(17)  All grower facilities shall comply with all applicable requirements of the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2017.07/404,  9, 7-17-17; Ord. No. 2018.10/409,  6, 10-8-18) 
Editor's note- See the editor's note to  18-145 regarding the renumbering of this section. 
Sec. 18-151. - Minimum operational standards of safety compliance facilities. 
    The following minimum standards for safety compliance facilities shall apply: 
(1)  The safety compliance facility shall comply at all times and in all circumstances with the MMMA and Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act or applicable state laws, and the general rules of the department of licensing and regulatory affairs, as they may be amended from time to time. It is the responsibility of the owner to be aware of changes in the MMFLA. The city bears no responsibility for failure of the owner to be unaware of changes in the Act; 
(2)  Consumption and/or use of marihuana shall be prohibited at the facility; 
(3)  The premises shall be open, at all times, to any Michigan Medical Marihuana Licensing Board investigators, agents, auditors, or the state police, without a warrant and without notice to the licensee, enter the premises, offices, facilities, or other places of business of a licensee, if evidence of compliance or noncompliance with the MMMA and Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act or applicable state laws is likely to be found and consistent with constitutional limitations, for the following purposes: 
a.  To inspect and examine all premises of medical marihuana facilities. 
b.  To inspect, examine, and audit relevant records of the licensee and, if the licensee or any managerial employees or employees fail to cooperate with an investigation, impound, seize, assume physical control of, or summarily remove from the premises all books, ledgers, documents, writings, photocopies, correspondence, records, and videotapes, including electronically stored records, money receptacles, or equipment in which the records are stored. 
c.  To inspect the person, and inspect or examine personal effects present in a medical marihuana facility, of any holder of state operating license while that person is present in a medical marihuana facility. 
d.  To investigate alleged violations of the MMMA and Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act or applicable state laws. 
(4)  Any safety compliance facility shall maintain a log book and/or database which complies with the MMMA and Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act or applicable state laws; 
(5)  All marihuana shall be contained within the building in an enclosed, locked facility in accordance with the MMMA, as amended, and Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act or applicable state laws; 
(6)  There shall be no other accessory uses permitted within the same facility other than those associated with testing marihuana; 
(7)  All persons working in direct contact with marihuana shall conform to hygienic practices while on duty; 
(8)  Litter and waste shall be properly removed and the operating systems for waste disposal shall be maintained in an adequate manner so that they do not constitute a source of contamination in areas where marihuana is exposed; 
(9)  Floors, walls and ceilings shall be constructed in such a manner that they may be adequately cleaned and kept clean and in good repair; 
(10)  Any buildings, fixtures and other facilities shall be maintained in a sanitary condition; 
(11)  Marihuana that can support the rapid growth of undesirable microorganisms including but not limited to mold shall be held in a manner that prevents the growth of these microorganisms; 
(12)  Exterior signage or advertising identifying the facility as a safety compliance facility shall be prohibited; 
(13)  All safety compliance facilities shall comply with all applicable requirements of the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2017.07/404,  10, 7-17-17; Ord. No. 2018.10/409,  6, 10-8-18) 
Editor's note- See the editor's note to  18-145 regarding the renumbering of this section. 
Sec. 18-152. - Minimum operational standards of processor facilities. 
    The following minimum standards for processor facilities shall apply: 
(1)  The processor shall comply at all times and in all circumstances with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, and the general rules of the department of licensing and regulatory affairs, as they may be amended from time to time; 
(2)  Consumption and/or use of marihuana shall be prohibited at the processor facility; 
(3)  All activity related to the processor facility shall be done indoors; 
(4)  The premises shall be open, at all times, to any Michigan Medical Marihuana Licensing Board investigators, agents, auditors, or the state police, without warrant and without notice to the licensee, enter the premises, offices, facilities, or other places of business of a licensee, if evidence of compliance or noncompliance with the MMMA and Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act or applicable state laws is likely to be found and consistent with constitutional limitations, for the following purposes: 
a.  To inspect and examine all premises of medical marihuana facilities. 
b.  To inspect, examine, and audit relevant records of the licensee and, if the licensee or any managerial employees or employees fails to cooperate with an investigation, impound, seize, assume physical control of, or summarily remove from the premises all books, ledgers, documents, writings, photocopies, correspondence, records, and videotapes, including electronically stored records, money receptacles, or equipment in which the records are stored. 
c.  To inspect the person, and inspect or examine personal effects present in a medical marihuana facility, of any holder of state operating license while that person is present in a medical marihuana facility. 
d.  To investigate alleged violations of the MMMA and Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act or applicable state laws. 
(5)  Any processor facility shall maintain a log book and/or database which complies with the MMMA, as amended, and Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act or applicable state laws; 
(6)  All marihuana shall be tagged as required by the MMMA, the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act or applicable state laws; 
(7)  All marihuana shall be contained within an enclosed, locked facility in accordance with the MMMA, as amended; 
(8)  All necessary building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical permits shall be obtained for any portion of the structure in which electrical wiring for devices that support the processing of marihuana are located; 
(9)  That portion of the structure where any chemicals are located and/or stored shall be subject to inspections at any time and approval by the fire department to ensure compliance with all applicable statutes, codes and ordinances; 
(10)  The dispensing of medical marihuana at the processor facility shall be prohibited; 
(11)  All persons working in direct contact with marihuana shall conform to hygienic practices while on duty, including but not limited to: 
a.  Maintaining adequate personal cleanliness; 
b.  Washing hands thoroughly in adequate hand-washing areas before starting work and at any other time when the hands may have become soiled or contaminated; 
c.  Refraining from having direct contact with marihuana if the person has or may have an illness, open lesion, including boils, sores or infected wounds, or any other abnormal source of microbial contamination, until the condition is corrected. 
(12)  Litter and waste shall be properly removed and the operating systems for waste disposal are maintained in an adequate manner so that they do not constitute a source of contamination in areas where marihuana is exposed; 
(13)  Floors, walls, and ceilings shall be constructed in such a manner that they may be adequately cleaned and kept clean and in good repair; 
(14)  There shall be adequate screening or other protection against the entry of pests. Rubbish shall be disposed of so as to minimize the development of odor and minimize the potential for the waste becoming an attractant, harborage or breeding place for pests; 
(15)  Any buildings, fixtures and other facilities shall be maintained in a sanitary condition; 
(16)  Each processor facility shall provide its occupants with adequate and readily accessible toilet facilities that are maintained in a sanitary condition and good repair; 
(17)  Marihuana that can support the rapid growth of undesirable microorganisms including but not limited to mold shall be held in a manner that prevents the growth of these microorganisms; 
(18)  Processor facility shall be free from infestation by insects, rodents, birds, or vermin of any kind; 
(19)  Processor facilities shall produce no products other than useable marihuana intended for human consumption; 
(20)  Exterior signage or advertising identifying the facility as a processor facility shall be prohibited; 
(21)  All processor facilities shall comply with all applicable requirements of the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2017.07/404,  11, 7-17-17; Ord. No. 2018.10/409,  6, 10-8-18) 
Editor's note- See the editor's note to  18-145 regarding the renumbering of this section. 
Sec. 18-153. - Minimum operational standards of secure transporter. 
    The following minimum standards for secure transporters shall apply: 
(1)  The secure transporter shall comply at all times and in all circumstances with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, and the general rules of the department of licensing and regulatory affairs, as they may be amended from time to time. 
(2)  Consumption and/or use of marihuana shall be prohibited at a storage facility of a secure transporter. 
(3)  Storage of marihuana by a secure transporter shall comply with the following: 
a.  The storage facility shall be continuously monitored with a surveillance system that includes security cameras. The video recordings shall be maintained in a secure, off-site location for a period of 14 days. The storage facility shall not be used for any other commercial purposes. 
b.  The storage facility shall not be open or accessible to the general public. 
c.  The storage facility shall be maintained and operated so as to comply with all state and local rules, regulations and ordinances. 
d.  The storage facility shall be open, at all times, to any Michigan Medical Marihuana Licensing Board investigators, agents, auditors, or the state police, without warrant and without notice to the licensee, enter the premises, offices, facilities, or other places of business of a licensee, if evidence of compliance or noncompliance with the MMMA and Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act or applicable state laws is likely to be found and consistent with constitutional limitations, for the following purposes: 
1.  To inspect and examine all premises of medical marihuana facilities. 
2.  To inspect, examine, and audit relevant records of the licensee and, if the licensee or any managerial employees or employees fails to cooperate with an investigation, impound, seize, assume physical control of, or summarily remove from the premises all books, ledgers, documents, writings, photocopies, correspondence, records, and videotapes, including electronically stored records, money receptacles, or equipment in which the records are stored. 
3.  To inspect the person, and inspect or examine personal effects present in a medical marihuana facility, of any holder of state operating license while that person is present in a Medical Marihuana Facility. 
4.  To investigate alleged violations of the MMMA and Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act or applicable state laws. 
e.  All marihuana stored within the facility shall be stored within enclosed, locked facilities in accordance with the MMMA as amended. 
f.  All persons working in direct contact with marihuana being stored by a secure transporter shall conform to hygienic practices while on duty, including but not limited to: 
1.  Maintaining adequate personal cleanliness; 
2.  Washing hands thoroughly in adequate hand washing areas before starting work and at any other time when the hands may become soiled or contaminated; 
3.  Refrain from having direct contact with marihuana if the person has or may have an illness, open lesion, including boils, sores or infected wounds, or any other abnormal source of microbial contamination, until the condition is corrected. 
(4)  A secure transporter licensee and each stakeholder shall not have an interest in a grower, processor, provisioning center or state compliance facility and shall not be a registered qualifying patient or a registered primary caregiver. 
(5)  A secure transporter shall enter all transactions, current inventory, and other information as required by the state into the statewide monitoring system as required by law. 
(6)  A secure transporter shall comply with all of the following: 
a.  Each driver transporting marihuana must have a chauffer's license issued by the state. 
b.  Each employee who has custody of marihuana or money that is related to a marihuana transaction shall not have been convicted of or released from incarceration for a felony under the laws of this state, any other state, or the United States within the past five years or have been convicted of a misdemeanor involving a controlled substance with the past five years. 
c.  Each vehicle shall be operated with a two-person crew with at least one individual remaining with the vehicle at all times during the transportation of marihuana. 
d.  A route plan and manifest shall be entered into the statewide monitoring system, and a copy shall be carried in the transporting vehicle and presented to a law enforcement officer upon request. 
e.  The marihuana shall be transported by one or more sealed containers and not be accessible while in transit. 
f.  A secure transporting vehicle shall not bear markings or other indication that it is carrying marihuana or a marihuana infused product. 
(7)  A vehicle used by a secure transporter is subject to administrative inspection by a law enforcement officer at any point during the transportation of marihuana to determine compliance with all state and local laws, rules, regulations and ordinances. 
(8)  All secure transporters shall comply with all applicable requirements of the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2017.07/404,  12, 7-17-17; Ord. No. 2018.10/409,  6, 10-8-18) 
Editor's note- See the editor's note to  18-145 regarding the renumbering of this section. 
Sect. 18-154. - Location of grower facility, safety compliance facility, processor facility, and secure transporter. 
    No grower facility, safety compliance facility, processor facility or secure transporter shall be located within 1,000 feet of real property comprising a public or private elementary, vocational, or secondary school. 
(Ord. No. 2017.07/404,  13, 7-17-17; Ord. No. 2018.10/409,  6, 10-8-18) 
Editor's note- See the editor's note to  18-145 regarding the renumbering of this section. 
Sec. 18-155. - Location of provisioning centers. 
    No provisioning center shall be located within: 
(1)  One thousand feet of real property comprising a public or private elementary, vocational, or secondary school; or 
(2)  Five hundred feet of a church or religious institution defined tax exempt by the city assessor's office. 
(Ord. No. 2017.07/404,  14, 7-17-17; Ord. No. 2018.10/409,  6, 10-8-18) 
Editor's note- See the editor's note to  18-145 regarding the renumbering of this section. 
Sec. 18-156. - Denial and revocation. 
(a)  A permit issued under this article may be revoked after an administrative hearing at which the city commission by majority vote of members present determines that any grounds for revocation under this article exist. Notice of the time and place of the hearing and the grounds for revocation must be given to the holder of a permit at least five days prior to the date of the hearing, by first class mail to the address given on the license application; a licensee whose license is subject of such hearing may present evidence and/or call witnesses at the hearing. 
(b)  A permit applied for or issued under this article may be denied or revoked on any of the following basis: 
(1)  Any violation of this article; 
(2)  Any conviction of or release from incarceration for a felony under the laws of this state, any other state, or the United States within the past five years by the applicant or any stakeholder of the applicant as measured from the date of the application or the date of becoming a stakeholder, whichever occurs later, or while licensed under this article; or any conviction of a substance-related felony by the applicant or any stakeholder of the applicant ever or while licensed under this article; 
(3)  Commission of fraud or misrepresentation or the making of a false statement by the applicant or any stakeholder of the applicant while engaging in any activity for which this article requires a permit; 
(4)  Sufficient evidence that the applicant(s) lack, or have failed to demonstrate, the requisite professionalism and/or business experience required to assure strict adherence to this article and the rules and regulations governing the medical marihuana program in the State of Michigan; 
(5)  The medical marihuana facility is determined by the city to have become a public nuisance; 
(6)  The Michigan Medical Marihuana Licensing Board has denied, revoked or suspended the applicant's state license. 
(Ord. No. 2017.07/404,  15, 7-17-17; Ord. No. 2018.10/409,  6, 10-8-18) 
Editor's note- See the editor's note to  18-145 regarding the renumbering of this section. 
Sec. 18-157. - Penalties and discipline. 
(a)  The city may require an applicant or holder of a permit for a medical marihuana facility to produce documents, records, or any other material pertinent to the investigation of an application or alleged violation of this article. Failure to provide the required material may be grounds for application denial, permit revocation, or discipline; 
(b)  Any person in violation of any provision of this article or any provision of a permit issued under this article is responsible for a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to $500.00 plus cost of prosecution, 90 days imprisonment, or both, for each violation. Each day a violation of this article continues to exist constitutes a separate violation. This section is not intended to prevent enforcement of any provision of the state law by the police department. A violator of this article shall also be subject to such additional sanctions, remedies and judicial orders as are authorized under Michigan law; 
(c)  A violation of this article is deemed to be a nuisance per se. In addition to any other remedy available at law, the city may bring an action for an injunction or other process against a person to restrain, prevent, or abate any violation of this article; 
(d)  All fines imposed under this article shall be paid within 45 days after the effective date of the order imposing the fine or as otherwise specified in the order; 
(e)  The city commission may temporarily suspend a medical marihuana facility permit without a hearing if the city commission finds that public safety or welfare requires emergency action. The city commission shall cause the temporary suspension by issuing a suspension notice by majority vote of members present and voting thereon in connection with institution of proceedings for a hearing; 
(f)  If the city commission temporarily suspends a permit without a hearing, the holder of permit is entitled to a hearing within 30 days after the suspension notice has been issued. The hearing shall be limited to the issues cited in the suspension notice; 
(g)  If the city commission does not hold a hearing within 30 days after the date of suspension was issued, then the suspended permit shall be automatically reinstated and the suspension vacated. 
(Ord. No. 2017.07/404,  16, 7-17-17; Ord. No. 2018.10/409,  6, 10-8-18) 
Editor's note- See the editor's note to  18-145 regarding the renumbering of this section. 
Sec. 18-158. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article shall be applicable to all persons and facilities described herein, whether the operations or activities associated with a marijuana facility were established without authorization before the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017.07/404,  17, 7-17-17; Ord. No. 2018.10/409,  6, 10-8-18) 
Editor's note- See the editor's note to  18-145 regarding the renumbering of this section. 
Sec. 18-159. - Enforcement. 
    This article shall be enforced and administered by the city manager, or such other city official as may be designated from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 2017.07/404,  18, 7-17-17; Ord. No. 2018.10/409,  6, 10-8-18) 
Editor's note- See the editor's note to  18-145 regarding the renumbering of this section. 
Chapter 20 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses generally, ch. 18. 

Sec. 20-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. All other words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as defined in the act and FCC rules. 
    Act means the Cable Communications Act of 1984, as amended (and specifically as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. 102-385), and as may be amended from time to time. 
    Associated equipment means all equipment and services subject to regulation pursuant to 47 CFR 76.923. 
    Basic cable service means basic service as defined in the FCC rules and any other cable television service which is subject to rate regulation by the city pursuant to the act and the FCC rules. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    FCC rules means all rules of the FCC promulgated from time to time pursuant to the act. 
    Increase in rates means an increase in rates or a decrease in programming or customer services. 
(Ord. No. 331,  1, 9-22-93) 
Sec. 20-2. - Purpose, interpretation. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to adopt regulations consistent with the act and the FCC rules with respect to basic cable service rate regulation and prescribe procedures to provide a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties in connection with basic cable rate regulation by the city. This chapter shall be implemented and interpreted consistent with the act and FCC rules. 
(Ord. No. 331,  2, 9-22-93) 
Sec. 20-3. - Rate regulations promulgated by FCC. 
    In connection with the regulation of rates for basic cable service and associated equipment, the city shall follow all FCC rules. 
(Ord. No. 331,  3, 9-22-93) 
Sec. 20-4. - Filing of rate schedule; additional information; burden of proof. 
(a)  A cable operator shall submit its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates in accordance with the act and the FCC rules. The cable operator shall include as part of its submission such information as is necessary to show that its schedule of rates or its proposed increase in rates complies with the act and the FCC rules. The cable operator shall file ten copies of the schedule or proposed increase with the city clerk. For purposes of this chapter, the filing of the cable operator shall be deemed to have been made when at least ten copies have been received by the city clerk. The city commission may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt rules and regulations prescribing the information, data and calculations which must be included as part of the cable operator's filing of the schedule of rates or a proposed increase. 
(b)  In addition to information and data required by rules and regulations of the city pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, a cable operator shall provide all information requested by the city manager in connection with the city's review and regulation of existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in these rates. The city manager may establish deadlines for submission of the requested information and the cable operator shall comply with such deadlines. 
(c)  A cable operator has the burden of proving that its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates complies with the act and the FCC rules including, without limitation, 47 USC 543 and 47 CFR 76.922 and 76.923. 
(Ord. No. 331,  4, 9-22-93) 
Sec. 20-5. - Proprietary information. 
(a)  If this chapter, any rules or regulations adopted by the city pursuant to section 20-4(a), or any request for information pursuant to section 20-4(b) requires the production of proprietary information, the cable operator shall produce the information. However, at the time the allegedly proprietary information is submitted, a cable operator may request that specific, identified portions of its response be treated as confidential and withheld from public disclosure. The request must state the reason why the information should be treated as proprietary and the facts that support those reasons. The request for confidentiality will be granted if the city determines that the preponderance of the evidence shows that nondisclosure is consistent with the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act, 5 USC 552. The city shall place in a public file for inspection any decision that results in information being withheld. If the cable operator requests confidentiality and the request is denied: 
(1)  Where the cable operator is proposing a rate increase, it may withdraw the proposal, in which case the allegedly proprietary information will be returned to it; or 
(2)  The cable operator may seek review within five working days of the denial in any appropriate forum. Release of the information will be stayed pending review. 
(b)  Any interested party may file a request to inspect material withheld as proprietary with the city. The city shall weigh the policy considerations favoring nondisclosure against the reasons cited for permitting inspection in light of the facts of the particular case. It will then promptly notify the requesting entity and the cable operator that submitted the information as to the disposition of the request. It may grant, deny or condition a request. The requesting party or the cable operator may seek review of the decision by filing an appeal with any appropriate forum. Disclosure will be stayed pending resolution of any appeal. 
(c)  The procedures set forth in this section shall be construed as analogous to and consistent with the rules of the FCC regarding requests for confidentiality including, without limitation, 47 CFR 0.459. 
(Ord. No. 331,  5, 9-22-93) 
Sec. 20-6. - Initial review of rates. 
    Upon the filing of ten copies of the schedule of rates or the proposed increase in rates pursuant to section 20-4(a), the city clerk shall publish a public notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city which shall state that: 
(1)  The filing has been received by the city clerk and, except those parts which may be withheld as proprietary, is available for public inspection and copying; and 
(2)  Interested parties are encouraged to submit written comments on the filing to the city clerk not later than seven days after the public notice is published. 
The city clerk shall give notice to the cable operator of the date, time, and place of the meeting at which the city commission shall first consider the schedule of rates or the proposed increase. This notice shall be mailed by first class mail at least three days before the meeting. In addition, if a written staff or consultant's report on the schedule of rates or the proposed increase is prepared for consideration of the city commission, then the city clerk shall mail a copy of the report by first class mail to the cable operator at least three days before the meeting at which the city commission shall first consider the schedule of rates or the proposed increase. 
(Ord. No. 331,  6, 9-22-93) 
Sec. 20-7. - Tolling order. 
    After a cable operator has filed its existing schedule of rates or a proposed increase in these rates, the existing schedule of rates will remain in effect or the proposed increase in rates will become effective after 30 days from the date of filing under section 20-4(a) unless the city commission or other properly authorized body or official tolls the 30-day deadline pursuant to 47 CFR 76.933 by issuing a brief written order, by resolution or otherwise, within 30 days of the date of filing. The city commission may toll the 30-day deadline for an additional 90 days in cases not involving cost-of-service showings and for an additional 150 days in cases involving cost-of-service showings. 
(Ord. No. 331,  7, 9-22-93) 
Sec. 20-8. - Hearing on basic cable service rates following tolling of 30-day deadline. 
    If a written order has been issued pursuant to section 20-7 and 47 CFR 76.933 to toll the effective date of existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in these rates, the cable operator shall submit to the city any additional information required or requested pursuant to section 20-4. In addition, the city commission shall hold a public hearing to consider the comments of interested parties within the additional 90-day or 150-day period, as the case may be. The city clerk shall publish a public notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city which shall state: 
(1)  The date, time, and place at which the hearing shall be held; 
(2)  Interested parties may appear in person, by agent, or by letter at such hearing to submit comments on or objections to the existing rates or the proposed increase in rates; and 
(3)  Copies of the schedule of rates or the proposed increase in rates and related information, except those parts which may be withheld as proprietary, are available for inspection or copying from the office of the clerk. 
The public notice shall be published not less than 15 days before the hearing. In addition, the city clerk shall mail by first class mail a copy of the public notice to the cable operator not less than 15 days before the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 331,  8, 9-22-93) 
Sec. 20-9. - Staff or consultant report; written response. 
    Following the public hearing, the city manager shall cause a report to be prepared for the city commission which shall, based on the filing of the cable operator, the comments or objections of interested parties, information requested from the cable operator and its response, staff or consultant's review, and other appropriate information, include a recommendation for the decision of the city commission pursuant to section 20-10. The city clerk shall mail a copy of the report to the cable operator by first class mail not less than 20 days before the city commission acts under section 20-10. The cable operator may file a written response to the report with the city clerk. If at least ten copies of the response are filed by the cable operator with the city clerk within ten days after the report is mailed to the cable operator, the city clerk shall forward it to the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 331,  9, 9-22-93) 
Sec. 20-10. - Rate decisions and orders. 
    The city commission shall issue a written order, by resolution or otherwise, which, in whole or in part, approves the existing rates for basic cable service and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates; denies the existing rates or proposed increase; orders a rate reduction; prescribes a reasonable rate; allows the existing rates or proposed increase to become effective subject to refund; or orders other appropriate relief, in accordance with the FCC rules. If the city commission issues an order allowing the existing rates or proposed increase to become effective subject to refund, it shall also direct the cable operator to maintain an accounting pursuant to 47 CFR 76.933. The order specified in this section shall be issued within 90 days of the tolling order under section 10-7 in all cases not involving a cost-of-service showing. The order shall be issued within 150 days after the tolling order under section 20-7 in all cases involving a cost-of-service showing. 
(Ord. No. 331,  10, 9-22-93) 
Sec. 20-11. - Refunds. 
    The city commission may order a refund to subscribers as provided in 47 CFR 76.942. Before the city commission orders any refund to subscribers, the city clerk shall give at least seven days' written notice to the cable operator by first class mail of the date, time, and place at which the city commission shall consider issuing a refund order and shall provide an opportunity for the cable operator to comment. The cable operator may appear in person, by agent, or by letter at such time for the purpose of submitting comments to the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 331,  11, 9-22-93) 
Sec. 20-12. - Written decisions. 
    Any order of the city commission pursuant to section 20-10 or section 20-11 shall be in writing, shall be effective upon adoption by the city commission, and shall be deemed released to the public upon adoption. The clerk shall publish a public notice of any such written order in a newspaper of general circulation within the city which shall summarize the written decision and state that copies of the text of the written decision are available for inspection or copying from the office of the clerk. In addition, the city clerk shall mail a copy of the text of the written decision to the cable operator by first class mail. 
(Ord. No. 331,  12, 9-22-93) 
Sec. 20-13. - Promulgation of additional rules and regulations. 
    In addition to rules promulgated pursuant to section 20-4, the city commission may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt rules and regulations for basic cable service rate regulation proceedings, including, without limitation, the conduct of hearings, consistent with the act and the FCC rules. 
(Ord. No. 331,  13, 9-22-93) 
Sec. 20-14. - Failure to give notice. 
    The failure of the city clerk to give the notices or to mail copies of reports as required by this chapter shall not invalidate the decisions or proceedings of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 331,  14, 9-22-93) 
Sec. 20-15. - Additional hearings. 
    In addition to the requirements of this chapter, the city commission may hold additional public hearings upon such reasonable notice as the city commission, in its sole discretion, shall prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 331,  15, 9-22-93) 
Sec. 20-16. - Additional powers of city. 
    The city shall possess all powers conferred by the act, the FCC rules, the cable operator's franchise, and all other applicable law. The powers exercised pursuant to the act, the FCC rules, and this chapter shall be in addition to powers conferred by law or otherwise. The city may take any action not prohibited by the act and the FCC rules to protect the public interest in connection with basic cable service rate regulation. 
(Ord. No. 331,  16, 9-22-93) 
Sec. 20-17. - Failure to comply; remedies. 
    The city may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies against the cable operator, including, without limitation, all remedies provided under a cable operator's franchise with the city, for failure to comply with the act, the FCC rules, any orders or determinations of the city pursuant to this chapter, any requirements of this chapter, or any rules or regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter. Subject to applicable law, failure to comply with the act, the FCC rules, any orders or determinations of the city pursuant to this chapter, any requirements of this chapter, or any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall also be sufficient grounds for revocation or denial of renewal of a cable operator's franchise. 
(Ord. No. 331,  17, 9-22-93) 
Chapter 22 - CEMETERIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 358, adopted April 28, 2003, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II,  22-26-22-42, pertained to the same subject matter and derived from  35.251-35.268 of the 1991 Compiled Ordinances. 

Sec. 22-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City cemetery, when used in this chapter, shall mean any public cemetery owned, managed or controlled by the city. 
    Lot includes lots as platted, partial lots or single grave spaces, plots and parcels. 
    Superintendent means the cemetery superintendent or his duly authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 358, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 22-27. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this article to provide the best possible cemetery conditions, upkeep and aesthetics without infringing on public use; to provide for the sanctity of the grounds devoted to the burial of the dead; and to provide for the maximum use of space owned by an individual without infringing on the rights of other individuals. 
(Ord. No. 358, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 22-28. - Perpetual care. 
    Any person owning any lot or who should hereafter purchase a lot in a city cemetery shall have the privilege of purchasing perpetual care for such lot. Charges for perpetual care shall be fixed and determined from time to time by resolution of the city commission. All persons purchasing perpetual care for any lot shall be guaranteed that such lots shall be cared for in perpetuity without additional charge or cost. Perpetual care shall not include care of monuments, markers or other embellishments, which shall be at the expense of the lot owner. All moneys received from the sale of perpetual care shall be deposited in and placed to the credit of the perpetual care fund. 
(Ord. No. 358, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 22-29. - Perpetual care fund. 
    There is hereby created a fund designated as "Cemetery Perpetual Care Fund", which fund shall be so designated upon the books of the city treasurer and the funds thereof shall be kept separate and shall constitute a perpetual care and maintenance fund, the corpus and/or the income from which shall be used for the perpetual keeping in order of the lots and tombs of the donors or purchasers of perpetual care, or as provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 358, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 22-30. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof be fined as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 358, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 22-31. - Powers of superintendent, commission. 
    The superintendent shall have the care, charge, management and control of the cemetery, under the supervision of the city commission. The city commission shall have control, supervision and charge of the cemetery and its appurtenances, and shall have the power and authority to define the duties of a competent superintendent for the cemetery. His salary shall be fixed by the city manager and approved by the city commission. The city commission, or the cemetery board with the approval of the city commission, may adopt by resolution such rules as are necessary for the care and operation of the Oak Ridge Cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 358, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 22-32. - Creation of department of cemeteries. 
    There is hereby created a department of cemeteries. The city manager shall appoint a cemetery superintendent as head of this department subject to procedure for appointment of department heads as provided in section 4.9 of the Charter. The superintendent shall be responsible for the operation of the cemetery, the regulation and removal of planting of all trees or shrubs on public property including street rights-of-way and such other duties and responsibilities as the city commission or city manager may provide. 
(Ord. No. 358, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 22-33. - Perpetual repair funds. 
(a)  The city hereby covenants to maintain lots on which perpetual care has been paid in accordance with section 22-28. All lots on which perpetual care has been paid shall be maintained in a like condition. 
(b)  The existing cemetery perpetual care fund may be utilized for the expansion and improvement of the city cemetery. No expansion or improvement expense can be made without authorization by a majority vote of the entire city commission. In no event can the perpetual care fund be utilized for expansion or improvement if the corpus of said funds is, or as a result of such expansion or improvement, would fall below a minimum of $100,000.00. 
(c)  Any moneys held as part of the cemetery perpetual care fund of the city shall be invested or reinvested by the treasurer in accordance with the policies of the city commission in direct obligations of the United States of America or the state, or in obligations the principal and interest of which are unconditionally guaranteed by the United States of America or the state, or in certificates of deposit of any bank or savings and loan having a capital and surplus aggregating at least $5,000,000.00 and whose deposits are so insured, or in such other investments as may from time to time be permitted by law for funds of this nature. 
(d)  All payments for perpetual care shall be paid to the city treasurer for deposit in the account of cemetery perpetual care fund of the city. The perpetual care funds shall be invested by the city treasurer as provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 358, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 22-34. - Mandatory perpetual care. 
    The rates established for sale of lots or fractions thereof shall include perpetual care, and no sales or interments shall be made without providing for perpetual care, except for indigent burials as provided for by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 358, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 22-35. - Fees and charges. 
    The city commission shall by resolution set a schedule of fees, payments and service charges for sale of lots and services provided. Such schedule of fees shall be posted at the Oak Ridge Cemetery office and a copy shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and city treasurer. Perpetual care charges shall be set by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 358, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 22-36. - Partial payments for services. 
    Services in connection with interment may be provided in hardship cases on a payment plan approved by the city commission and upon signature of a bona fide note by the person responsible and arranging such interment. Such notes shall not extend for a period of greater than one year in equal monthly installments with an interest rate as established by resolution by the city commission on the unpaid balance. Payment plans shall not be extended to nonresidents of the city. The above shall not preclude the city from pursuit of any remedy afforded by state law. 
(Ord. No. 358, 4-28-03) 
Sec. 22-37. - Sale of lots on contract. 
(a)  Sale of lots may be made on a contract basis provided at least one-half of the perpetual care charge is made as a down payment on the contract. Interest, as set annually by the city commission, shall be charged on the unpaid balance which shall, in equal payments, extend over a specified period not in excess of two years. Title to lots sold under contract shall not be given the purchaser until a contract is paid in full. The city may give title to a portion of the property paid for under contract upon cancellation of contract and may cancel and repossess any lot on which a contract is in arrears for two payment periods. Failure to comply with the provisions of the purchase agreement within 60 days of the mailing of the notice shall act as forfeiture of all rights under the contract. Lots may not be sold under contract to nonresidents of the city. 
(b)  If a funeral director takes the responsibility of acting as agent for the family of the deceased and signs a promissory note for services, he shall be responsible for payment of such note for services. A grave shall not be opened until arrangements are made for costs involved except indigent burials. 
(Ord. No. 358, 4-28-03; Ord. No. 360.12/03, 12-22-03) 
Sec. 22-38. - Limitations on lot owners, sales; records. 
(a)  The city clerk shall issue all cemetery deeds. Such deeds shall evidence ownership of parcels, however such ownership shall be subject to rights of ingress and egress of cemetery personnel and equipment, subject to reasonable trespass by the public during burial services on adjacent lots and subject to rules and regulations for cemetery operation and use now in effect or as may be adopted in the future. 
(b)  No purchase of any grounds of the cemetery shall be permitted for speculative purposes. 
(c)  The superintendent shall keep complete records of land ownership. The city clerk shall not file a deed or change of ownership until there is entered on the face of the deed a notation by the superintendent to the effect that the deed is entered in his records. 
(d)  Deeds may be transferred in ownership, parcels split or property returned to the cemetery for delinquent charges upon surrender to the city clerk of existing deeds and reissue of new deeds. There shall be no charge for this service. 
(e)  No cemetery lot deeds, conveyance or assignment of any type shall be recognized unless said deed, assignment or conveyance is made a matter of record with the city clerk. The clerk may issue duplicate deeds to replace lost or destroyed instruments upon application by the lot owner. 
(Ord. No. 360.12/03, 12-22-03) 
Sec. 22-39. - Conduct. 
(a)  No person shall in the exercise of his rights of ownership or rights as a member of the public so as to conduct himself or use of his property or the property of others so as to commit a breach of decorum, interfere with the sanctity of the area, be obnoxious to other persons, interfere with a funeral, damage property or the appearance of the cemetery or cause injury to a person of ordinary sensibilities while on the cemetery grounds. The superintendent shall enforce this section and the cemetery board may adopt supplementary rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the above policies. The superintendent may refuse services to any individual or may refuse the right of use of cemetery facilities or property for violation of such rules. The superintendent may solicit aid from police officers for the handling of any such disorderly person or violation of rules. 
(b)  Any refusal of service to a person or refusal to permit an act or any administrative rule or regulation may be appealed by an aggrieved party to the cemetery board for review. A review by the cemetery board shall be final insofar as it involves discretion or the finding of facts. 
(Ord. No. 360.12/03, 12-22-03) 
Sec. 22-40. - Monuments, headstones, markers. 
    The cemetery board may by resolution set aside areas in which no monuments, other than flush-type monuments or headstones, will be permitted. All monuments or headstones shall be set on permanent foundations and shall be of such dimension as to not interfere with adjacent view, crowd a lot or interfere with use of adjacent lots. Markings, designs and shapes shall be in good taste and not objectionable to a person of ordinary sensibilities. All foundation work shall be done by cemetery workers and the superintendent shall have the right to accept or reject all orders for foundation work. 
(Ord. No. 360.12/03, 12-22-03) 
Sec. 22-41. - Unsightly objects; removal by city. 
    Unsightly objects, erected or placed upon lots or graves, which are objectionable or detrimental to cemetery appearances will not be permitted. Whenever such objects may be placed or whenever objects become unsightly due to weathering or become withered, the city reserves the right to remove them without notice and no responsibility for return to the owner will be assumed. 
(Ord. No. 360.12/03, 12-22-03) 
Sec. 22-42. - Funerals. 
(a)  Reasonable notice must be given the superintendent and all arrangements must be completed for services to be furnished and payment prior to a grave opening. All interments, disinterments, funerals, grave openings, grave locations and arrangements shall be under direction of the superintendent. 
(b)  The city reserves the right of refusal for any disinterment except by order of husband, wife, father, mother, son or daughter of the deceased. Presentation of a permit from the state board of health, except for reinterment in Oak Ridge Cemetery, will be required prior to disinterment. 
(Ord. No. 360.12/03, 12-22-03) 
Sec. 22-43. - Reclaiming of lots by city for delinquent care. 
    When the owner of any burial space or plot fails to pay annual care charges or fails to maintain the plot himself for a period of seven years or does not provide for perpetual care, it shall be lawful for the city to institute proceedings for termination and forfeiture of the rights and interests of the owner as provided for by the laws of the state. This section shall not apply to any burial space that has been used for interment, and no such space shall be subject to resale. 
(Ord. No. 360.12/03, 12-22-03) 
Sec. 22-44. - Care and maintenance of plantings. 
    In order to provide for the best maintenance possible, plants must be set not more than 18 inches from the marker or monument and not out over the length of the grave. Trees and shrubs may be planted upon written consent of the superintendent; however, any tree or shrub so planted becomes the property of the cemetery and may be trimmed, pruned or removed if detrimental to adjacent lots or walkways or unsightly or inconvenient to cemetery operations. The superintendent shall consider care and maintenance problems prior to granting permission for plantings. He may also use his discretion in permitting or refusing to permit any practice which will interfere with or increase maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 360.12/03, 12-22-03) 
Sec. 22-45. - Severability. 
    If any provision, paragraph, word, section or article of Ordinance No. 360.12/03 is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words, sections and articles shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 360.12/03, 12-22-03) 
Sec. 22-46. - Conflict. 
    All parts of the Code of Ordinances in conflict with Ordinance No. 360.12/03 are hereby repealed to the extent they conflict with said ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 360.12/03, 12-22-03) 
Chapter 26 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; law enforcement, ch. 50. 
State Law reference- Emergency preparedness act, MCL 30.401 et seq., MSA 4.824(11) et seq.; governor's emergency powers, MCL 10.31 et seq., MSA 3.4(1) et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1-26-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 26-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Coordinator means a person appointed to coordinate emergency planning and services within the city as prescribed in this article. In the absence of an appointed person, "coordinator" shall mean the mayor. 
    Disaster means an occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or manmade cause, including, but not limited to, fire, flood, snow, ice or wind storm, wave action, oil spills, water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, utility failure, hazardous peacetime radiological incident, major transportation accident, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot, or hostile military or paramilitary action. Riots and other civil disorders are not within the meaning of this term unless they directly result from and are an aggravating element of the disaster. 
    District coordinator means the state police district emergency services coordinator or his authorized representative. 
    Emergency operations plan means the city emergency operations plan which has been prepared under section 26-31(b) to coordinate disaster response and recovery within the city. 
    Emergency services means and includes preparations for, and relief from, the effects of natural and manmade disasters, and includes civil defense. 
    Emergency services forces means all disaster relief forces; all agencies of the municipal government, private and volunteer personnel, public officers and employees; and all other persons or groups of persons having duties or responsibilities under this article or pursuant to a lawful order or directive authorized by this article. 
    Emergency services volunteer means any person duly registered and appointed by the coordinator and assigned to participate in the emergency services activity. 
    Emergency situation means any situation confronting a community requiring emergency actions of a lesser nature than a disaster, as defined above, to include, but not limited to, civil disturbances, labor strikes, visits by national or international dignitaries, and buildup activities prior to an actual disaster. 
    State of disaster means a declaration by executive order or proclamation by the governor under the provisions of Act No. 390 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCL 30.401 et seq., MSA 4.824(11) et seq.), as amended, which activates the disaster response and recovery aspects of state, local and interjurisdictional disaster emergency plans and authorizes the deployment and use of any forces to which the plan or plans apply. 
    State of emergency means a declaration by the mayor pursuant to this article which activates the disaster response and recovery aspects of the city emergency operations plan and authorizes the deployment and use of any municipal forces to which the plan applies. 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, MCL 30.402, MSA 4.824(12). 
Sec. 26-27. - Intent; purpose; scope. 
(a)  It is the intent and purpose of this article to establish an organization that will ensure the complete and efficient utilization of all municipal resources during periods of emergency and disaster. 
(b)  The city office of emergency services will be the coordinating agency responsible for citywide emergency preparedness; it will provide the means through which the commission and the mayor may exercise the authority and discharge the responsibilities vested in them by this article and Act No. 390 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCL 30.401 et seq., MSA 4.824(11) et seq.), as amended. 
(c)  This article will not relieve any elected officials or municipal departments of the normal responsibilities or authority given by general law or local ordinance, nor will it affect the work of the American Red Cross or other volunteer agencies organized for relief in a natural disaster. 
Sec. 26-28. - Emergency organization. 
(a)  The mayor, with the approval of the commission, is hereby authorized and directed to create an organization to prepare for community disasters utilizing to the fullest extent existing agencies within the city. The mayor, as executive head of the city government, shall be the director of the emergency services forces of the city and shall be responsible for their organization, administration and operation, working through the coordinator. 
(b)  The organization for providing emergency services shall consist of the following: 
(1)  An office of emergency services established within city government. The office of emergency services shall have an administrative head appointed who will be known as the coordinator, office of emergency services. Such assistants and other employees as are deemed necessary for the proper functioning of the organization will be employed. 
(2)  The employees, equipment and facilities of all municipal departments, boards, institutions and commissions suitable for or adaptable to emergency services activities may be designated as part of the total emergency services forces. Such designations shall be by the mayor with the approval of the council. 
(c)  All officers and employees of departments, commissions, boards, institutions and other agencies of the city government designated by the mayor, with the approval of the commission, as emergency services forces shall cooperate with the emergency services coordinator in the formulation of the emergency operations plan, and they shall assist the coordinator in all matters pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
Sec. 26-29. - Emergency coordinator. 
(a)  The mayor, with the approval of the commission, shall appoint an emergency services coordinator who shall be a person with the personal attributes, experience, and training needed to coordinate the activities of the agencies, departments, and individuals within the city to protect the public health, safety and welfare during emergency situations and disasters. 
(b)  Assistant coordinators shall be designated to work with the coordinator on emergency planning matters. Assistant coordinators shall be selected and shall serve as follows: 
(1)  There shall be one such assistant coordinator appointed from each city department as designated by the department head, with the approval of the mayor, as part of the emergency services forces. 
(2)  Assistant coordinators shall assume the duties of the coordinator whenever he is unavailable during disasters or emergency situations in the order of designation by the mayor, acting upon the recommendation of the coordinator. 
State Law reference- Local coordinator, MCL 30.409, MSA 4.824(19). 
Sec. 26-30. - Mayor's powers, duties. 
(a)  The mayor may exercise the emergency power and authority as specified in this article. Whenever a situation requires, or is likely to require, that the mayor invoke such power and authority, he shall, as soon as reasonably expedient, convene the commission to perform its legislative and administrative duties as the situation demands, and shall report to that body relative to emergency activities. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as abridging or curtailing the powers of the commission unless specifically provided in this article. 
(b)  Under the following circumstances, the mayor may declare a state of emergency exists in the city and may assemble and utilize the emergency services forces in accordance with the city emergency operations plan, and he may prescribe the manner and conditions of the use of such emergency services forces: 
(1)  Whenever, on the basis of information received from authoritative sources, he feels that a large-scale disaster or emergency situation in the city or state is imminent. 
(2)  During any period of disaster in the city or state and thereafter as long as he shall deem it necessary. 
(c)  Whenever the mayor deems that any condition in the city is beyond the control of local public or private agencies or has attained or threatens to attain the proportions of a major disaster, he may request the governor to declare a state of disaster exists therein by instructing the coordinator to contact the district coordinator in accordance with section 14 of Act No. 390 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCL 30.414, MSA 4.824(24)), as amended. 
(d)  The mayor, with the approval of the commission, is hereby empowered and has the authority: 
(1)  To appropriate and expend funds, make contracts, obtain and distribute equipment, materials, and supplies for disaster purposes. 
(2)  To provide for the health and safety of persons and property, including emergency assistance to the victims of a disaster. 
(3)  To assign and make available for duty the employees, property, or equipment of the municipality relating to firefighting; engineering; rescue; health, medical, and related services; police; transportation; construction; and similar items or service for disaster relief purposes within or without the physical limits of the city. 
(4)  In the event of a foreign attack upon this state, to waive procedures and formalities otherwise required by law pertaining to the performance of public work, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of permanent and temporary workers, the utilization of volunteer workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase and distribution with or without compensation of supplies, materials, and facilities, and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds. 
(e)  The mayor, with the approval of the commission, shall establish procedures for the succession of government during emergencies where officials are unavailable for exercising the powers and discharging the duties of their respective offices. 
(f)  The mayor, with the approval of the commission, may make regulations permitting the coordinator to assemble and utilize the emergency services forces and provide disaster relief aid as prescribed in sections 26-30(b), 26-30(c), and 26-30(d). 
(g)  When obtaining formal approvals would result in delay of relief activity, the mayor may, until the council convenes, waive procedures and formalities otherwise required pertaining to the performance of public works, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase and distribution of supplies, materials and facilities and expenditure of existing funds, and the commission is also empowered to waive any such procedures and formalities. 
Sec. 26-31. - Powers, duties of coordinator. 
(a)  The emergency services coordinator shall be responsible for the administration, planning, coordination and operation of all emergency preparedness activities in the city. He shall maintain liaison with county, state and federal authorities, and the authorities of adjacent and nearby political subdivisions so as to ensure the most effective emergency operations. 
(b)  His duties shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Developing of the city emergency operations plan, and any other appropriate disaster plans, for the immediate use of all of the facilities, equipment, manpower, and other resources of the city for the purpose of minimizing or preventing damage to persons or property; and protecting and restoring to usefulness governmental services and public utilities necessary for the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  Coordinating the recruitment and training of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the personnel and facilities of the city for emergency purposes. 
(3)  Through public information programs, educating the population as to actions necessary and required for the protection of persons and property in case of a disaster. 
(4)  Conducting practice alerts and exercises to ensure the efficient operation of the city's emergency organization and to familiarize residents of the city with emergency regulations, procedures and operations. 
(5)  Coordinating the activity of all other public and private agencies engaged in any emergency or disaster relief programs. 
(6)  Negotiating with owners or persons in control of buildings or other property for the use of such buildings or property for emergency or disaster relief purposes, and designating suitable buildings as public shelters. 
(7)  Establishing and maintaining administrative control over a local radiological defense program, to include emergency preparations for both peacetime radiation incidents and international wartime disasters. 
(8)  Coordinating municipal emergency preparedness activities with those at the county level and adjacent municipalities. 
Sec. 26-32. - Volunteers generally. 
(a)  Each department, commission, board, or other agency of city government may at any time appoint or authorize the appointment of volunteer citizens to augment the personnel of such city department, commission, board, or agency in time of emergency. Such individuals shall be enrolled as emergency services volunteers and shall be subject to the rules and regulations set forth by the respective department, commission, board or agency head for such volunteers. 
(b)  The coordinator may enlist volunteer citizens to form the personnel of an emergency service for which the city has no counterpart, or to temporarily augment personnel of the city engaged in emergency activities. The coordinator shall maintain formal records of all such volunteers for workman's compensation purposes. 
(c)  The city assumes no liability for injury or death of volunteers in performance of their duty as such volunteers except that which is imposed by state law or by this Code or resolution of the council, except, however, that volunteers assigned to duty during a period of natural disaster or emergency situation in the city shall be eligible for the benefits of the state workers' compensation law at a rate of compensation commensurate with that of persons performing similar work under conditions of regular employment. 
Sec. 26-33. - Rights of city employees. 
    City employees assigned to duty as a part of the emergency services forces pursuant to the provisions of this article shall retain all of the rights, privileges, and immunities of city employees, and shall receive the compensation incident to their employment. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 30.411(1)(b), MSA 4.824(21)(1)(b). 
Sec. 26-34. - Liability. 
(a)  This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare. As such, neither the city nor agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, nor trustees, nor any of the agents thereof acting in good faith carrying out, complying with, or attempting to comply with this article shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons or property as a result of the activity. 
(b)  Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants the city the right to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during a disaster or an emergency situation or during an authorized practice disaster exercise or practice emergency situation exercise shall not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission, or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
Sec. 26-35. - Superiority of emergency rules. 
    At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede all other existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations, insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
Sec. 26-36. - Unlawful acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any emergency services forces in the enforcement or accomplishment of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or other means of identification as a member of the emergency services forces of the city unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by proper officials. 
Chapter 30 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; planning, ch. 70; subdivisions, ch. 90; taxation, ch. 94; utilities, ch. 102. 
State Law reference- Housing and slum clearance projects, MCL 125.651 et seq., MSA 5.3011 et seq.; housing corporation law, MCL 125.601 et seq., MSA 5.3057(1) et seq.; urban redevelopment corporations, MCL 125.901 et seq., MSA 5.3058(1) et seq.; rehabilitation of blighted areas, MCL 125.71 et seq., MSA 5.3501 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1-30-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 30-26. - Created; description of district. 
(a)  Definitions. The following terms and definitions shall apply to this chapter: 
    Act 197 means the Downtown Development Authority Act, Public Act 197 of 1975, as amended. 
    Authority means the City of Buchanan Downtown Development Authority. 
(b)  City commission determination. Based on a public hearing held at a regular meeting of the city commission in the city commission chambers on the 23rd day of October, 2006, in compliance with Act 197, the city commission determined that: 
(1)  It is in the best interests of the public to halt property value deterioration and increase property tax valuation where possible in the central business district, to eliminate the causes of that deterioration, and to promote economic growth. 
(2)  This city commission established a DDA by ordinance on December 17, 1984. 
(3)  By amending the boundary of the DDA, as illustrated on the legal description found herein under subsection (d), the authority would be better able to achieve its goals. 
(4)  The city commission introduced its intention to amend the DDA by passing a Resolution of Intent on August 28, 2006. 
(5)  The proposed boundary amendment was the topic of a public hearing in front of the city commission on October 23, 2006. 
(6)  The proposed amendment and all procedures for adoption satisfy the requirements of Public Act 197 of 1975, as amended. 
(c)  Approval of amendments. The amendment of the downtown development authority for the City of Buchanan as recommended by the downtown development authority and presented at the public hearing on the 23rd day of October, 2006, is approved and adopted. 
(d)  Legal description of the City of Buchanan Downtown Development Authority District: 
    Commencing at the corner common to sections 25, 26, 35 and 36, City of Buchanan, Berrien County, Michigan; thence south on the line common to sections 35 and 36 a distance of 117.5 feet; thence west 165 feet; thence south 42 feet; thence east 132 feet to the west line of Redbud Trail; thence south on said west line 66 feet; thence west 177 feet; thence south 132 feet; thence east 177 feet to the west line of Redbud Trail; thence south on said west line 66 feet; thence west 132 feet; thence south 66 feet to the north right-of-way line of Central Court; thence west 155.5 feet to the east line of Days Avenue; thence south on said east line 82.5 feet to the centerline of Roe Street extended; thence west on said centerline and centerline extended 437.25 feet to the centerline of Oak Street; thence north on said centerline 297 feet to the north line of Charles Court extended; thence west on said north line and north line extended 294.75 feet; thence north 46 feet; thence east 49 feet; thence north 234.25 feet to the south right-of-way line of Front Street; thence west 43 feet along the south line of Front Street; thence north 231 feet; thence east 288.75 feet to the centerline of Oak Street; thence north on said centerline approximately 220 feet to the centerline of Dewey Street; thence east on said centerline 222.75 feet to the centerline of Main Street; thence north on said centerline 280.5 feet to the centerline of Third Street; thence east on said centerline 264 feet to the east line of Short Street extended; thence south on said east line 90.75 feet; thence east 132 feet; thence south 66 feet; thence east 66 feet; thence north 132 feet to the south line of Third Street; thence east on said south line and south line extended 132 feet to the east line of Redbud Trail; thence north on said east line approximately 292 feet to a point approximately 20 feet north of the southwest corner of block 3 of the Hatch Addition to the City of Buchanan; thence east a distance of 93 feet; thence north 157 feet; thence east 6 feet; thence north along the east line and east line extended of said block 3 to the westerly line of lot 2, block 3 of said Hatch Addition; thence northwesterly on said westerly line of lot 2, block 3 to the southerly line of River Street; thence northeasterly on said southerly line to the east line of block 2 of said Hatch Addition a distance of 228.35 feet; thence southeasterly along said lot line 192.36 feet; thence south 69 41' west 58.65 feet; thence south 18 21' East 50 feet; thence South 0 22' 52? east 271.72 feet to the northern edge of the Third Street right-of-way, also being the northern edge of McCoy Creek; thence southwesterly 340.65 feet along the western right-of-way of Third Street to the southeast corner of lot 10, block 3 of the Hatch Addition to the City of Buchanan; thence south 66 feet across the Third Street right-of-way; thence southwesterly along the eastern edge of lot 1 of the Assessor's Plat No. 1 to the City of Buchanan and the property line extended 295.16 feet to the south right-of-way line of Dewey Street; thence northeasterly 66 feet; thence east 105.5 feet; thence south 9 51' 30? east 349.76 feet to the northern right-of-way line of Front Street; thence easterly approximately 185 feet along the northern right-of-way line of Front Street to a point also known as the southeast corner of unplatted parcel 11-58-0025-0014-00-7 as of 8/15/06; thence south 66 feet to the south right-of-way line of Front Street; then easterly along the south right-of-way line of Front Street 606.14 feet; thence north approximately 27 feet to a point also known as the southwest corner of unplatted parcel 11-58-0025-0015-10-1 as of 8/15/06; thence east 165 feet; thence northerly 396 feet; thence westerly 165 feet; thence northerly 244.9 feet; thence westerly 47.53 feet; thence northerly 83.26 feet; thence north 18 40' west 339.9 feet; thence north 25 26' 10? west 84.18 feet; thence north 4 20' 10? west 151.08 feet to the south right-of-way line of Third Street; thence northeasterly approximately 570 feet to the westernmost point of lot 6 of Assessor's Plat No. 1 to the City of Buchanan, a point which also lies along the western right-of-way of Third Street; thence northeasterly 505.3 feet; thence northeasterly 409.2 feet to the northeastern corner of lot 6 of Assessor's Plat No. 1 to the City of Buchanan; thence south 271.6 feet; thence east 150 feet to the north and south quarter line of said section 25; thence south on said quarter line to the south quarter corner of said section 25; thence west on the section line common to said sections 25 and 36 a distance of 77.8 feet; thence southerly approximately 329.5 feet; thence west 202 feet; thence southerly approximately 30 feet; thence west approximately 600 feet; thence northwesterly approximately 140 feet; thence westerly 298.85 feet to the centerline of Liberty Street; thence north on said centerline 126 feet; thence west 274.5 feet; thence south 162.9 feet; thence northwesterly approximately 419 feet along a line parallel with the centerline of Rynearson Street; thence south 4 15' west 174 feet to the centerline of Rynearson Street; thence northwesterly on said centerline approximately 745 feet to the line common to sections 35 and 36; thence north 20 feet along said common line to the point of beginning. 
    Except parts of blocks A and D of Central Addition to the City of Buchanan commencing 399.9 feet west and 33 feet south of the northeast corner of section 35, township 7 south, range 18 west; thence south 230.25 feet; thence north 89 45' West 127.9 feet; thence north 0 12' 30? east 113.04 feet; thence north 69 57' east 4.08 feet; thence north 0 21' east 15.23 feet; thence east 29.5 feet; thence north 0 21' east 18.94 feet; thence east 1 foot, thence north 0 05' west on building wall 81.06 feet to south line of Front Street; thence east 94.27 feet to the point of beginning being a part of lots 1, 2, 3, 7 and 8 block A and part of lots 1 through 6 of block D of said plat. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.221; Ord. No. 2007.01/374, 1-22-07) 
Sec. 30-27. - Purpose. 
    The downtown development authority is created to promote economic growth, increase property values, and halt deterioration within the district described in section 30-26. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.222) 
Sec. 30-28. - Establishment of governing board. 
    The downtown development authority shall be under the supervision and control of a board, consisting of the mayor and eight members appointed by the mayor; subject to approval of the city commission. Not less than a majority of the members shall be persons having an interest in property located in the downtown district. Not less than one of the members shall be a resident of the downtown district, if the district is found to have 100 or more persons residing therein. The present members of the board shall hold office until the members' successors are appointed. The additional members of the board shall serve for a term of four years; members shall serve without compensation, but they shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses. The chairman of the board shall be elected by the board. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.223) 
Sec. 30-29. - Compensation of board. 
    The board members shall receive no compensation for their services on the downtown development authority. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.224) 
Sec. 30-30. - Board rules and meetings. 
    The downtown development authority board shall adopt rules governing its procedure and the holding of regular and special meetings, subject to the approval of the city commission. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.225) 
Sec. 30-31. - Employment of personnel. 
(a)  Director. The downtown development authority board may employ and fix the compensation of a director, subject to the approval of the city commission. The director shall serve at the pleasure of the board. A member of the board is not eligible to hold the position of director. Before entering upon the duties of his office, the director shall take and subscribe to the constitutional oath, and furnish bond, by posting a bond in the amount of $5,000.00, payable to the authority for use and benefit of the authority, approved by the board, and filed with the city clerk. The premium on the bond shall be deemed an operating expense of the authority, payable from funds available to the authority for expenses of operation. The director shall be the chief executive officer of the authority. Subject to the approval of the board, the director shall supervise, and be responsible for, the preparation of plans and the performance of the functions of the authority. The director shall attend the meetings of the board and shall render to the board and to the city commission a regular report covering the activities and financial condition of the authority. If the director is absent or disabled, the board may designate a qualified person as acting director to perform the duties of the office. Before entering upon the duties of his office, the acting director shall take and subscribe to the oath, and furnish bond, as required of the director. The director shall furnish the board with information or reports governing the operation of the authority as the board requires. 
(b)  Treasurer. The board may employ and fix the compensation of a treasurer, who shall keep the financial records of the authority and who, together with the director, shall approve all vouchers for the expenditure of funds of the authority. The treasurer shall perform such other duties as may be delegated to him by the board and shall furnish bond in an amount as prescribed by the board. 
(c)  Secretary. The board may employ and fix the compensation of a secretary, who shall maintain custody of the official seal and of records, books, documents, or other papers not required to be maintained by the treasurer. The secretary shall attend meetings of the board and keep a record of its proceedings, and shall perform such other duties delegated by the board. 
(d)  Legal counsel. The board may retain legal counsel to advise the board in the proper performance of its duties. The legal counsel shall represent the authority in actions brought by or against the authority. 
(e)  Other personnel. The board may employ other personnel deemed necessary by the board. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.226) 
Sec. 30-32. - Duties of board. 
    The downtown development authority board shall: 
(1)  Prepare an analysis of economic changes taking place in the district. 
(2)  Study and analyze the impact of metropolitan growth upon the district. 
(3)  Plan and propose the construction, the renovation, repair, remodeling, rehabilitation, restoration, preservation, or reconstruction of a public facility, an existing building, or a multiple-family dwelling unit which may be necessary or appropriate to the execution of a plan which, in the opinion of the board, aids in the economic growth of the district. 
(4)  Develop long-range plans, in cooperation with the agency which is chiefly responsible for planning in the city, designed to halt the deterioration of property values in the district and to promote the economic growth of the district, and take such steps as may be necessary to persuade property owners to implement the plans to the fullest extent possible. 
(5)  Implement any plan of development in the district necessary to achieve the purposes of this article, in accordance with the powers of the authority as granted by this article. 
(6)  Make and enter into contracts necessary or incidental to the exercise of its powers and the performance of its duties. 
(7)  Acquire by purchase or otherwise, on terms and conditions and in a manner the authority deems proper or own, convey, or otherwise dispose of, or lease or lessor or lessee, land and other property, real or personal, or rights or interests therein, which the authority determines is reasonably necessary to achieve the purposes of this act, and to grant or acquire licenses, easements, and options with respect thereof. 
(8)  Improve land and construct, reconstruct, rehabilitate, restore and preserve, equip, improve, maintain, repair, and operate any building, including multiple-family dwellings, and any necessary or desirable appurtenances thereto, within the district for the use, in whole or in part, of any public or private person or corporation, or a combination thereof. 
(9)  Fix, charge, and collect fees, rents, and charges for the use of any building or property under its control or any part thereof, or facility therein, and pledge the fees, rents, and charges for the payment of revenue bonds issued by the authority. 
(10)  Lease any building or property under its control, or any part thereof. 
(11)  Accept grants and donations of property, labor or other things of value from a public or private source. 
(12)  Acquire and construct public facilities. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.227) 
Sec. 30-33. - Authority defined. 
    The downtown development authority shall be deemed an instrumentality of a political subdivision for purposes of Act No. 227 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972 (MCL 213.321 et seq., MSA 8.215(61) et seq.), as amended. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.228) 
Sec. 30-34. - Transfer of private property to authority. 
    The city may take private property under Act No. 149 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1911 (MCL 213.21 et seq., MSA 8.11 et seq.), as amended, for the purpose of transfer to the downtown development authority, and may transfer the property to the authority for use in an approved development, on terms and conditions it deems appropriate, and the taking, transfer, and use shall be considered necessary for public purposes and for the benefit of the public. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.229) 
Sec. 30-35. - Financing. 
(a)  The activities of the downtown development authority shall be financed from one or more of the following sources: 
(1)  Donations to the authority for the performance of its functions. 
(2)  Proceeds of a tax imposed pursuant to section 30-36. 
(3)  Moneys borrowed and to be repaid as authorized by section 30-37. 
(4)  Revenues from any property, building or facility owned, leased, licensed or operated by the authority or under its control, subject to the limitations imposed upon the authority by trusts or other agreements. 
(5)  Proceeds of a tax increment financing plan, established under sections 30-38 to 30-40. 
(6)  Moneys obtained from other sources approved by the city commission. 
(b)  Moneys received by the authority and not covered under subsection (a) shall immediately be deposited to the credit of the authority, subject to disbursement pursuant to this article. Except as provided in this article, the city shall not obligate itself, nor shall it ever be obligated to pay any sums from public funds, other than moneys received by the city pursuant to this section, for or on account of the activities of the authority. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.230) 
Sec. 30-36. - Levying of ad valorem tax. 
(a)  The downtown development authority, with the approval of the city commission, may levy an ad valorem tax on the real and tangible personal property not exempt by law as finally equalized in the district. The tax shall not be more than two mills. The tax shall be collected by the city. The city shall collect the tax at the same time and in the same manner as it collects its other ad valorem taxes. The tax shall be paid to the treasurer of the authority and credited to the general fund of the authority for purposes of the authority. 
(b)  The city may, at the request of the authority, borrow money and issue its notes therefor pursuant to Act No. 202 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1943 (MCL 131.1 et seq., MSA 5.3188(1) et seq.), as amended, in anticipation of collection of the ad valorem tax authorized in this section. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.231) 
Sec. 30-37. - Borrowing money; issuing revenue bonds. 
    The downtown development authority may borrow money and issue its negotiable revenue bonds therefor pursuant to Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq., MSA 5.2731 et seq.), as amended. Revenue bonds issued by the authority shall not, except as provided in this article, be deemed a debt of the city or the state. The city, by majority vote of the members of the city commission, may pledge its full faith and credit to support the authority's revenue bonds. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.232) 
Sec. 30-38. - Tax increment financing plan. 
(a)  As used in this section and sections 30-39 and 30-40: 
    Captured assessed value means the amount in any one year, by which the current assessed value of the project area exceeds the initial assessed value. 
    Initial assessed value means the most recently assessed value of all taxable property within the boundaries of the development area at the time the ordinance establishing the tax increment financing plan is approved. Property exempt from taxation at the time of the determination of the initial assessed value shall be included as zero. 
(b)  When the downtown development authority determines that it is necessary for the achievement of the purposes of this article, the authority shall prepare and submit a tax increment financing plan to the city commission. The plan shall include a development plan as provided in section 30-40, a detailed explanation of the tax increment procedure, the amount of bonded indebtedness to be incurred, the duration of the program, and shall be in compliance with section 30-39. The plan shall contain a statement of the estimated impact of tax increment financing on the assessed values of all taxing jurisdictions in which the development area is located. The plan may provide for the use of part or all of the captured assessed value, but the portion intended to be used by the authority shall be clearly stated in the tax increment financing plan. 
(c)  Approval of the tax increment financing plan shall be in accordance with the notice, hearing and disclosure provisions of section 30-42. When the development plan is part of the tax increment financing plan, only one hearing and approval procedure is required for the two plans together. 
(d)  Before the public hearing on the tax increment financing plan, the city commission shall provide a reasonable opportunity to the members of the county board of commissioners, and to the members of the community school board to meet with the city commission. The authority shall fully inform members of the county board of commissioners and of the school board of the fiscal and economic implications of the proposed development area. The members of the county boards of commissioners and of the school boards may present their recommendations at the public hearing on the tax increment financing plan. The authority may enter into agreements with the county board of commissioners, the school board and the governing body of the city in which the development area is located to share a portion of the captured assessed value of the district. 
(e)  A tax increment financing plan may be modified if the modification is approved by the governing body upon notice and after public hearings and agreements as are required for approval of the original plan. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.233) 
Sec. 30-39. - Tax increment; disposition of. 
(a)  The amount of tax increment to be transmitted to the downtown development authority by the city and county treasurers shall be that portion of the tax levy of all taxing bodies paid each year on real and personal property in the project area on the captured assessed value. 
(b)  The authority shall expend the tax increments received for the development program only in accordance with the tax increment financing plan. Surplus funds shall revert proportionately to the respective taxing bodies. These revenues shall not be used to circumvent existing levy limit laws. The governing body of the city may abolish the tax increment financing plan when it finds that the purposes for which it was established are accomplished. 
(c)  Annually the authority shall submit to the city commission and the state tax commission a report on the status of the tax increment financing account. The report shall include: the amount and source of revenue in the account; the amount and purpose of expenditures from the account; the amount of principal and interest in any outstanding bonded indebtedness; the initial assessed value of the project area; the captured assessed value retained by the authority; the tax increments received; and any additional information the city commission deems necessary. The report shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.234) 
Sec. 30-40. - General obligation bonds. 
    The city may by resolution of the city commission authorize, issue and sell general obligation bonds subject to the limitations set forth in this section to finance the development program of the tax increment financing plan and shall pledge its full faith and credit for the payment of the bonds. The bonds shall mature in not more than 30 years and shall be subject to Act No. 202 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1943 (MCL 131.1 et seq., MSA 5.3188(1) et seq.), as amended. Before the city may authorize the borrowing, the downtown development authority shall submit an estimate of the anticipated tax increment revenue to be available for payment of principal and interest on the bonds, to the city commission. This estimate shall be approved by the city commission by resolution adopted by majority vote of the members of the commission in the resolution authorizing the bonds, and when approved by the municipal finance commission shall be conclusive for purposes of this section. The city may not pledge for annual debt service requirements in any one year in excess of 80 percent of the estimated tax increment revenue to be received for a development area for that year, and the total aggregate amount of borrowing shall not exceed an amount which the 80 percent of the estimated tax increment will service as to annual principal and interest requirements. The bonds issued under this section shall be considered a single series for the purposes of Act No. 202 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1943 (MCL 131.1 et seq., MSA 5.3188(1) et seq.), as amended. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.235) 
Sec. 30-41. - Development plan generally-Preparation, contents. 
(a)  When the downtown development authority board decides to finance a project in the downtown district by the use of revenue bonds as authorized in section 30-38 or tax increment financing as authorized in sections 30-38, 30-39 and 30-40, it shall prepare a development plan. 
(b)  The development plan shall contain: 
(1)  The designation of boundaries of the development area in relation to highways, streets, streams or otherwise. 
(2)  The location and extent of existing streets and other public facilities within the development area and shall designate the location, character and extent of the categories of public and private land uses then existing and proposed for the development area, including residential, recreational, commercial, industrial, educational, and other uses and shall include a legal description of the development area. 
(3)  A description of existing improvements in the development area to be demolished, repaired or altered, a description of any repairs and alterations, and an estimate of the time required for completion. 
(4)  The location, extent, character and estimated cost of the improvements including rehabilitation contemplated for the development area and an estimate of the time required for completion. 
(5)  A statement of the construction or stages of construction planned, and the estimated time of completion of each stage. 
(6)  A description of any parts of the development area to be left as open space and the use contemplated for the space. 
(7)  A description of any portions of the development area which the authority desires to sell, donate, exchange or lease to or from the city and the proposed terms. 
(8)  A description of desired zoning changes and changes in streets, street levels, intersections, and utilities. 
(9)  An estimate of the cost of the development, a statement of the proposed method of financing the development and the ability of the authority to arrange the financing. 
(10)  Designation of the person or persons, natural or corporate, to whom all or a portion of the development is to be leased, sold, or conveyed in any manner and for whose benefit the project is being undertaken if that information is available to the authority. 
(11)  The procedures for bidding for the leasing, purchasing or conveying in any manner of all or a portion of the development upon its completion, if there is no express or implied agreement between the authority and persons, natural or corporate; that all or a portion of the development will be leased, sold, or conveyed in any manner to those persons. 
(12)  Estimates of the number of persons residing in the development area and the number of families and individuals to be displaced. If occupied residences are designated for acquisition and clearance by the authority, a development plan shall include a survey of the families and individuals to be displaced, including their income and racial composition, a statistical description of the housing supply in the community, including the number of private and public units in existence or under construction, the condition of those in existence, the number of owner-occupied and renter-occupied units, the annual rate of turnover of the various types of housing and the range of rents and sale prices, an estimate of the total demand for housing in the community, and the estimated capacity of private and public housing available to displaced families and individuals. 
(13)  A plan for establishing priority for the relocation of persons displaced by the development in any new housing in the development area. 
(14)  Provision for the costs of relocating persons displaced by the development and financial assistance and reimbursement of expenses, including litigation expenses and expenses incident to the transfer of title, in accordance with the standards and provisions of the Federal Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, being Public Law 91-646, 42 U.S.C. Section 4601 et seq. 
(15)  A plan for compliance with Act No. 227 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972 (MCL 213.321 et seq., MSA 8.215(61) et seq.), as amended. 
(16)  Other material which the authority or city commission deems pertinent. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.236) 
Sec. 30-42. - Same-Public hearings. 
(a)  The city commission, before adoption of an ordinance approving a development plan or tax increment financing plan, shall hold a public hearing on the development plan. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given by publication twice in a newspaper of general circulation designated by the city, the first of which shall be not less than 20 days before the date set for the hearing. Proof of publication shall be by affidavit of the publisher, secured and made a part of such proceedings. Notice of the hearing shall be posted in at least 20 conspicuous and public places in the downtown district not less than 20 days before the hearing. Notice shall also be mailed to all property taxpayers of record in the downtown district not less than 20 days before the hearing. The city clerk shall attest to proof of posting and mailing by affidavit made a part of such proceedings. 
(b)  Notice of the time and place of hearing on a development plan shall contain: a description of the proposed development area in relation to highways, streets, streams or otherwise; a statement that maps, plats, and a description of the development plan, including the method of relocating families and individuals who may be displaced from the area, are available for public inspection at a place designated in the notice, and that all aspects of the development plan will be open for discussion at the public hearing; and other information that the governing body deems appropriate. At the time set for hearing, the city commission shall provide an opportunity for interested persons to be heard and shall receive and consider communications in writing with reference thereto. The hearing shall provide the fullest opportunity for expression of opinion, for argument on the merits, and for introduction of documentary evidence pertinent to the development plan. The city commission shall make and preserve a record of the public hearing, including all data presented thereat. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.237) 
Sec. 30-43. - Same-Conditions for approval. 
(a)  The city commission after a public hearing on the development plan or the tax increment financing plan, or both, with notice thereof given in accordance with section 30-42, shall determine whether the development plan or tax increment financing plan constitutes a public purpose. If it determines that the development plan or tax increment financing plan constitutes a public purpose, it shall then approve or reject the plan, or approve it with modification, by ordinance based on the following considerations: 
(1)  The findings are recommendations of a development area citizens council, if a development area citizens council was formed. 
(2)  The plan meets the requirements set forth in section 30-41. 
(3)  The proposed method of financing the development is feasible and the authority has the ability to arrange the financing. 
(4)  The development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(5)  The land included within the development area to be acquired is reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of the plan and of this article in an efficient and economically satisfactory manner. 
(6)  The development plan is in reasonable accord with the master plan of the city. 
(7)  Public services, such as fire and police protection and utilities, are or will be adequate to service the project area. 
(8)  Changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections, and utilities are reasonably necessary for the project and for the city. 
(b)  Amendments to an approved development plan or tax increment plan must be submitted by the downtown development authority to the city for approval or rejection. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.238) 
Sec. 30-44. - Relocation of persons. 
    A person to be relocated under this article shall be given not less than 90 days' written notice to vacate unless modified by court order for good cause. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.239) 
Sec. 30-45. - Development area citizens council-Establishment. 
(a)  If a proposed development area has residing within it 100 or more residents, a development area citizens council shall be established at least 90 days before the public hearing on the development or tax increment financing plan. The development area citizens council shall be established by the city commission and shall consist of not less than nine members. The members of the development area citizens council shall be residents of the development area and shall be appointed by the city commission. A member of a development area citizens council shall be at least 18 years of age. 
(b)  A development area citizens council shall be representative of the development area. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.240) 
Sec. 30-46. - Same-Duties. 
    A development area citizens council established pursuant to this article shall act as an advisory body to the downtown development authority and the city commission in the adoption of the development of tax increment financing plans. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.241) 
Sec. 30-47. - Same-Consultation with authority. 
    Periodically a representative of the downtown development authority responsible for preparation of a development or tax increment financing plan within the development area shall consult with and advise the development area citizens council regarding the aspects of a development plan, including the development of new housing for relocation purposes located either inside or outside of the development area. The consultation shall begin before any final decisions by the authority and the city commission regarding a development or tax increment financing plan. The consultation shall continue throughout the preparation and implementation of the development of the tax increment financing plan. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.242) 
Sec. 30-48. - Same-Meetings. 
(a)  Meetings of the development area citizens council shall be open to the public. Notice of the time and place of the meetings shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation not less than five days before the dates set for meetings of the development area citizens council. A person present at those meetings shall have reasonable opportunity to be heard. 
(b)  A record of the meetings of a development area citizens council, including information and data presented, shall be maintained by the council. 
(c)  A development area citizens council may request of and receive from the downtown development authority information and technical assistance relevant to the preparation of the development plan for the development area. 
(d)  Failure of a development area citizens council to organize or to consult with and be advised by the authority, or failure to advise the governing body, as provided in this article, shall not preclude the adoption of a development plan by the city if the city complies with the other provisions of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.243) 
Sec. 30-49. - Same-Recommendations. 
    Within 20 days after the public hearing on a development or tax increment financing plan, the development area citizens council shall notify the city commission, in writing, of its findings and recommendations concerning a proposed development plan. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.244) 
Sec. 30-50. - Budget. 
(a)  The director of the downtown development authority shall prepare and submit for the approval of the board a budget for the operation of the authority for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be prepared in the manner and contain the information required of municipal departments. Before the budget may be adopted by the board, it shall be approved by the city commission. Funds of the city shall not be included in the budget of the authority except those funds authorized in this article or by the city commission. 
(b)  The city commission may assess a reasonable pro rata share of the funds for the cost of handling and auditing the funds against the funds of the authority, other than those committed, which cost shall be paid annually by the board pursuant to an appropriate item in its budget. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.245) 
Sec. 30-51. - Historic sites. 
(a)  A public facility, building or structure which is determined by the city to have significant historical interests shall be preserved in a manner as deemed necessary by the city in accordance with laws relative to the preservation of historical sites. 
(b)  An authority shall refer to all proposed changes to the exterior of sites listed on the state register of the historic sites and the National Register of Historic Places to the applicable historic district commission created under Act No. 169 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1970 (MCL 399.201 et seq.), as amended, or the secretary of state for review. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.246) 
Sec. 30-52. - Termination of authority. 
    A downtown development authority which has completed the purposes for which it was organized shall be dissolved by ordinance of the city commission. The property and assets of the authority remaining after the satisfaction of the obligations of the authority shall belong to the city. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.247) 
Secs. 30-53-30-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEVELOPMENT PLAN 

Sec. 30-76. - Adoption. 
(a)  Definitions. The following terms and definitions shall apply to this chapter: 
    Act 197 means the Downtown Development Authority Act, Public Act 197 of 1975, as amended. 
    Authority means the City of Buchanan Downtown Development Authority. 
(b)  City commission determination. Based on a public hearing held at a regular meeting of the city commission in the city commission chambers on the 23rd day of October, 2006, in compliance with Act 197 and the Code of Ordinances of the City of Buchanan, the city commission determined that: 
(1)  The development plan constitutes a public purpose; 
(2)  The tax increment financing plan constitutes a public purpose; 
(3)  The development and tax increment financing plans meet the requirements as set forth in section 17(2) of Act 197. 
(4)  The proposed method of financing the development is feasible, and the authority has the ability to arrange the financing, upon the approval of the city commission. 
(5)  The development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes of Act 197. 
(6)  The land included within the development area to be acquired is reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of the plan and of this act in an efficient and economically satisfactory manner. 
(7)  The development plan is in accord with the city's master plan. 
(8)  Public services are adequate to service the project area. 
(9)  Changes in streets, street levels, intersections and utilities are reasonably necessary for the project and for the city. 
(c)  Approval of plan. The development and tax increment financing plans for the City of Buchanan Downtown Development District, as recommended by the downtown development authority and presented at the public hearing on the 23rd day of October, 2006, are both approved and adopted. Each step in the implementation of the development and tax increment financing plans as adopted shall be submitted to and approved by the city commission prior to implementation. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.271; Ord. No. 2007.01/373, 1-22-07) 
Sec. 30-77. - Legal description. 
    Commencing at the corner common to sections 25, 26, 35 and 36, City of Buchanan, Berrien County, Michigan; thence south on the line common to sections 35 and 36 a distance of 117.5 feet; thence west 165 feet; thence south 42 feet; thence east 132 feet to the west line of Redbud Trail; thence south on said west line 66 feet; thence west 177 feet; thence south 132 feet; thence east 177 feet to the west line of Redbud Trail; thence south on said west line 66 feet; thence west 132 feet; thence south 66 feet to the north right-of-way line of Central Court; thence west 155.5 feet to the east line of Days Avenue; thence south on said east line 82.5 feet to the centerline of Roe Street extended; thence west on said centerline and centerline extended 437.25 feet to the centerline of Oak Street; thence north on said centerline 297 feet to the north line of Charles Court extended; thence west on said north line and north line extended 294.75 feet; thence north 46 feet; thence east 49 feet; thence north 234.25 feet to the south right-of-way line of Front Street; thence west 43 feet along the south line of Front Street; thence north 231 feet; thence east 288.75 feet to the centerline of Oak Street; thence north on said centerline approximately 220 feet to the centerline of Dewey Street; thence east on said centerline 222.75 feet to the centerline of Main Street; thence north on said centerline 280.5 feet to the centerline of Third Street; thence east on said centerline 264 feet to the east line of Short Street extended; thence south on said east line 90.75 feet; thence east 132 feet; thence south 66 feet; thence east 66 feet; thence north 132 feet to the south line of Third Street; thence east on said south line and south line extended 132 feet to the east line of Redbud Trail; thence north on said east line approximately 292 feet to a point approximately 20 feet north of the southwest corner of block 3 of the Hatch Addition to the City of Buchanan; thence east a distance of 93 feet; thence north 157 feet; thence east 6 feet; thence north along the east line and east line extended of said block 3 to the westerly line of lot 2, block 3 of said Hatch Addition; thence northwesterly on said westerly line of lot 2, block 3 to the southerly line of River Street; thence northeasterly on said southerly line to the east line of block 2 of said Hatch Addition a distance of 228.35 feet; thence southeasterly along said lot line 192.36 feet; thence south 69 41' west 58.65 feet; thence south 18 21' east 50 feet; thence south 0 22' 52? east 271.72 feet to the northern edge of the Third Street right-of-way, also being the northern edge of McCoy Creek; thence southwesterly 340.65 feet along the western right-of-way of Third Street to the southeast corner of lot 10, block 3 of the Hatch Addition to the City of Buchanan; thence south 66 feet across the Third Street right-of-way; thence southwesterly along the eastern edge of lot 1 of Assessor's Plat No. 1 to the City of Buchanan and the property line extended 295.16 feet to the south right-of-way line of Dewey Street; thence northeasterly 66 feet; thence east 105.5 feet; thence south 9 51' 30? east 349.76 feet to the northern right-of-way line of Front Street; thence easterly approximately 185 feet along the northern right-of-way line of Front Street to a point also known as the southeast corner of unplatted parcel 11-58-0025-0014-00-7 as of 8/15/06; thence south 66 feet to the south right-of-way line of Front Street; then easterly along the south right-of-way line of Front Street 606.14 feet; thence north approximately 27 feet to a point also known as the southwest corner of unplatted parcel 11-58-0025-0015-10-1 as of 8/15/06; thence east 165 feet; thence northerly 396 feet; thence westerly 165 feet; thence northerly 244.9 feet; thence westerly 47.53 feet; thence northerly 83.26 feet; thence north 18 40' west 339.9 feet; thence north 25 26' 10? west 84.18 feet; thence north 4 20' 10? west 151.08 feet to the south right-of-way line of Third Street; thence northeasterly approximately 570 feet to the westernmost point of lot 6 of Assessor's Plat No. 1 to the City of Buchanan, a point which also lies along the western right-of-way of Third Street; thence northeasterly 505.3 feet; thence northeasterly 409.2 feet to the northeastern corner of lot 6 of Assessor's Plat No. 1 to the City of Buchanan; thence south 271.6 feet; thence east 150 feet to the north and south quarter line of said section 25; thence south on said quarter line to the south quarter corner of said section 25; thence west on the section line common to said sections 25 and 36 a distance of 77.8 feet; thence southerly approximately 329.5 feet; thence west 202 feet; thence southerly approximately 30 feet; thence west approximately 600 feet; thence northwesterly approximately 140 feet; thence westerly 298.85 feet to the centerline of liberty street; thence north on said centerline 126 feet; thence west 274.5 feet; thence south 162.9 feet; thence northwesterly approximately 419 feet along a line parallel with the centerline of Rynearson Street; thence south 4 15' west 174 feet to the centerline of Rynearson Street; thence northwesterly on said centerline approximately 745 feet to the line common to sections 35 and 36; thence north 20 feet along said common line to the point of beginning. 
    Except parts of blocks A and D of Central Addition to the City of Buchanan commencing 399.9 feet west and 33 feet south of the northeast corner of section 35, township 7 south, range 18 west; thence south 230.25 feet; thence north 89 45' west 127.9 feet; thence north 0 12' 30? east 113.04 feet; thence north 69 57' east 4.08 feet; thence north 0 21' east 15.23 feet; thence east 29.5 feet; thence north 0 21' east 18.94 feet; thence east 1 foot, thence north 0 05' on building wall 81.06 feet to south line of Front Street; thence east 94.27 feet to the point of beginning being a part of lots 1, 2, 3, 7 and 8 block A and part of lots 1 through 6 of block D of said plat. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.275; Ord. No. 2007.01/374, 1-22-07) 
Chapter 34 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Election laws, MCL 168.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Precincts established. 
    The city consisting of one ward shall for the purpose of voting in all elections henceforth held in the city, be divided in the following numbered and described voting precincts: 
(1)  Precinct No. 1. All that part of the city bounded on the north, west and east by the limits of the city, and on the south by the centerline of Front Street. 
(2)  Precinct No. 2. All that part of the city bounded on the south, west and east by the limits of the city, and on the north by the centerline of Front Street. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.101; Ord. No. 333,  1, 11-22-93) 
Secs. 34-2-34-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EVEN-YEAR ELECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 2008.04/376, adopted April 14, 2008, retitled Art. II, Odd-Year Elections, to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 34-26. - Statutory authority. 
    This article is enacted pursuant to the various provisions of Act No. 239 of the Public Acts of Michigan, 1970 (MCL 168.644a et seq.), as amended, and the authority to so ordain therein granted. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.084; Ord. No. 2008.04/376, 4-14-08; Ord. No. 2009.02/378, 2-23-09) 
Sec. 34-27. - Date of elections established. 
    The city having at its regular meeting held January 11, 1971, and within 30 days after December 22, 1970, by resolution duly adopted and filed with the secretary of state, resolved to continue to hold its elections as required by its Charter, does now, by its action in passing this article, establish that all regular elections for local offices shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday of November of each even-numbered year notwithstanding the provision of chapter 3, section 3.3, of the Charter. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.081; Res. No. 2004.12/36, 12-28-04; Ord. No. 2008.04/376, 4-14-08; Ord. No. 2009.02/378, 2-23-09) 
Sec. 34-28. - Terms. 
    The term of office of each elective officer shall commence on and date from the Monday following the Tuesday after the first Monday in November and shall expire as of the beginning of the term of office of a successor. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.083; Ord. No. 2008.04/376, 4-14-08; Ord. No. 2009.02/378, 2-23-09) 
Sec. 34-29. - Filing of nomination petitions. 
    Notwithstanding the provision of Chapter 3, Section 3.9, of the Charter, and pursuant to the authority of the city commission and pursuant to state statute, nomination petitions shall be filed with the clerk no later than 4:00 p.m. on the fifteenth Tuesday before the November general election. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.086; Ord. No. 2008.04/376, 4-14-08; Ord. No. 2009.02/378, 2-23-09; Ord. No. 2017.12/406, 12-12-17; Ord. No. 2018.05/407, 5-29-18) 
Sec. 34-30. - Number of signatures for nomination petitions. 
    Notwithstanding the provision of chapter 3, section 3.9, of the Charter, and pursuant to the authority of the city commission and pursuant to state statute, the number of signatures of qualified and registered electors necessary for nomination petitions shall be based on the city's population as set forth in MCL 168.544(f). 
(Ord. No. 2008.04/376, 4-14-08; Ord. No. 2009.02/378, 2-23-09) 
Chapter 38 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; dangerous buildings,  14-231 et seq.; solid waste, ch. 78. 
State Law reference- Environmental protection act, MCL 691.1201 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1-38-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; offenses, ch. 58. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-26. - Enforcement; abatement of nuisances. 
    No person shall maintain a nuisance as described in section 38-28. Any person may report a nuisance to the police or the code enforcement officer, whose duty it shall be to investigate the facts, and if in his/her opinion a nuisance is being maintained the chief of police or code enforcement officer shall serve a written notice upon the person responsible for maintaining such nuisance and if the nuisance is not abated within the required time, the chief of police or code enforcement officer shall make a complaint before a judge or magistrate. After the service of the notice and before the date specified for the abatement of the alleged nuisance, the party who was served with the notice may appeal to the city commission and shall be allowed a hearing as to whether or not the act complained of constitutes a nuisance and its decision shall be final and in case it decides that a nuisance is being maintained, the chief of police or code enforcement officer shall proceed with his complaint and warrant. The notice shall state that the responsible party must abate the alleged nuisance within the time limit set forth in the notice, which shall not be less than two days nor more than ten days from the date of the service of the notice. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is: 
(1)  Delivered personally; 
(2)  Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known address; or 
(3)  If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.182; Ord. No. 2016.01/399, 1-11-16) 
Sec. 38-27. - Penalty. 
    Any person who is found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.184) 
Sec. 38-28. - Creating or maintaining prohibited. 
    Nuisances are not to be created or maintained. No person, owner or occupant having control or management of any dwelling or building, structure, excavation, business pursuit, matter or thing shall allow any nuisance to be created or to exist on the premises over which such person is the owner or exercises control or management; nor shall any person occupying any public or private street, alleyway or any premises whatever, or having control or management thereof, within the limits of the city, create or maintain a nuisance thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.131) 
Sec. 38-29. - Noise-producing devices. 
(1)  The operating or maintaining of noisemaking, noise-amplifying or noise-producing instruments or devices by which the peace or good order of the neighborhood is disturbed is hereby declared a nuisance. No person by himself or for another shall operate or maintain any radio, phonograph, player piano, calliope or other noisemaking, noise-amplifying or noise-producing instrument or device in any public or private place in any manner by which the peace and good order of the neighborhood are disturbed; or persons occupying property in the neighborhood are disturbed or annoyed. 
(2)  Excessive noise from electronically amplified sound systems in or on motor vehicles. No person operating or in control of a parked or moving motor vehicle (including motorcycles and mopeds) shall operate or permit the operation of an electronically-amplified sound system in or about the vehicle so as to produce sound that is clearly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the vehicle between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., or clearly audible at a distance of 25 feet from the vehicle between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except as follows: 
(a)  Any police vehicle, ambulance, fire engine or emergency vehicle while engaged in emergency or necessary public activities; or 
(b)  Sound made to alert persons to the existence of an emergency, danger, or attempted crime, or for warning purposes authorized by law. 
(3)  A person who violates this section 38-29 shall be punished as provided in section 1-15, General Penalty, of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.132; Ord. No. 2006.08/372, 8-14-06) 
Sec. 38-30. - Barking dogs. 
    No person shall permit any dog to continue any loud and unnecessary barking which annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of the neighborhood, nor shall any person keep any animal which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. The making or causing of such disturbances is declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.133) 
Sec. 38-31. - Smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes and gases. 
    No person shall permit or cause the escape of such quantities of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes and gases in such place or manner as to be detrimental to the public or to endanger the health, comfort and safety of any person or of the public, or in such manner as to cause or have a tendency to cause injury or damage to property or business. The escape of such matter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.134) 
Sec. 38-32. - Lights. 
    No person shall use or maintain any lighting facilities connected with any use of land, or operation of any place of business or factory, so as to reflect light upon any residential use adjacent to such lighting facilities. The use of lights in this manner is declared a public nuisance. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.135) 
Sec. 38-33. - Unsightly, offensive accumulations. 
    The city ordains for the purpose of this article that a nuisance shall be described as any accumulation of motor vehicles or parts thereof, paper, lumber, ashes, manure, hay and fodder or any other material that is kept or stored in any building, vacant lot, or any other property in the city that is unsightly or is offensive to the owner or occupants of any adjoining or adjacent property. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.181) 
Secs. 38-34-38-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LITTER 

Sec. 38-46. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Litter means garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined in this section and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as prohibited in this division, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
    Refuse means all decaying and nondecaying solid wastes including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, junk and solid market and industrial wastes. 
    Rubbish means nondecaying solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.054-35.056; Ord. No. 317, 7-8-91) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 38-47. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. Accumulating or permitting the accumulation of litter on private premises in violation of section 38-53 is hereby declared to constitute a nuisance per se. Upon application to any court of competent jurisdiction, the court may order the nuisance abated and/or the violation restrained and enjoined. The enforcement of this division by abatement of any nuisance by the enforcing officer or by application to any court of competent jurisdiction for abatement by judicial decree or writ shall not preclude enforcement of this division by complaint for violation of this division and the imposition of fine or imprisonment as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.101) 
Sec. 38-48. - Littering prohibited. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street sidewalk or other public places within the city except in public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection, or in official city dumps. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.071) 
Sec. 38-49. - Proper use of waste receptacles. 
    Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.072) 
Sec. 38-50. - Sweeping litter into gutters, streets, other public places. 
    No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.073) 
Sec. 38-51. - Merchants' duty to keep sidewalks clean. 
    No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.074) 
Sec. 38-52. - Private premises; private receptacles. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter on any private premises within the city, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of occupied private premises may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.081) 
Sec. 38-53. - Owner to maintain premises free of litter. 
    The owner or person in control of any private premises shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.082) 
Sec. 38-54. - Enforcement; notice to abate; method of service. 
    The chief of police or code enforcement officer and their agents are hereby charged with the enforcement of this division. No person being the owner or person in charge of or occupant of any private premises shall accumulate or permit the accumulation of any litter on the private premises owned, controlled or occupied by him in a manner prohibited by the provisions of this division. When any litter shall be accumulated or permitted to accumulate on any private premises in a manner prohibited by this division, the enforcing officer shall notify the owner, person in control or occupant of such private premises to remove the litter and clear the private premises within a time limited in the notice, such not to be less than two days nor more than ten days from the time the notice is served. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is: 
(1)  Sent by certified or first-class mail, addressed to the last known address; or 
(2)  If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.092-35.094; Ord. No. 317, 7-8-91; Ord. No. 2016.01/399, 1-11-16) 
Sec. 38-55. - Failure of owner to abate; abatement by city; recovery of costs. 
    If the owner, person in charge or occupant of any premises notified to abate a nuisance consisting of the accumulation of litter on any private premises shall fail to abate the same within the time limited in the notice therefor, the chief of police or code enforcement officer and their agents are hereby authorized to enter upon such private premises and abate the nuisance by removing the litter and clearing the private premises. The cost of abating such nuisance plus an additional 15 percent for overhead and other expenses shall constitute a lien against the private premises and shall be charged to the occupant or owner thereof or to the owner of unoccupied premises, as the case may be. If not paid within 60 days after the bill for such charges is rendered such charges may be collected as a single lot assessment against the premises in the manner provided by law or in any other manner authorized for the collection of debts owed the city. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.094) 
Sec. 38-56. - Responsibility for violation. 
    Whenever any act is prohibited by this division, or by any amendment hereto, the prohibition shall extend to and include the causing, securing, aiding or abetting of another person to do such act. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.111) 
Secs. 38-57-38-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JUNK VEHICLES 

Sec. 38-76. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Junk vehicle means any vehicle, capable of being registered with the department of state, which is not both registered and roadworthy. 
    Private premises means any lot or parcel of land owned or occupied by any person, whether or not improved with any dwelling, house, building, or other structure, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to any dwelling, house, building or other structure erected thereon. 
    Public places means any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces and grounds. 
(Ord. No. 319,  1.2, 7-22-91) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 38-77. - Visibility to public. 
    The owner or person in control of any private premises shall at all times keep junk vehicles, on the private premises or on any public places immediately adjacent to the private premises, from being visible to the public. For purposes of this section, a junk vehicle shall be deemed not to be visible to the public only if fully enclosed within a garage, barn or pole barn. 
(Ord. No. 319,  2.1, 7-22-91) 
Sec. 38-78. - Exceptions. 
    The sole exceptions to the requirements of section 38-77 shall be: 
(1)  Licensed automobile repair businesses, which shall have the right to store junk vehicles outdoors for up to 90 days, provided such storage is in accordance with all other local ordinances or state statutes pertaining thereto. 
(2)  Licensed automobile salvage, scrap or junk yards, which shall not be governed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 319,  2.2, 7-22-91) 
Sec. 38-79. - Notice to abate. 
    The chief of police or the code enforcement officer, and their agents, are hereby charged with the enforcement of this article, and shall be referred to as the enforcement officer. When any provision of this article is violated, the enforcement officer shall notify the owner or person in control of the private premises on which the violation takes place, or the owner or person in control of the private premises immediately adjacent to the public places on which the violation takes place, to remove the junk vehicle within the time limit set forth in the notice, such time not to be less than two days nor more than ten days from the time the notice is served. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is: 
(1)  Delivered personally; 
(2)  Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known address; or 
(3)  If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. 
(Ord. No. 319,  3.1, 7-22-91; Ord. No. 2016.01/399, 1-11-16) 
Sec. 38-80. - Failure to remove. 
    If the owner or person in control of any private premises on which the violation of this article takes place, or if the owner or person in control of the private premises immediately adjacent to the public place on which the violation takes place, shall fail to remove the junk vehicle within the time limited in the above-mentioned notice, the enforcement officer is hereby authorized to enter upon such private premises and remove the junk vehicle. The cost of removing, towing and storage of the junk vehicle, plus an additional 15 percent for overhead and other expenses, shall constitute a lien against the private premises and shall be charged against the owner thereof. If not paid within 60 days after the bill for such charges is rendered, such charges may be collected in any manner provided by law or in any other manner authorized for the collection of debts owed to the city. 
(Ord. No. 319,  3.2, 7-22-91) 
Sec. 38-81. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. Each day such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. A violation of any section of this article is hereby declared to constitute a nuisance per se. Upon application to any court of competent jurisdiction, the court may order the nuisance abated and/or the violation restrained and enjoined. The enforcement of this article by removing the junk vehicle by the enforcement officer or by application to any court of competent jurisdiction for abatement by judicial decree or writ shall not preclude enforcement of this article by complaint for violation of this article and the imposition of fine or imprisonment as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 319,  4.1, 7-22-91) 
Secs. 38-82-38-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GROUNDWATER PROTECTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 355, adopted Sept. 23, 2002, deleted  38-90-38-93 in their entirety, and enacted similar provisions to read as herein set out. Former  38-90-38-93 derived from Ord. No. 341, adopted Jan. 22, 1996. 

Sec. 38-90. - Purpose and intent. 
    The City of Buchanan has determined that: 
(1)  The groundwater underlying the city is the sole source of the city's drinking water. 
(2)  Groundwater aquifers are integrally connected with, and flow into, the surface waters, lakes and streams that constitute significant public health, recreational and economic resources of the city. 
(3)  Spills and discharges of petroleum products, sewage and other hazardous substances threaten the quality of the groundwater supplies and other water related resources, posing potential public health and safety hazards and threatening economic losses. 
    Therefore, the City of Buchanan has enacted this article to: 
(1)  Preserve and maintain existing and potential groundwater supplies, aquifers, and groundwater recharge areas of the city, and protect them from adverse development or land use practices. 
(2)  Preserve and protect present and potential sources of drinking water supply for public health and safety. 
(3)  Conserve the natural resources of the city. 
(4)  Protect the financial investment of the city in its drinking water supply system and to meet state requirements for wellhead protection. 
(5)  Assure that state regulations that help protect groundwater are implemented consistently when new or expanded development proposals are reviewed. 
(Ord. No. 355, 9-23-02) 
Sec. 38-91. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aquifer: A geologic formation, group of formations or part of formation capable of storing and yielding a significant amount of groundwater to wells or springs. 
    Best management practices: Measures, either managerial or structural, to prevent or reduce pollution inputs to soil, surface water or groundwater. 
    Development: The carrying out of any construction, reconstruction, alteration of surface or structure or change of land use or intensity of use. 
    Environmental contamination: The release of a hazardous substance, or the potential release of a discarded hazardous substance, in a quantity which is or may become injurious to the environment, or to the public health, safety or welfare. 
    Facility: Any building, structure or installation from which there may be a discharge of pollutants. 
    Hazardous substance: A chemical or other material, which is or may become injurious to the public health, safety or welfare, or to be environment. The term "hazardous substance" includes, but is not limited to, hazardous substances as defined in the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, Public Law 96-510, 94 Stat. 2767; "hazardous waste" as defined in the Hazardous Waste Management Act, Act No. 64 of the Public Acts of 1979, being MCL 299.501 to 299.551; "petroleum" as defined in the Leaking Underground Storage Tank Act, Act No. 478 of the Public Acts of 1988, being MCL 299.831 to 299.850. 
    Primary containment facility: A tank, pit, container, pipe, or vessel of first containment of a hazardous substance. 
    Secondary containment facility: A second tank, catchment pit, pipe, or vessel that limits and contains liquid or chemical leaking or leaching from a primary containment area. Containment systems shall be constructed of materials of sufficient thickness, density and composition to prevent the discharge to land, groundwater, or surface waters, of any pollutant that may emanate from said storage container or containers. 
(Ord. No. 355, 9-23-02) 
Sec. 38-92. - Scope. 
(1)  These provisions shall apply to all business and facilities, including private and public facilities, which use, store or generate hazardous substances in quantities greater than 100 kilograms per month (equal to about 25 gallons or 220 pounds), and which require site plan review under the provisions of this article. 
(2)  All applications for site plan review shall be required to meet the conditions set forth in this article in addition to those contained in the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Buchanan, including but not limited to section 15.105 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 355, 9-23-02) 
Sec. 38-93. - General provisions. 
(1)  Groundwater protection standards. 
(a)  The development and related improvements shall be designed to protect the natural environment, including lakes, ponds, streams, wetlands, flood plains and groundwater, and to ensure the absence of an impairment, pollution, and/or destruction of water, natural resources, and the public trust therein. 
(b)  Stormwater management and drainage facilities shall be designed to retain the natural retention and storage capacity of any wetland, water body, or watercourse, and shall not increase flooding, or the potential for environment contamination, on-site or off-site, and shall not result in loss of the use of property by any third party. 
(c)  General purpose floor drains shall be connected to a public sewer system, an on-site holding tank, or a system authorized through a state surface or groundwater discharge permit. 
(d)  Sites at which hazardous substances are stored, used, or generated shall be designed to prevent spills and unpermitted discharges to air, surface of the ground, groundwater, lakes, streams, rivers or wetlands. 
(e)  State and federal agency requirements for storage, spill prevention, record keeping, emergency response, transport and disposal of hazardous substances and polluting materials shall be met. No discharges to groundwater, including direct and indirect discharges, shall be allowed without applicable permits and approvals. 
(f)  In determining a conformance with the standards in this article, the city shall take into consideration the publication entitled Small Business Guide to Secondary Containment, Clinton River Watershed Council, 1991, and other applicable references. 
(g)  Bulk storage of pesticides shall be in accordance with Regulation No. 640, Commercial Pesticide Bulk Storage, of Act 171 of the Public Acts of 1976, as amended, being MCL 286.569. 
(2)  Above ground storage and use areas for hazardous substances and polluting material. 
(a)  Primary containment of hazardous substances shall be product tight. 
(b)  Secondary containment shall be sufficient to store the substance for the maximum anticipated period of time necessary for the recovery of any released substance. Products held in containers of ten gallons or less packaged for retail use shall be exempt from this item. 
(c)  Outdoor storage of hazardous substances shall be prohibited except in product-tight containers that are protected from weather, release, accidental damage and vandalism, including an allowance for the expected accumulation of precipitation. 
(d)  Out buildings, storage rooms, sheds and pole barns which are utilized as secondary containment shall not have floor drains which outlet to soil, public sewer systems, groundwater, or nearby drains or natural water bodies unless a surface or groundwater discharge permit has been obtained pursuant to applicable requirements of Act 451. 
(e)  Areas and facilities for loading and unloading of hazardous substances as well as areas where such materials are handled and stored, shall be designed and constructed to prevent unpermitted discharges to floor drains, rivers, lakes, wetland, groundwater, or soils. 
(3)  Underground storage tanks. 
(a)  Existing and new underground storage tanks shall be registered with the authorized state agency in accordance with applicable requirements of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality Storage Tank Division. 
(b)  Installation, operation, maintenance, closure, and removal of underground storage tanks shall be in accordance with applicable requirements of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality Storage Tank Division. Leak detection, corrosion protection, spill prevention and overfill protection requirements shall be met. During operation, records of monthly monitoring or inventory control must be retained and available for review by city officials for five years. 
(c)  Underground storage tanks taken out of service permanently shall be emptied and permanently closed in accordance with the requirements of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
(4)  Well abandonment. Out-of-service water wells shall be sealed and abandoned in accordance with applicable requirements of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
(5)  Groundwater removal. No person shall install a water well on, use any existing well on, or pump or otherwise use any groundwater which has been designated as contaminated by state or federal regulatory agency or any groundwater from beneath the surface of any property located in the City, which has been designated as contaminated by a state or federal regulatory agency unless such activity has been approved by the appropriate state or federal regulatory agency as part of a remediation plan. 
(6)  Site with contaminated soils and/or groundwater. 
(a)  Site plans shall take into consideration the location and extent of any contaminated soils and/or groundwater on the site, and the need to protect public health and the environment. 
(b)  Development shall not be allowed on or near contaminated areas of a site unless information from the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality is available indicating that cleanup will proceed in a timely fashion. 
(7)  Construction standards. 
(a)  The general contractor, or if none, the property owner, shall be responsible for assuring that each contractor or subcontractor evaluates each site before construction is initiated to determine if any site conditions may pose particular problems for handling any hazardous substances. For instance, handling hazardous substances in proximity to water bodies or wetlands may be improper. 
(b)  Hazardous substances stored on the construction site during the construction process shall be stored in a location and manner designed to prevent spills and unpermitted discharges to air, surface of the ground, groundwater, lakes, streams, rivers, or wetlands. Any storage container over 25 gallons, or 220 pounds, containing hazardous substances shall have secondary containment. 
(c)  If the contractor and/or owner will be storing or handling hazardous substances that require a manufacturer's material safety data sheet, the contractor and/or owner shall familiarize him/herself with the sheet, and shall be familiar with procedures required to contain and clean up any release of the hazardous substance. 
(d)  Upon completion of construction, all hazardous substances and containment systems no longer used or not needed in the operation of the facility shall be removed from the construction site by the responsible contractor and/or owner, and shall be disposed of, recycled, or reused in a proper manner as prescribed by applicable state and federal regulations. 
(8)  Maintenance. In areas where hazardous substances are handled, structural integrity of the building must be maintained to avoid inadvertent discharge of chemicals to soil and groundwater. Cracks and holes in floors, foundations and walls must be repaired in areas where chemicals are handled or stored. 
(Ord. No. 355, 9-23-02) 
Sec. 38-94. - Site plan review requirements. 
(1)  Specify location and size of interior and exterior area(s) and structure(s) to be used for on-site storage, use, locating/unloading, recycling, or disposal of hazardous materials. 
(2)  Specify location of all underground and aboveground storage tanks for such uses as fuel storage, waste oil holding tanks, hazardous materials storage, collection of contaminated storm water or wash water, and all similar uses. 
(3)  Specify location of exterior drains, dry wells, catch basins, retention/detention areas, sumps and other facilities designed to collect, store or transport storm water or waste water. The point of discharge for all drains and pipes shall be specified on the site plan. 
(4)  Specify areas on the site that the applicant has reason to believe are contaminated, together with a report of the status of site cleanup, if applicable. 
(5)  Submit hazardous materials reporting form for site plan review. 
(6)  Submit state/county environmental permits checklists. 
(Ord. No. 355, 9-23-02) 
Sec. 38-95. - Conditions for approval or denial. 
    The planning commission, upon reviewing a site plan, shall take one of the following actions: 
(1)  Approval. If the site plan meets all the Zoning Ordinance and related development requirements and standards, the planning commission shall record such approval and the chairman shall sign three copies of the site plan, filing one in the official site plan file, forwarding one to the building inspector, and returning one to the applicant. 
(2)  Disapproval. If the site plan does not meeting Zoning Ordinance and related development requirements and standards, the planning commission shall record the reasons for denial. The applicant may subsequently refile a corrected site plan under the same procedures followed for the initial submission. 
(3)  Conditional approval. Conditions on approval of the site plan may be imposed meeting the requirements specified in the City Zoning Enabling Act. Conditions must be: 
a.  Designed to protect natural resources and the health, safety and welfare and social and economic well-being of residents, neighbors, and the community as a whole. 
b.  Related to the valid exercise of the police power. 
c.  Necessary to meet the purposes of the Zoning Ordinance and related to the standards established in Zoning Ordinance for the land use or activity under consideration. 
(4)  Table. If the site plan is found to be in violation of requirements, incomplete with respect to necessary information or presenting a unique situation, the planning commission may table the site until a public hearing can e scheduled to determine specific improvement requirements the planning commission feels are necessary but the applicant is not in agreement with. 
(Ord. No. 355, 9-23-02) 
Sec. 38-96. - Appeals. 
    The city commission may grant a special permit if it finds by written decision that the proposed use: 
(1)  Meets the intent of this section as well as its specific criteria; 
(2)  Will not, during construction or thereafter, have an adverse impact on any aquifer or recharge area in the district; 
(3)  Will not adversely affect an existing or potential domestic or municipal water supply, and is consistent with existing and probably future development of surrounding areas. 
    In addition to the findings described above, the decision shall include an explanation of the reason for any variation to the requirement. 
(Ord. No. 355, 9-23-02) 
Sec. 38-97. - Exemptions and waivers. 
    The transportation of any hazardous substances shall be exempt from the provisions of this ordinance providing the transporting motor vehicle or rail is in continuous transit, or that it is transporting substances to or from a state licensed hazardous waste treatment, storage, or disposal facility. 
(Ord. No. 355, 9-23-02) 
Sec. 38-98. - Penalties and costs. 
(1)  Falsifying information. Any person/persons who is/are found to have violated an order of the city or who willfully or negligently fails/fail to comply with any provision of this article and the orders, rules and regulations and permits issued thereunder, shall be fined upon conviction not more than $500.00, plus costs. 
(2)  Violations. Any person/persons which is/are found to have violated an order of the City or who willfully or negligently fails/fail to comply with any provision of this ordinance and the orders, rules and regulations and permits issued thereunder, shall be fined upon conviction not more than $500.00, plus costs. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue to occur, shall be deeded a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporter's fees, and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person(s) found to have violated this article or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued thereunder. Any person/persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall be liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage caused by such violation. The city shall bill the person/persons for the costs incurred by the city caused by the violation. 
(Ord. No. 355, 9-23-02) 
Sec. 38-99. - Severability. 
    If any provision, paragraph, word, section or article of this Ordinance is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words, sections and articles shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 355, 9-23-02) 
Sec. 38-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 38-101. - General. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and welfare of city residents and to protect property values, quality of life, and natural systems relating to stormwater runoff control and management. The city finds it is a matter of public concern and benefit to protect water bodies and properties within the city and to reduce the future need for public expenditures relating to flooding, water quality, and stormwater system maintenance. Both the quality and quantity of stormwater runoff are a matter of public concern. 
(Ord. No. 2012.07/386, 7-23-12) 
Sec. 38-102. - Findings and objectives. 
    The city finds that stormwater regulation and management is a matter of public health, safety and welfare because: 
(1)  Water Bodies, roadways, structures, and other property within, and downstream of the city are at times subjected to flooding. 
(2)  Flooding is a danger to the lives and property of the public and is also a danger to the natural resources of the city and the region. 
(3)  Changes in land use alter the hydrologic response of watersheds, resulting in increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes, which further result in increased flooding, increased stream channel erosion, and increased sediment transport and deposition. 
(4)  Stormwater runoff produced by changes in land use contributes to Increased quantities of water-borne pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 2012.07/386, 7-23-12) 
Sec. 38-103. - Scope. 
(a)  These provisions shall apply to all construction projects for areas of new development and significant redevelopment. Prior to development, an applicant shall submit a site plan that shall evaluate and implement site-appropriate, cost-effective structural and non-structural best management practices (BMPs) that prevent or minimize the impacts on water quality. 
(b)  All applications for site plan review shall be required to meet the conditions set forth in this article, those contained in the zoning ordinance city of buchanan, and with the City of Buchanan construction requirements pertaining to stormwater sewer construction and stormwater cleaning regulations. 
(c)  The property owner shall be responsible for ensuring that each contractor or subcontractor satisfies the requirements of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2012.07/386, 7-23-12) 
Sec. 38-104. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section unless the context in which they are used specifically indicates otherwise. 
    100-year flood means that water occupation adjacent to a body of water which results from a storm event having a one percent probability of occurrence in any given year. Thus, a 50-year storm has a two percent probability, a ten-year storm a ten percent probability, etc. 
    Best management practices (BMPs) means a practice, or combination of practices and design criteria that comply with the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality's Guidebook of BMPs for Michigan Watersheds, or equivalent practices and design criteria that accomplish the purposes of this article (including, but not limited to, minimizing stormwater runoff and preventing the discharge of pollutants into stormwater) as determined by the city engineer and, when applicable, the standards of the Berrien County Drain Commissioner. 
    Detention basin means a structure or facility, natural or artificial, which stores stormwater on a temporary basis and releases it at a predetermined rate. A detention basin may drain completely after a storm event, or it may be a pond with a fixed minimum water elevation between runoff events. 
    Development means the carrying out of any construction, reconstruction. alteration of surface or structure or change of land use or intensity of use. 
    Discharge means the rate of flow or volume of water passing a given point. Expressed as cubic feet per second. 
    Disturbed area means an area of land subject to the removal of vegetative cover and/or earthmoving activities. 
    Drainage system means all facilities, areas, and structures which serve to convey, store, or receive stormwater, either on a temporary or permanent basis. 
    Drainageway means a natural or artificial facility, area, or structure which conveys or transports stormwater runoff from one location to a different location. 
    Earth change means any human activity which removes ground cover, changes the slope or contours of the land, or exposes the soil surface to the actions of wind and rain. Earth change includes, but is not limited to, any excavating, surface grading, filling, landscaping, or removal of vegetative roots. 
    Erosion means the removal of soil particles from the land by the action of water, wind, ice, or other geological agents. 
    Grading means any stripping, excavating, filling, and stockpiling of soil or any combination thereof and the land in its excavated or filled condition. 
    Infiltration means the percolation and movement of water downward into and through the soil column. The rate of this movement is expressed in inches per hour. 
    Offsite facility means any potion of a stormwater management system which is located off the development site which it serves. 
    Primary drainage system means facilities, structures, and areas which convey, store, or receive runoff from storms up to a ten-year frequency. 
    Receiving body of water means any watercourse or wetland into which surface waters are directed, either naturally or artificially. 
    Retention basin means a holding area for stormwater, either natural or constructed, which does not have a positive outlet. Water is removed from retention basins through infiltration and/or evaporation processes, and may or may not have a permanent pool of water. 
    Runoff means the portion of precipitation which does not infiltrate or percolate into the ground, but rather moves over the land, eventually reaching a body of water, wetland, or low area. 
    Secondary drainage system means facilities, structures, and areas which convey, store or receive runoff from storms up to a 100-year frequency without causing serious damage to adjacent properties. 
    Sediment means any solid particulate matter, both mineral and organic, which has been moved from the site of origin by erosion, is being transported by water, is in suspension in water, or has been deposited in a body of water, wetland or floodplain. 
    Site means any tract, lot, or parcel of land or combination of tracts, lots, or parcels, which compose an area proposed for development and/or earth change. 
    Soil erosion means the stripping of soil and weathered rock from land creating sediment for transportation by water, wind or ice, and enabling formation of new sedimentary deposits. 
    Stormwater facility means methods, structures, BMPs, areas, or related items, which are used to control, store, receive, infiltrate, or convey runoff. 
    Stormwater management plan means maps and written information which describe the way in which stormwater will be controlled, both during and after construction. 
    Stormwater runoff means the runoff and drainage of precipitation resulting from rainfall, snowmelt or other natural event or process. 
    Watercourse means any waterway or other body of water having reasonably well-defined banks, including rivers, streams, creeks and brooks, whether continually or intermittently flowing; and lakes and ponds, as shown on the official maps of the Michigan Department of Natural Resources and Berrien County Drain Commissioner. 
    Wetland means land characterized by the presence of water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, wetland vegetation and/or aquatic life. Also known as a bog, swamp, marsh, etc. (from MCL 324.30301, Part 303 of NREPA, Wetlands Protection). The Michigan Department of Environmental Quality is the authority on the presence and regulatory status of wetlands. 
(Ord. No. 2012.07/386, 7-23-12) 
Sec. 38-105. - Performance standards. 
(a)  Stormwater management areas and facilities. Stormwater management areas and facilities, whether on-site or off-site, shall be designed, constructed, and maintained to prevent flooding and protect water quality. The design of any stormwater management system shall be based upon a 25-year frequency 24-hour duration storm event. In order to be approved, all stormwater management plans must meet the following performance standards: 
(1)  Runoff. Runoff leaving the site shall be controlled to a non-erosive velocity, both during and after construction. 
(2)  Minimum Treatment volume. 
a.  A minimum treatment volume is established to provide pollutant removal (pretreatment) for prevalent precipitation events. The minimum treatment volume standard shall be either: one inch of runoff from the entire site or the calculated site runoff from the 90 percent annual non-exceedance storm, which is one inch for the city. Use of the US Geological Service (USGS) runoff curve number method is the preferred means to calculate site runoff. 
b.  A minimum treatment volume standard is not required where site conditions are such that TSS concentrations in stormwater discharges will not exceed 80 mg/1. 
(3)  Channel protection criteria. 
a.  Channel protection criteria are established to protect stream channel bed and banks from excessive flows. The channel protection criteria is to maintain post-development site runoff volume and peak flow rate at or below existing levels for all storms up to the two-year, 24-hour event. "Existing levels" means the runoff flow volume and rate for the last land use prior to the planned new development or redevelopment. 
b.  An acceptable source of rainfall data for calculating runoff volume and peak flow rate is: Rainfall Frequency Atlas of the Midwest, Huff and Angel, NOAA Midwest Climate Center and Illinois State Water Survey, 1992. Methods for estimating pre- and post-development runoff shall follow the USGS runoff curve number method. 
c.  Curve number evaluation is described in a document titled "Computing Food Discharges for Small Ungauged Watersheds," July 2003, which can be found at www.michigan.gov/deqstormwater under "Municipal Program/MS4 Permit Guidance" (go to "Stormwater Control Resources" and select "Guidance for Calculating Runoff Volume and Peak Flow Rate") . 
(4)  Riparian buffers. 
a.  A riparian buffer shall be provided for lands adjacent to streams and rivers and wetlands which are contagious to these natural features. Riparian buffers shall also be required for noncontiguous wetlands if the full extent of the wetland as a natural feature is five acres or greater. 
b.  The riparian buffer shall serve as a natural conservation area, where the principal best management practice is vegetative filtering and the conservation of trees, shrubs and herbaceous vegetation using native plantings when and where possible. The riparian buffer is a stormwater management measure to control soil loss and reduce water quality degradation caused by nutrients, animal wastes, toxics, sediment and runoff. 
c.  The riparian buffer shall begin at the edge of the stream bank of the active channel or the wetland boundary. The riparian buffer shall be composed of two distinct management zones in order to proscribe both permitted and restricted uses that provide progressive best management practices for stormwater quality protection. 
1.  Zone 1-Stream side protection. Zone 1 begins at the edge of the stream bank or wetland and extends 25 feet upgradient and perpendicular to the protected natural feature. Zone 1 shall contain undisturbed natural vegetation. Allowable uses within this zone are restricted to flood control structures, utility rights-of-way, foot paths, and road crossings where permitted. Highly restricted vegetative trimmings and removal of woody brush/trees is allowed to provide a limited view shed of the protected natural feature. 
2.  Zone 2-Outer zone. The outer zone (Zone 2) begins at the outer limit of the stream side protection zone (Zone 1) and extends 25 feet. Allowable uses within the outer zone are biking or hiking paths, approved stormwater management facilities, approved recreational facilities, and removal of mature tree cover. Shrub and herbaceous ground cover are to be protected from disturbance. 
3.  Permitted activities. The following actions are permitted within Zones 1 and 2, provided the activity is undertaken in accordance with recognized best management practices. Other regulatory restrictions may apply, such as actions that may require separate federal, state or local permit or permit-by-rule provisions. 
i.  Stream restoration projects conducted with advice and guidance of the county conservation district and DNR/DEQ officials. 
ii.  Removal of individual trees that are in danger of falling, causing damage to structures, or causing blockage of the stream. 
iii.  Timber cutting techniques approved by state agencies, under advice and guidance, for purposes of forest management due to pest infestation, disease or threat from fire. 
iv.  Riparian buffers are intended to grow into their vegetative target state naturally; however, active methods to enhance successional process, reforestation or to ensure preservation and propagation of the buffer are allowed. 
4.  Width of each zone. The width of each zone may need to be increased if steep slopes are within close proximity of the protected natural feature. Guidelines of the U.S. Geological Service may be used to determine the required equivalent length of vegetative filter capacity needed for slopes in excess of 15 percent. 
5.  Encouragement of voluntary measures. Lands adjacent to the outer edge of the outer zone (Zone 2) are hereby defined as riparian lands. Riparian property owners have a unique and critical role in protecting water quality, preserving critical natural features and accommodating wildlife whose survival depends upon water features and conservation corridors. For example, some studies suggest that riparian buffers of 150 feet may be required for certain Michigan threatened species to successfully move between larger conservation areas and maintain healthy breeding populations. Therefore, it is a policy of the city to educate, outreach and otherwise assist riparian landowners in the implantation of additional voluntary stormwater best management practices. 
(b)  Stormwater storage facilities. Stormwater storage facilities which protect water quality and prevent adverse flooding on-site and off-site shall be required for all sites of one acre or more. In order to improve the quality of stormwater runoff and reduce the discharge of sediment into wetlands, watercourses, roadways, structures and other property within, and downstream of the City of Buchanan, the following techniques (1) through (6) and standards (7) through (9) shall be used: 
(1)  Infiltration of runoff provided that soils and groundwater conditions are suitable. 
(2)  Retention basins with a fixed minimum water elevation between runoff events (e.g., wet ponds). 
(3)  Detention basins which drain completely after a storm event (e.g., dry basins) but which discharge stormwater to wetlands or constructed basins which trap sediment carried by stormwater runoff. 
(4)  Detention basins which hold stormwater for more than 24 hours before completely draining to become a dry basin (extended detention basins). 
(5)  Detention basins with a positive outlet shall be designed to hold runoff from a ten-year storm event, as a minimum. Retention basins without a positive outlet shall be designed to hold runoff from a 100-year storm event. 
(6)  The banks of detention basins shall not exceed a 1:5 slope unless a fence is constructed. 
(7)  Natural watercourses shall not be dredged, cleared of vegetation, deepened, widened, straightened, stabilized or otherwise altered without approval from the Michigan Department of Natural Resources, Michigan Department of Environmental Quality and the Berrien County Drain Commissioner. 
(8)  Discharge of runoff from commercial and industrial sites which may contain oil, grease, toxic chemicals, or other polluting materials shall be prohibited unless approval has been obtained from the Michigan Department of Natural Resources and the Berrien County Drain Commissioner. 
(9)  The use of stormwater management areas and vegetated buffer areas as open space, recreation, and conservation areas shall be encouraged. 
(c)  Pipes, conduits, ditches, drains, or other conveyance facilities. Pipes, conduits, ditches, drains, or other conveyance facilities shall not discharge directly to the following receiving waters without providing the minimum treatment volume and channel protection criteria: 
(1)  Any natural watercourses, including lakes, ponds, rivers and streams. 
(2)  Wetlands with unique or natural wildlife or habitat characteristics as defined by a professional wetlands delineation specialist, biologist or ecologist. 
(3)  Wetlands which are within a 500-foot distance of any natural lake or pond. 
(4)  Wetlands which are within a 100-foot distance of any river or stream. 
(d)  Discharges from stormwater conveyance facilities. Discharges from stormwater conveyance facilities shall be routed through swales, vegetated buffer strips, stormwater basins, hydrologically isolated wetlands, and other facilities designed to decrease runoff velocity and volume, allow for natural infiltration, allow suspended solids to settle, and remove pollutants. 
(e)  Wetlands proposed for stormwater detention. If wetlands are proposed for stormwater detention, runoff must be diffused to non-erosive velocities before it reaches the wetlands. 
(f)  Operation and maintenance. All structural and vegetative BMPs installed as a performance standard for stormwater management shall include a plan for maintaining maximum performance through long-term operation and maintenance (O&M). The plan shall include a schedule for O&M maintenance procedures to be performed by the business own/manager and recordkeeping provisions such as periodic inspections by the city's stormwater manager. 
(g)  Records retention. Inspections and other records pertaining to the O&M of best management practices for stormwater quality protection shall be maintained by the property owner and retained for a minimum of five years. A copy of O&M maintenance procedures and any other activities performed by the business own/manager impacting stormwater shall be sent to the stormwater manager each September 1. 
(h)  Plan approval. No stormwater management plan shall be approved if the City of Buchanan Planning Commission finds that the action will or is likely to pollute, impair or destroy air, water or other natural resources or the public trust therein, provided that there is a feasible and prudent alternative consistent with the reasonable requirements of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(i)  Plan changes. Any changes to the stormwater management plan shall be approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 2012.07/386, 7-23-12) 
Sec. 38-106. - Site plan review requirements. 
    Prior to any construction, an applicant shall submit for approval a site plan which shall contain Stormwater Management Plan . 
(Ord. No. 2012.07/386, 7-23-12) 
Sec. 38-107. - Conditions for approval or denial. 
(a)  Approval. If the site plan meets all the zoning ordinance and related development requirements and standards, the planning commission shall record such approval and the chairman shall sign three copies of the site plan, filing one in the official site plan file, forwarding one to the building inspector, and returning one to the applicant. 
(b)  Disapproval. If the site plan does not meet zoning ordinance and related development requirements and standards, the planning commission shall record the reasons for denial. The applicant may subsequently re-file a corrected site plan under the same procedures followed for the initial submission. 
(c)  Conditional approval. Conditions on approval of the site plan may be imposed. Conditions must be: 
(1)  Designed to protect natural resources and the health, safety and welfare and social and economic well-being of residents, neighbors, and the community as a whole. 
(2)  Related to the valid exercise of the police power. 
(3)  Necessary to meet the purposes of the zoning ordinance and related to the standards established in zoning ordinance for the land use or activity under consideration. 
(d)  Table. If the site plan is found to be in violation of requirements, incomplete with respect to necessary information, or presenting a unique situation, the planning commission may table the site plan until a public hearing can be scheduled to determine specific improvement requirements the planning commission feels are necessary but the applicant is not in agreement with. 
(Ord. No. 2012.07/386, 7-23-12) 
Sec. 38-108. - Appeals. 
    Appeals may be taken to the city commission. The city commission may grant a special permit if it finds by written decision that the proposed use: 
(1)  Meets the intent of this article as well as its specific criteria; 
(2)  Will not, during construction or thereafter, have an adverse impact on water quality; 
(3)  Will not adversely affect an existing or potential watershed area and is consistent with existing and probably future development of surrounding areas. 
    In addition to the findings described above, the decision shall include an explanation of the reason or any variation to the requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2012.07/386, 7-23-12) 
Sec. 38-109. - Inspection. 
    Representatives of the city, State of Michigan DNR or DEQ, and Berrien County Drain Commission shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a stormwater facility for inspections. On request, the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the drainage system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of a violation and may result in the revocation of any site plan approvals or permits. 
(Ord. No. 2012.07/386, 7-23-12) 
Sec. 38-110. - Penalties and costs. 
(a)  General penalty. The penalties contained in section 1-15 shall apply. In addition the following shall apply. 
(b)  Violations. 
(1)  Any person/persons which is/are found to have violated an order of the city or who willfully or negligently fails/fail to comply with any provision of this article and the orders, rules and regulations and permits issued thereunder, shall be fined upon conviction not more than $500.00, plus costs. 
(2)  Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue to occur shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporter's fees, and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person(s) found to have violated this article or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued thereunder. 
(3)  Any person/persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall be liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage caused by such violation. the city shall bill the person/persons for the costs incurred by the city caused by the violation. 
(4)  The penalty for violation of this article, in addition to the general Code penalty, shall include revocation of site plan approval and revocation of any existing building permits for the site. The city may refuse any further permit applications until such time as the site has been brought into compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 2012.07/386, 7-23-12) 
Sec. 38-111. - Conflict. 
    All ordinances or parts thereof in conflict herewith are hereby repealed and shall be of no further force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2012.07/386, 7-23-12) 
Sec. 38-112. - Severability. 
    Any and all sections, terms, provisions and/or clauses herein shall be deemed independent and severable. Should any court of competent jurisdiction hold any section, term, provision or clause void and/or invalid, all remaining sections, terms, provisions and/or clauses not held void and/or invalid shall continue in force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2012.07/386, 7-23-12) 
Chapter 42 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; civil emergencies, ch. 26; nuisances,  38-26 et seq.; subdivisions, ch. 90. 
State Law reference- State fire prevention act, MCL 29.1 et seq., MSA 4.559(1) et seq.; crimes related to explosives and bombs, MCL 750.200 et seq., MSA 28.397 et seq.; crimes related to fires, MCL 750.240 et seq., MSA 28.437 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before any court of competent jurisdiction, be punished by a fine as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  40.006) 
Sec. 42-2. - Fire hazards prohibited. 
    No person shall maintain or allow a fire hazard as described in Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1941 (MCL 29.1 et seq.), as amended, in or upon any property in the corporate limits of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  40.001) 
Sec. 42-3. - Fire inspector-Duties. 
    The city commission shall designate some member of its fire department as an inspector, whose duty it shall be to inspect buildings or property as set forth in section 42-2, either upon complaint or at his own instance, and he shall report his findings after making any such inspection to the city commission at least once each month and in case any of his inspections reveal that there is a fire hazard upon the premises inspected, he shall also make a report to the department of state police. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  40.002) 
Sec. 42-4. - Same-Authority. 
    The fire inspector named by the city commission shall be properly identified and shall have full authority to make an inspection of any premises with the city; and all owners or occupants of premises shall not hinder in any way the inspection or officer, so long as his demands for entry to or on the premises are reasonable. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  40.003) 
Sec. 42-5. - Notice to abate fire hazard. 
    At any time the city commission receives a report from the fire inspector that a fire hazard as described in section 42-2 is being maintained within the city, a notice thereof shall be served upon the owner or occupants thereof to abate the fire hazard within such reasonable time as the commission or inspector shall determine and in case the fire hazard is not abated within the time, the owner or occupants shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable in accordance with section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  40.004) 
Sec. 42-6. - Fire hazards deemed nuisance. 
    Any person who shall create or maintain a fire hazard as described in section 42-2 shall also be deemed to be guilty of maintaining a nuisance and may be further dealt with accordingly. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  40.005) 
Secs. 42-7-42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPEN BURNING 

Sec. 42-31. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  40.124) 
Sec. 42-32. - Prohibited except by special permit and in approved incinerators. 
(a)  No person shall dispose of any leaves, rubbish, trash, wood, garbage, food containers, or other combustible material whatever in any street, alley, private place, or public place by burning within the city except by special permit from the city and except in an approved incinerator. 
(b)  No property owner shall allow the burning of any leaves, rubbish, trash, wood, garbage, food containers, or other combustible material whatever in any street, alley, private place, or public place by burning within the city except by special permit from the city and except in an approved incinerator. 
(c)  A property owner shall be jointly and severally liable for the burning of any leaves, rubbish, trash, wood, garbage, food containers, or other combustible whatever on property owned by him. 
(d)  No incinerator shall be installed within or on any premises without a permit and approval of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  40.121; Ord. No. 2005.05/366, 5-9-05) 
Sec. 42-33. - Exceptions. 
    This article is not intended to prohibit burning for the following purposes: the preparation of food; outdoor camp fires in designated areas and parks; outdoor fireplace structures or containers, which structures or containers are designed and constructed and/or manufactured for the sole purpose of functioning as an outdoor fireplace, burning wood or charcoal fuel, and not designed and constructed and/or manufactured for primary purpose of disposal, by burning, of leaves, rubbish, trash, wood, garbage, food containers or other combustible material. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  40.122) 
Chapter 46 - HUMAN RELATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1-46-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISCRIMINATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 46-26-46-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FAIR AND OPEN HOUSING 

Sec. 46-36. - Statement of fact and policy. 
    It is hereby found that the population of the city consists of people of many races, colors, religions, ancestries and national origins, and that discrimination in housing violates the public policy of the city and that such discrimination in housing is injurious to the public health, safety and general welfare of the city and its inhabitants. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.101) 
Sec. 46-37. - Penalty. 
    Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this division shall be punished as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.104) 
Sec. 46-38. - Discrimination prohibited. 
    No owner of real property, lessee, sublessee, real estate broker or salesman, lender, financial institution, builder, advertiser, or agent of any of the foregoing shall discriminate against any other person because of the religion, race, color, sex, blindness or national origin of such other person or because of the religion, race, color, sex, blindness or national origin of the friends or associates of such other person, in regard to the sale or rental of, or dealings concerning, real property located in the city. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.102) 
Sec. 46-39. - Exemption. 
(a)  The provisions of this division shall not apply to the rental of a room or rooms to three or less persons in a single dwelling unit, the remainder of which dwelling unit is occupied by the owner or members of his immediate family, or by a lessee of the entire dwelling unit or members of his immediate family. 
(b)  Nothing in this division shall require an owner to offer property to the public at large before selling or renting it, nor shall this division be deemed to prohibit owners from giving preference to prospective tenants or buyers for any reason other than religion, race, color, sex, blindness or national origin. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.103) 
Chapter 50 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Civil emergencies, ch. 26. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1-50-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMPLOYMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 50-26. - Minimum standards adopted. 
    The minimum employment standards for law enforcement officers as established and adopted by the Michigan Law Enforcement Officers Training Council in accordance with Act No. 203 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1965 (MCL 28.601 et seq., MSA 4.450(1) et seq.), as amended, are hereby adopted as follows: 
(1)  Be a citizen of the United States. 
(2)  Minimum age of 21 years. 
(3)  Graduation from high school or equivalent. Equivalent defined as having attained a passing score on the general education development (GED) test indicating high school graduation level. 
(4)  Fingerprinting of applicants with a search of local, state and national fingerprint files to disclose any criminal record. 
(5)  The applicant shall not have been convicted of a felony offense. 
(6)  Good moral character as determined by a favorable report following a comprehensive background investigation covering school and employment records, home environment, personal traits and integrity. Consideration will be given to any and all law violations, including traffic and conservation law convictions as indicating a lack of good character. 
(7)  Acceptable physical, emotional and mental fitness as established by a licensed physician following examination to determine the applicant is free from any physical, emotional or mental condition which might adversely affect his performance of duty as a police officer. 
(8)  The trainee shall possess normal hearing and normal color vision. He shall be free from any impediments of the senses. He must possess normal visual functions and visual acuity in each eye correctable to 20/20. The trainee must be physically sound; well developed physically, with height and weight in relation to each other and to age as indicated by accepted medical standards and in possession of his extremities. He shall be free from any physical defects, chronic diseases, organic diseases, organic or functional conditions, or mental instabilities which may tend to impair efficient performance of duty or which might endanger the lives of others or himself if he lacks these qualifications. 
(9)  A declaration of the applicant's medical history shall become a part of the background investigation. The information shall be available to the examining physician. 
(10)  An oral interview shall be held by the hiring authority or his representative, to determine the applicant's acceptability for a police officer position and to assess appearance, background and ability to communicate. 
(11)  Recruitment and employment practices and standards shall be in compliance with existing state statutes governing this activity. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.121) 
Secs. 50-27-50-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 

Sec. 50-46. - Police custody. 
    The police department shall be charged with the custody of such unclaimed personal property as may come into its possession and shall dispose of such personal property except impounded motor vehicles and firearms as provided in this article. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.651) 
Sec. 50-47. - Disposition. 
    All personal property, unclaimed by the owner for a period of 30 days or more, in possession of the police department may be sold at public sale upon five days' written notice of the time and place of the sale which shall have included therein a description of the property to be sold, which notice shall be posted in at least three places, one of which shall be at the city hall; provided, perishable produce may be sold within 12 hours if unclaimed, and animals after 48 hours, upon notice to the city clerk of the proposed sale and terms thereof. If the unclaimed property consists of currency which has been surrendered to the police department by the finder thereof, the currency shall be retained by the police department for a period of three months, from and after the date the same has been deposited with the police department by the finder thereof. If the amount deposited is $20.00 or less, and at the expiration of the three-month period if the currency has not been claimed by the rightful owner thereof the same shall be delivered and turned over to the finder, by the police chief. If the amount found and deposited with the police department shall exceed $20.00, then the currency shall be retained by the police department for a period of six months and if not claimed by the rightful owner thereof shall at the expiration of six months be turned over to the finder thereof, by the police department. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.652) 
Sec. 50-48. - Records. 
    The police department shall keep a book permanently bound, in which shall be kept a list of all unclaimed personal property, the date taken into possession by the police department and the final disposition thereof, and if sold, the amount received which shall be certified to by the chief of police. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.653) 
Sec. 50-49. - Sale. 
(a)  If any article is not claimed and reasonable charges for storage paid within the period allotted in this article, the chief of police may proceed to sell the articles upon the same provisions as are applicable to notice and procedure for execution sales in the district court for the county. If no bids are received for the purchase of any property, it shall be conclusively presumed that the property is of no value and it shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of. The proceeds of the sale shall be applied as provided by law; the first of the proceeds shall be used to reimburse the police department for the expenses of the sale and charges for storage and other services rendered by the police department; the excess, if any, over such items shall be paid to the owner or person entitled to possession, upon proof thereof, and in the absence of such proof, such excess shall be credited to the police department fund. 
(b)  Each sale shall be under the direction of the chief of police and the city clerk shall act as clerk at such sale. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.654) 
Chapter 54 - LIBRARY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Establishment and maintenance of libraries, MCL 397.201 et seq., MSA 15.1661 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Name of institution. 
    The collection of books and library furnishings owned by the city and used by it to furnish a library service to its citizens shall be known as the Buchanan Public Library. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.302) 
Secs. 54-2-54-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LIBRARY BOARD 

Sec. 54-26. - Appointment. 
    The mayor shall, with the consent of the city commission, appoint a library board consisting of five members for the term of one, two, three, four and five years respectively. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.311) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 397.202, MSA 15.1662. 
Sec. 54-27. - Terms of office. 
    No member of the library board shall be appointed to more than a five-year term in office. Such members may be reappointed for successive terms of five years. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.312) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 397.203, MSA 15.1633. 
Sec. 54-28. - Compensation of members. 
    Members of the library board shall serve without pay. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.313) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 397.204, MSA 15.1664. 
Sec. 54-29. - Administration of tax monies. 
    The library board shall have full power to receive, control and administer money derived from appropriations of tax levies by the city, or by townships served by the library, or from state and/or federal grants. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.321) 
Sec. 54-30. - Administration of other funds. 
    The library board shall have full power to receive, control and administer all funds or other assets derived from gifts or bequests, and to administer funds in trust for the benefit of the public library. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.323) 
Sec. 54-31. - Control of premises. 
    The library board shall have full power to control the premises which the public library occupies, whether by title or rental. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.322) 
Sec. 54-32. - Purchase of sites; implementation of plans for library building. 
    The library board shall have within its jurisdiction the purchase of sites for a library building and to determine and to carry out plans for the erection of such building whenever funds for such construction may be available with the provision that arrangements for such purchase and such construction shall be subject to the review of the city commission. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.324) 
Sec. 54-33. - Form of organization. 
    The library board shall have power to determine the form of its internal organization and to elect such officers as it determines to be necessary, and to define the powers and duties of such officers. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.325) 
Sec. 54-34. - Bylaws. 
    The library board shall have the power to adopt bylaws for the conduct of its own business. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.326) 
Sec. 54-35. - Appointment of librarian; making of rules and regulations. 
    The library board shall have power to appoint the librarian to have general control of the library staff, and to make rules and regulations for the use of the library. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.327) 
Sec. 54-36. - Borrowing from, lending to other libraries. 
    The library board shall have power to borrow books from and lend books to libraries when such cooperation shall, in its judgment, be in the best interest of the public library. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.328) 
Sec. 54-37. - Annual report. 
    The library board shall be responsible for rendering adequate annual reports to the city commission, showing all funds received from all sources, with an adequately detailed report of its expenditures, such report including a subsidiary report by the librarian on the work done by the library during such year. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.329) 
Sec. 54-38. - Administration of library. 
    The library board shall have the power to perform all other acts requisite to the proper administration of the library. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.330) 
Sec. 54-39. - Review by city commission. 
    The city commission reserves the right to review and to confirm or reject any acts or appointments by the library board when it shall deem it necessary for the best interest of the citizens of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.331) 
Chapter 58 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Nuisances,  38-26 et seq.; parks and recreation, ch. 62; traffic and vehicles, ch. 98. 
State Law reference- Crimes, MSA Title 28. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  Whenever any words and phrases as used in this chapter are not defined, but are defined in the state penal code, any such definition in the state penal code shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used in this chapter. 
(b)  The term "public place" or "place" as used in this chapter shall mean any alley, street, privately owned area to which the public is invited, building, house, hall, room or other place to which the public or any number of persons of the public has access, or to which the public is customarily invited or admitted. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.011) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Secs. 58-2-58-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AFFECTING GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS 

Sec. 58-26. - Hindering city officers and employees. 
    No person shall hinder, resist or oppose any city officer or employee, including police officers and firefighters, in the performance of their duties. 
State Law reference- Obstruction of police officer, MCL 750.479, MSA 28.747. 
Sec. 58-27. - Resisting officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to resist any police officer or other law enforcement agent while in the discharge or apparent discharge of his duty, or in any way interfere with or hinder him in the discharge of his duty. 
State Law reference- Resisting officer in discharge of duty, MCL 750.479, MSA 28.747. 
Sec. 58-28. - Interference with fire department. 
    No person shall knowingly or willfully hinder, obstruct or interfere with any firefighter in the performance of his duties, nor shall any person, while in the vicinity of any fire, willfully disobey any reasonable order, rule or regulation of the officer or officers commanding the fire department at such fire. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.083) 
Sec. 58-29. - False alarm of fire. 
    Any person who shall knowingly and willfully commit any one or more of the following actions shall be guilty of a misdemeanor: 
(1)  Raise a false alarm of fire at any gathering or in any public place. 
(2)  Ring any bell or operate any mechanical apparatus, electrical apparatus or combination thereof, for the purpose of creating a false alarm of fire. 
(3)  Raise a false alarm of fire orally, by telephone or in person. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.240, MSA 28.437. 
Sec. 58-30. - False report to police department. 
    No person shall intentionally make, or aid and abet in making, with the intent to deceive, any false, fictitious or deceptive alarm or call for police aid or protection, or make any false, or fictitious or deceptive report when requesting such aid or protection. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.073) 
Sec. 58-31. - Impersonation of officer. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely assume or pretend to be an employee of the city, an employee of the county, an employee of the state, federal government or an employee of any public utility for the purpose of gaining entry into any home or business located in the city. 
(b)  No person, not a member of a police department or force or a legally elected public official, or commissioned by a proper legal authority, shall represent himself or herself to be a police officer, member of a law enforcement agency, sheriff, deputy sheriff or constable, nor shall any person not a member of the police department, for the purpose of such false representation, wear a badge, symbol, uniform or part thereof similar to that of a police officer. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.074) 
Sec. 58-32. - Aiding escape of prisoner. 
    No person shall convey or attempt to convey anything to effect or aid in the escape of any prisoner charged with or convicted of a misdemeanor, and held in jail or other lawful custody. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.075) 
Sec. 58-33. - Damage to fire apparatus. 
    No person shall willfully in any manner injure, deface or destroy any hose, cart, engine, truck or fire apparatus or part thereof, belonging to the city or in use therein, nor shall any person willfully drive over or otherwise willfully or intentionally injure the fire hose of this city or any other hose in use therein. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.082) 
Secs. 58-34-58-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 

Sec. 58-56. - Improper use of lights, flares. 
    No person shall use any light or flare on any automobile or otherwise, in such manner to cause annoyance to others or be likely to endanger life or property or to interfere with traffic. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.181(P)) 
Sec. 58-57. - Jostling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to be found jostling or roughly crowding people unnecessarily in a public place. 
State Law reference- Such person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(l), MSA 28.364(1)(l). 
Sec. 58-58. - Scattering itching or sneezing powder, stench bombs, similar articles. 
    No person shall distribute, spread, scatter or set free in any school, theater, hall or other public place or place of public assemblage any one or more of the articles known as itching powders, sneezing powders, stench bombs, or any other article of similar nature for the purpose of producing itching, sneezing by irritation or nausea by annoying smells or odors. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.030) 
Sec. 58-59. - Harassing, threatening or obscene telephone calls. 
    No person shall telephone any other person repeatedly or cause any person to be telephoned repeatedly for the sole purpose of harassing or molesting such other person or his family whether or not conversation ensues, or use any threatening, vulgar, indecent, obscene, immoral or insulting language over any telephone. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.029) 
Sec. 58-60. - Reserved. 
Sec. 58-61. - Malicious annoyance by writing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly send or deliver, or to make, for the purpose of being delivered, or sent, to part with the possession of any letter, postal card or writing containing any obscene language with or without a name subscribed thereto, or signed with a fictitious name, or with any letter, mark or other designation with the intent thereby to cause annoyance to any person within the city or with a view or intent to extort or gain any money or property of any description belonging to another. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.028) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.390, MSA 28.622. 
Sec. 58-62. - Assault and battery. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to attempt or offer, with force and violence, to do a corporal hurt to another, or assault and/or batter any other person or persons. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.81, MSA 28.276. 
Sec. 58-63. - Window peeping. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to look, peer, or peep into, or be found loitering around or within view of any window not on his own property, with the intent of looking through such window in such a manner as would be likely to interfere with the occupant's reasonable expectation of privacy without the occupant's express or implied consent. 
State Law reference- Such person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(c), MSA 28.364(1)(c). 
Sec. 58-64. - Fortunetelling. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to pretend, for money or gain, to tell fortunes, or to predict future events by cards, tokens, trances, the inspection of the hands or the conformation of the skull of any person, by mind-reading, or by consulting the movements of the heavenly bodies or by other means. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to pretend, by or through means of palmistry, phrenology, clairvoyancy, astrology or fortunetelling by cards or other devices for money or gain, to enable anyone to get or recover lost or stolen property, or to give success in business, enterprise, speculation or games of chance, or to make a person dispose of property, business or valuable thing in favor of another. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to publish by card, circular, sign, newspaper or any other means whatsoever that he shall or will predict future events, and any person whose fortune may have been told, as aforesaid, shall be a competent witness against all persons charged with any violation of the preceding subsections of this section. 
Sec. 58-65. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015.03/390,  1, adopted March 9, 2015, repealed  58-65, which pertained to begging and derived from original source material. 
Secs. 58-66-58-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 

Sec. 58-86. - Trespass upon lands or premises of another. 
    No person shall willfully enter upon the land or premises of another without lawful authority, after having been forbidden to do so by the owner or occupant, agent or servant of the owner or occupant, nor shall any person remain upon land or premises of another after having been notified to depart therefrom by the owner or occupant, the agent or servant of either, without lawful authority. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.191) 
Sec. 58-87. - Posting of bills. 
    No person shall paint, print, write, paste, stencil, staple, nail or in any manner whatsoever post any bill, sign, poster, notice, advertisement or any communication upon any pole, tree, wall, fence, building, or other structure standing on public property nor shall any person so do to any private property without consent of the owner. This section shall not apply to the posting of a handbill or notice of public sale by a sheriff, administrator, executor, or any notice required by law to be posted. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.054) 
Sec. 58-88. - Tampering with or removing public property. 
    No person shall intentionally tamper with, injure, destroy, steal or remove any lamp, lantern, lamppost, pole, cable, electric line, tool, hose, pipe, conduit, road material, earth, stone or any other property or material owned or under the supervision or control of any unit or agency of government, nor shall any person without being duly authorized, have in his control or possession any equipment, tools, implements or other property belonging to any unit or agency of government. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.053) 
Sec. 58-89. - Malicious destruction of public property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to maliciously destroy, damage, injure, mar or deface any building, monument, sign or structure or fence, tree, shrub, plant, park or public property of any kind which is owned, controlled, or managed by the state, county, city, any school district within the city, or by any other unit or agency of government whose operating budget is raised in whole or in part by public taxation, or to commit any act of vandalism on or in any such property. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties in this chapter any person convicted of an act of vandalism shall reimburse the city or public agency for up to three times the amount of damages as determined by the court. 
Sec. 58-90. - Malicious injury to building or property of another. 
    No person shall maliciously destroy or injure any house or structure of another or the appurtenances thereof, where the damage shall be $100.00 or less, nor shall any person maliciously break down, injure, mar or deface any fence or gate belonging to or enclosing lands not his own; nor shall any person wrongfully take and carry away from any place any fruit tree, ornamental tree, shade tree, ornamental shrub or any plant, vine, bush or vegetable there growing, standing or being, with intent to deprive the owner thereof, or without right and with wrongful intent to detach from the ground or injure any fruit tree, ornamental tree, shade tree, ornamental shrub or any plant, vine, bush, vegetable or garden produce. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.051) 
Secs. 58-91-58-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 

Sec. 58-111. - Advertising by loud or unusual noise. 
    No person shall operate or cause to be operated any whistle, bell, rattle, gong, clapper, hammer, drum, horn, player piano, calliope, radio, phonograph or other sound-producing or sound-amplifying instrument, or use loud or boisterous language, or any unusual noise whatever to advertise goods, wares, or merchandise for sale, either at auction or in any other manner, or by any such means advertise any show, theater, exhibition or entertainment, whereby the public peace and quiet are disturbed. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.027) 
Sec. 58-112. - Fighting, quarreling. 
    No person shall be engaged in or aid or abet in any fight, quarrel or disturbance in the city. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.024) 
Sec. 58-113. - Interference with gatherings, meetings. 
    No person shall disrupt or aid in disrupting in any manner any service of worship or any other assemblage for any other purpose. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.022) 
Sec. 58-114. - Breach of peace. 
    Any person who shall make or assist in making any noise, disturbance, trouble or improper diversion, or any rout or riot, by which the peace and good order of the city are disturbed, shall be guilty of a breach of the peace, and disorderly conduct. 
State Law reference- Disturbing public places, MCL 750.170, MSA 28.367. 
Sec. 58-115. - Loitering. 
(a)  In this section the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Loitering means remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concept of spending time idly; to be dilatory; to linger; to stay; to saunter; to delay; to stand around; and also includes the colloquial expression "hanging around." 
    Public place means any place to which the general public has access and a right of resort for business, entertainment or for lawful purpose, but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also public grounds, areas or parks. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle either alone or in consort with others in a public place in such manner so as to: 
(1)  Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians after having been told to move on by a police officer. 
(2)  Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress and regress, therein, thereon and thereto after having been told to move on by a police officer. 
(3)  Obstruct the entrance to any business establishment, without so doing for some lawful purpose, if contrary to the expressed wish of the owner, lessee, managing agent or person in control or charge of the building or premises. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly loiter in or about any place where an illegal occupation or business is being conducted. 
State Law reference- Certain loiterers deemed disorderly persons, MCL 750.167, MSA 28.364. 
Secs. 58-116-58-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS 

Sec. 58-136. - Disorderly intoxication. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to be intoxicated in a public place and to either endanger directly the safety of another person or of property or act in a manner that causes a public disturbance. 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. 
State Law reference- Intoxicated person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(e), MSA 28.364(1)(e). 
Sec. 58-137. - Possession of policy or pool tickets, other articles of gaming or gambling; confiscation. 
    It shall be unlawful, within the city, for any person to be in possession of any policy or pool tickets, slips or checks, memoranda, or any combination thereof, bet slips, numbers slips, or of any article associated and/or connected with commercial gambling. Any and all such articles may be confiscated and destroyed by the police department, or used in evidence in any prosecution for violation of this Code. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.306, MSA 28.538. 
Sec. 58-138. - Gambling, frequenting place of gambling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deal in, play or engage in gaming such as faro, roulette, dice, cards, or other device or game of chance, hazard or skill, either as bookmaker, dealer, keeper, player or otherwise for the purpose of gambling for money or other valuable thing or to knowingly attend or be found frequenting any place where gambling is permitted or allowed or is taking place. 
Cross reference- Amusements and entertainments, ch. 10. 
Sec. 58-139. - Keeping or occupying building for gambling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, or his agent or employee, within the city, to directly or indirectly keep or occupy, or assist in keeping or occupying any common gambling house, or any building or room therein, or place within the city where gaming is permitted or suffered, or to suffer or permit on any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him any apparatus used for gaming or gambling, or to use such apparatus for gaming or gambling in any place within the city. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.302, MSA 28.534. 
Sec. 58-140. - Keeping, operating gambling place, equipment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, or his agent or employee, within the city, to directly or indirectly keep, maintain, operate or occupy any building or room, or any part thereof, or any place with apparatus, books, or any device for registering bets, or buying or selling pools upon the result of a game, competition, political competition, appointment, or election, or any purported event of like character, or to register bets, or buy or sell pools, or to be concerned in buying or selling pools, or to knowingly permit any grounds or premises owned, occupied, or controlled by him to be used for any of the purposes aforesaid. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.304, MSA 28.536. 
Sec. 58-141. - Cappers, steerers, ropers for gambling place. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the work or occupation of a roper, steerer, doorman, or capper so-called for any gambling room, gaming house, or place where gaming is carried on, or for any gambling, game of chance, trick or device, or for any place where gambling or games of chance may be permitted or allowed or are being carried on. It shall be unlawful for persons to knowingly frequent, attend or be found present in any of such places. 
(b)  No person shall assist, solicit or advertise for, or occupy any place where gambling is permitted or allowed or is taking place. 
Sec. 58-142. - Keeping gaming room for hire, gain or reward. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to keep or maintain for hire, gain or reward a gaming room or gambling table or any game of skill or chance, or partly of skill and partly of chance, used for gaming, or to knowingly suffer a gaming room or gaming table, or any such game to be kept, maintained or played on any premises within the city occupied or controlled by him, or for any person to aid, assist or abet in the keeping or maintaining of any such gaming room, gaming table or game within the city. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.303, MSA 28.535. 
Sec. 58-143. - Prostitution generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to commit or offer or agree to commit a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to pander, secure or offer another for the purpose of committing a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to be in or near any place frequented by the public or any public place for the purpose of inducing, enticing or procuring another to commit a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly transport any person to any place for the purpose of committing a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly receive or offer to or agree to receive any person into any place or building for the purpose of performing a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion or to knowingly permit any person to remain in any place or building for any such purpose. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to direct or offer to direct any person to any place or building for the purpose of committing any lewd act or act of prostitution or moral perversion. 
State Law reference- Prostitution, MCL 750.448 et seq., MSA 28.703 et seq. 
Sec. 58-144. - Houses of ill fame-Keeping, maintaining. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to keep or maintain a house of ill fame or assignation or place for the practice of prostitution or lewdness. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.452, MSA 28.707. 
Sec. 58-145. - Same-Patronizing. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to patronize, frequent, be found in or be an inmate of any house of ill fame or assignation or place for the practice of prostitution or lewdness. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to accept the solicitation of or solicit a prostitute for the practice of fornication, prostitution or lewdness. 
State Law reference- Admitting to place for purpose of prostitution, MCL 750.449, MSA 28.704; engaging or offering to engage services of female, MCL 750.449a, MSA 28.704(1). 
Sec. 58-146. - Same-Leasing premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to lease to another any house, room or other premises, in whole or in part, for any of the uses or purposes set forth in sections 58-144 and 58-145 or to knowingly permit house, room or other premises to be used or occupied for such purposes. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.454, MSA 28.709. 
Sec. 58-147. - Soliciting, accosting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city, male or female, 17 years of age or older, to accost, solicit or invite another in any public place or in or from any building or vehicle by word, gesture or any other means to commit prostitution or to do any other lewd or immoral act. This section shall not apply to a law enforcement officer while in the performance of his duties as an enforcement officer. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.448, MSA 28.703. 
Sec. 58-148. - Indecent exposure. 
    No person shall exhibit himself in any place of entertainment or in any place which is visible to the public, nude or indecently clad; no person shall indulge in any indecent or suggestive conduct in any public place or in places which are visible to the public, and no person shall designedly make any open or indecent exposure of his person, or of the person of another. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.042) 
Sec. 58-149. - Indecent language. 
    No person shall use indecent, profane or blasphemous language in any public way or place, or in such a way as to subject or expose the public or any member thereof to such language. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.041) 
Secs. 58-150-58-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 58-171. - Fireworks. 
    No person shall shoot, set off, trigger, explode or cause to explode any fireworks, cannon or other instrument set forth in chapter XXXIX of the Penal Code of the state (MCL 750.243a et seq., MSA 28.440(1) et seq.), unless the terms and conditions thereof have been first complied with; and no person shall sell, or expose for sale any of such fireworks or other instruments mentioned above. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.121) 
Secs. 58-172-58-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WEAPONS 

Sec. 58-181. - Definition. 
    The word "firearm," except as otherwise specifically defined in this division, shall be construed to include any weapon from which a dangerous projectile may be propelled by using explosives, gas or air as a means of propulsion. 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 58-182. - Persons exempt. 
    Police officers, peace officers and persons in the military service, in pursuit of official duty, and persons duly authorized by federal or state law to carry firearms, are exempt from the provisions of this division. 
Sec. 58-183. - Aiming firearm. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to intentionally, without malice, point or aim any firearm at or toward any other person. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.233, MSA 28.430. 
Sec. 58-184. - Aiming and discharging firearm. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to discharge without injury to another person any firearm, while intentionally, without malice, aiming at or toward any person. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.234, MSA 28.431. 
Sec. 58-185. - Injury by discharge of firearm. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to maim or injure any other person by the discharge of any firearm pointed or aimed unintentionally, without malice, at any such person. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.235, MSA 28.432. 
Sec. 58-186. - Possession or control of firearm while intoxicated. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city, while under the influence of an alcoholic liquor or any exhilarating or stupefying drug, to carry, have in possession or control, or use in any manner, or discharge any firearm. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.237, MSA 28.434. 
Sec. 58-187. - Hunting within city. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to hunt wild game, or in any manner carry any gun, weapon or firearm within the city for the purpose of hunting any wild game or fowl at any time. 
State Law reference- Game law, MCL 311.1 et seq., MSA 13.1321 et seq. 
Sec. 58-188. - Possession of knives, razors by minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any minor under 18 years of age to have in his possession or control, except within his own domicile, or carry or use in any manner any knife with a blade in excess of three inches, dagger, dirk, razor, stiletto or any other sharp-edged or pointed instrument or weapon used for inflicting injury upon another; provided, however, that such person shall not be in violation of this section if his possession of such knife with a blade in excess of three inches, dagger, dirk, razor, stiletto or any other sharp-edged or pointed instrument is necessary for his employment, trade or occupation, or if he is engaged in or is proceeding to or returning from a place of hunting, trapping or fishing and, whenever required, is also carrying a currently valid license issued to him by the state department of conservation, or if such person is a duly enrolled member of the Boy Scouts of America or a similar organization or society and such possession is necessary to participate in the activities of such organization or society or if the knife with a blade in excess of three inches, dagger, dirk, razor, stiletto or any other sharp-edged pointed instrument is required under circumstances that tend to establish that its possession is for a lawful purpose. 
State Law reference- Carrying firearm or dangerous weapon, MCL 750.226, MSA 28.423. 
Sec. 58-189. - Confiscation of firearms. 
    All weapons, guns, pistols, firearms, knives, dirks, razors, stilettos, or any other sharp-edged or pointed instruments, or weapons carried, possessed or used contrary to this division are hereby declared forfeited to the city. 
Sec. 58-190. - Transportation and possession. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to transport or to have in possession in or upon any vehicle a firearm unless the same is unloaded in both barrel and magazine and carried in the luggage compartment of the vehicle. It shall be unlawful to carry a firearm on any public street or in any public place unless it is unloaded and in a case. 
State Law reference- Carrying concealed weapons without license, MCL 750.227, MSA 28.424. 
Sec. 58-191. - Sale or purchase. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to purchase, carry or transport a firearm on any public street or in any public place. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell a firearm to any person under 18 years of age. 
Sec. 58-192. - Dangerous weapons or instruments. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, use, operate, discharge, fire, shoot, set off, or trigger any BB gun, air gun, spring gun, cross bows, toy pistol, slingshot, catapult, firearm, or any other dangerous weapon or instrument in the city, except in the lawful defense of his person or property or as otherwise permitted by law. 
State Law reference- BB guns, MCL 752.851 et seq., MSA 28.436(41) et seq. 
Secs. 58-193-58-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS 

Sec. 58-216. - Hours of curfew. 
    It shall be unlawful for any minor person under the age of 16 years to be or remain in or upon any street, alley, playground, public place, place of amusement or other unsupervised place, in the city, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., Michigan Standard Time, or the same may be varied from time to time by the city commission, of the following days, on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday of each week during the months of September, October, November, December, January, February, March, April and May; and between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of Friday and Saturday of each week during the months of September, October, November, December, January, February, March, April and May, and also every night during the months of June, July and August. The provisions of this section do not apply to such a minor accompanied by his parent, guardian or other person having legal custody and control of the minor, or when the minor is in the performance of an errand or duty directed in writing by his parent, guardian or other person having his care or custody, or where the employment of the minor makes it necessary that the minor be upon any street, alley, playground, public place, place of amusement, or other unsupervised place during the nighttime after the specified hours; or if the minor is returning directly home from attending a special entertainment of an instructive or beneficial character for the attendance of which the minor shall have received permission in writing from his parent, guardian or other person having custody of the minor. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.201) 
Sec. 58-217. - Permitted exceptions to curfew. 
    It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the legal care and custody of a minor under the age of 16 years to allow or permit any such minor to go or be upon any street, alley, playground, public place, place of amusement or other unsupervised place between the hours as set forth in section 58-216. The provisions of this section do not apply to a minor accompanied by his parent, guardian or other person having the legal care and custody of the minor, or when the minor is in the performance of an errand or duty directed in writing by his parent, guardian or other person having his care or custody, or where the employment of the minor makes it necessary that the minor be upon any street, alley, playground, public place, place of amusement or other unsupervised place during the nighttime after the specified hours; or if the minor is returning directly home from attending a special entertainment of an instructive or beneficial character for the attendance of which the minor shall have received permission in writing from his parent, guardian or other person having custody of the minor. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.202) 
Sec. 58-218. - Lack of knowledge of violation no defense. 
    It shall not constitute a defense under this article that the parent, guardian or other person having the legal care and custody of a minor who violates any provision of this article did not have knowledge of the presence of the minor in and upon any street, alley, playground, public place, place of amusement, or other unsupervised place prohibited in section 58-216. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.203) 
Sec. 58-219. - Violations by business establishments. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any theater, restaurant or other business establishment, either by himself or by any employee or agent, to permit any such minor to be or remain in such business establishment in violation of sections 58-216 and 58-217. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.204) 
Sec. 58-220. - Duties of police department. 
    It shall be the duty of each member of the police department to enforce the provisions of this article and each member of the police department is hereby authorized to question any person suspected of violating any of the provisions of this article, and to take into custody and detain any minor person so found to be violating this article and thereupon to take, or cause to be taken, the minor person to the police department headquarters, whereupon the name of the parent, guardian or other person having authorized custody, or the employer, of the minor person shall be ascertained; and upon determination, such parent, guardian or other person having authorized custody of the minor person shall be notified or summoned by the investigating officer or member of the police department to appear at the police department headquarters to complete an investigation, and assume custody of the minor person. If the parent, guardian or person having authorized custody of the minor person cannot be located within a reasonable time, the officer shall notify the county juvenile authorities to cause the proper proceedings to be had and taken as authorized by the laws of the state. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.205) 
Sec. 58-221. - Warning notice. 
(a)  Whenever any minor shall be taken into custody as provided in this article, written notice shall be given forthwith, or as soon as may be practical thereafter, to any parent, guardian or other person having legal care or custody of such minor, in the form provided in this section. Such notice shall be substantially in the following form: 
WARNING NOTICE 
To ___________ 
    You are notified on the _____ day of ________, 19___, at _____ o'clock _____m. a minor child under 16 years of age, named ___________ for whom you are responsible was taken into custody for being in violation of sections 58-216 and 58-217 of the Code of the City of Buchanan, known as the curfew ordinance, a portion of which ordinance is printed on the back of this notice. 
    You are further notified that you are charged in the future with the responsibility for compliance by the minor with the provisions of the ordinance. Failure to do so will subject you to the penalty therein provided. 
Police Department of the City of Buchanan By _____    
(b)  A synopsis of sections 58-216 and 58-217 shall be printed on the back of every such notice with a form for proof of service of a copy thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.206) 
Sec. 58-222. - Penalty. 
    The penalty for the first offense violation of the provisions of this article by any minor person may be no more than the detention provided in section 58-221. The parent or guardian or any person having authorized custody of, or the employer of the minor, upon being ascertained, shall be notified by the police department of the violation by the minor person and summoned to report for completion of investigation of violation. The penalty for the second and subsequent violations of the provisions of this article by any minor person shall be cause whereby the parent, guardian or other person having authorized custody or the employer of such minor person, contributing to the neglect of the minor person, may be directed to appear along with the minor person before the juvenile authorities of the county for disposition. Any minor found in violation of this article may be referred to the juvenile authorities of the county. Any person violating any provision of this article may, upon conviction, be punished by a fine as prescribed in section 1-15 of this Code. If a fine is imposed, the court shall have power to commit the offender to the county jail until such time as the fine is paid, not exceeding, however, a period of 30 days. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.207) 
Secs. 58-223-58-245. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - OFFENSES ON SCHOOL GROUNDS 

Sec. 58-246. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Principal means any principal of any elementary or secondary school or the chief administrative officer of any elementary or secondary school or college. 
    School means any pre-elementary, elementary (grades K-6), secondary (grades 7-12) school, any college or combination thereof. 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 58-247. - Destruction of school property. 
    No person shall damage, destroy or deface any public, private or parochial school building or the grounds, outbuildings, fences, trees or other appurtenances or fixtures belonging thereto. 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377 et seq., MSA 28.609 et seq. 
Sec. 58-248. - Admission restricted. 
    No person who is not a regularly enrolled student or parent or guardian thereof or a school official, teacher, or other public or school employee shall enter or trespass upon or loiter in or upon any public, private, or parochial school building or school property in the city for any reason whatever unless such person has received written permission from the principal or other person designated by the principal to be in or upon or to remain in or upon such public, private or parochial school building or school property; provided, however, that such written permission need not be secured by persons engaging in or attending a school or recreation board authorized activity or by persons using school playground or playground equipment after school hours or when school is not in session unless such entry or use shall have been otherwise prohibited by a rule or regulation of the school board, school principal or other person, board or committee with the authority to prohibit such use or entry. 
State Law reference- Trespassing, MCL 750.546 et seq., MSA 28.814 et seq. 
Sec. 58-249. - Disturbing schools. 
    No person shall willfully or maliciously make or assist in making any noise, disturbance or improper diversion by which the peace, quietude, or good order of any public, private or parochial school is disturbed. 
State Law reference- Disturbing public places, MCL 750.170, MSA 28.367. 
Sec. 58-250. - Duty of person creating disturbance to leave premises. 
    Any person, whether lawfully or unlawfully in or upon any public, private or parochial school building or school property, who is found to be creating a disturbance in or upon any such school building or property shall leave immediately when so directed by the principal or by any other person designated by the principal. 
State Law reference- Disturbing public places, MCL 750.170, MSA 28.367. 
Sec. 58-251. - Extortion. 
    No person shall by violence, threats of violence or other form of coercion force or attempt to force any public, private or parochial school student or other person to give or to lend any money or other thing of value to any person at any time. 
State Law reference- Extortion, MCL 750.213 et seq., MSA 28.410 et seq. 
Sec. 58-252. - Unauthorized borrowing of money or things of value from students in school or traveling to or from school. 
    No person shall borrow or attempt to borrow any money or thing of value from any student in or upon any public, private or parochial school building or school property in the city or during any time when such student is engaging in, going to or returning from any regularly scheduled session or activity of any such school without first obtaining the written approval of the principal of such school or other person designated by the principal to issue such written approval; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to college students who borrow money or things of value from other college students or adults. 
Sec. 58-253. - Indecent language and conduct. 
    No person shall use profane or indecent language or engage in indecent conduct in any public, private or parochial school building or in any building occupied by any public, private or parochial school or the grounds thereto or on any property adjacent to any building occupied by any public, private or parochial school. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  40.158) 
Chapter 62 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Offenses, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; vegetation, ch. 106. 
State Law reference- Authority to operate a system of public recreation and playgrounds, MCL 123.51 et seq., MSA 5.2421 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1-62-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RECREATION BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 62-26. - Established. 
    There is hereby created an area recreation board for the city to have the powers and duties specified in this article. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.361) 
Sec. 62-27. - Membership. 
    The recreation board shall consist of seven members. In formation of the board, upon implementation of this article, the city commission shall appoint four members total; two members who shall be residents in the city and two members who shall be residents of a neighboring municipality. The school board shall appoint two members. The city manager, or his/her duly authorized deputy shall be a member, but may not hold office. The school board, upon initial appointments as listed in this section, shall appoint one member for a term of one year, and one member for a term of two years. The city commission, upon initial appointments as listed in this section, shall appoint one member for a term of one year, one member for a term of two years, and one member for a term of three years, each appointment to terminate on June 30 of the year following the full extent of time of the original appointments. At the expiration of the terms of the members as above provided, the appointing authority for the specific membership shall fill the vacancy by an appointment for a three-year term. Any member may succeed himself. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.362; Ord. No. 2007.06/375, 6-25-07) 
Sec. 62-28. - Compensation. 
    All members of the recreation board shall serve without compensation. No member shall be employed in the recreation system of the city, either during his term on the board, or for a period of one year after he ceases to be a member. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.363) 
Sec. 62-29. - Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the recreation board to formulate and carry out a recreation program, using facilities and personnel placed at its disposal by agreement between the city, the Buchanan school district, and other neighboring municipalities. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.364; Ord. No. 2007.06/375, 6-25-07) 
Sec. 62-30. - Submittal of program and budget. 
    Not later than February 1 in each year, the board shall prepare and submit to the city manager a tentative outline of its recreational program for the ensuing fiscal year, together with its budget for such ensuing year, which outline and budget, shall serve as a guide in the appropriation of monies by the city. The Buchanan school district has, by written agreement, assumed responsibility for the maintenance and capital improvement of Memorial Field. Financial contributions to area recreation by other municipal authority in the area can be arranged by mutual agreement between the city commission and the municipal authority. If the amount appropriated by the city and other area municipal authority shall be less than the budget requirement, unless the recreation board is able to secure funds from other sources, it shall reduce its budget in accordance with the appropriations. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.365; Ord. No. 2007.06/375, 6-25-07) 
Sec. 62-31. - Full control of recreational program. 
    The recreation board shall have full control in the conduct of the recreational program through its supervision and direction of the recreation director, and the implementation of recreational policies, including appointment of subsidiary boards and committees, and may cooperate with other boards and committees with like purposes, provided that such board shall have no power to expend monies in excess of those expressly appropriated to, and/or received by it, and shall have no authority to bind or incur any obligations whatever against the city. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.366) 
Sec. 62-32. - Adoption of rules and regulations. 
    The recreation board shall adopt rules and regulations advisable or necessary to properly and effectively carry out its meetings, duties and programs. These rules and regulations shall have the effect of law on all persons bound thereby in the carrying out of the recreational program. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.367) 
Sec. 62-33. - Officers. 
    The recreation board shall elect from its membership a chairman to preside at meetings, a vice-chairman, to preside in the absence of the chairman, and a secretary who shall have charge of all board records, and keep accurate and complete minutes of all meetings thereof. The city treasurer shall be treasurer of the board, and shall disburse monies upon presentation of a voucher signed by the board chairman or vice-chairman and countersigned by the secretary. The board may appoint a recording secretary who shall not be a board member. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.368) 
Sec. 62-34. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the recreation board shall be from July 1 of each year to June 30 of the following year. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.369) 
Sec. 62-35. - Meetings. 
    Regular meetings of the recreation board shall be held at least once each month, on such date as shall be fixed by the rules of the board. Special meetings shall be called and held as provided by rule. A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of five members, at least one of whom shall be the city manager, or his duly authorized deputy. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.370) 
Sec. 62-36. - Funds for program. 
    The city may appropriate monies for carrying on a recreation program. The recreation board may raise and receive monies from other lawful sources, by contribution, gifts, bequests, devises or otherwise, for recreational purposes. Not later than 60 days following the close of the fiscal year, the city treasurer shall prepare and cause to be delivered to the city commission a full and concise accounting of all monies received and expended by the area recreation board. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.371) 
Sec. 62-37. - Use of recreational facilities by board. 
    The recreation board may use properties, buildings and equipment, including property of the city, the Buchanan school district, and other municipal authority within the recreation area, provided the owner thereof shall consent to such use, and provided further, that athletic teams sponsored by the school district shall have priority rights to the use of the Memorial Field football field, baseball diamond, softball diamond, tennis courts, soccer fields at the middle school and the practice football field south of McCoy's Creek. For the purpose of this section, such consent on the part of the school district may be given by the superintendent or his or her duly authorized designee of schools and, on the part of the city, by the city manager or his or her duly authorized designee. Consent for recreational use of facilities belonging to other neighboring municipalities in the recreation area shall be established by the municipality concerned. Charges incurred in connection with and properties and equipment used for maintenance or upkeep shall be charged against the board and by it paid to the proper body. The board may expend its funds on capital improvement and/or the development of recreational facilities; ownership and development of such facilities being retained under the authority and responsibility of the city commission and any other neighboring municipality within the recreation area. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.372; Ord. No. 2007.06/375, 6-25-07) 
Secs. 62-38-62-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - USE OF PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS 

Sec. 62-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animals means dogs, cats, horses, any fowl or birds and any living creatures within the jurisdiction of the parks, public areas or recreational areas. 
    Approving governmental agencies means the city commission, the Buchanan community schools or their designees. 
    Crossing means the extension of any sidewalk space whether marked by a pavement or otherwise, across any intersecting drive, street or highway. 
    Curb means any boundary of any street, road, avenue, boulevard or drive, whether or not marked by a raised curb. 
    Director means the community education director, unless an employee position of recreation director is established by the city commission and/or the board of education. In the absence of such employee or a vacancy in the position, the chairman of the recreation board of the city shall serve as director. 
    Park attendant means any person employed by the city commission or board of education as a park attendant to perform duties or tasks within the parks, public areas or recreational areas of the city. 
    Path means any footpath, walk or any path maintained for pedestrians. 
    Pedestrian means a person on foot. 
    Permits means any written license issued by or under the authority of the approving governmental agency allowing a special event or activity on a park facility. 
    Soliciting means the same as is defined in chapter 66 of this Code. 
    Stopping or standing means any cessation of movement of a vehicle occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with pedestrians or other traffic. 
    Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals and vehicles, either singly or together. 
    Vehicles means any conveyance, including motor vehicles, trailers of all types, campers, or other wheeled or skid type vehicles whether powered by muscular power or combustion. 
    Vending means the selling or trading of any item or service. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.804) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 62-62. - Construction of article. 
    In the interpretation of this article, the provisions shall be construed as follows: 
(1)  Any requirement or prohibitions of any act shall respectively extend to and include the causing and procuring, directly or indirectly, of such act. 
(2)  No provision of this article shall make unlawful any act necessarily performed by any officer or employee of the city in the line of duty or work as such, or by any person, his agent or employee in the proper and necessary execution of the terms of any agreement with the city. 
(3)  Any act otherwise prohibited by law or local ordinance shall be lawful if performed, under, by virtue of, and strictly within the provisions of a permit so to do, and to the extent authorized thereby. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.803) 
Sec. 62-63. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide rules and regulations for the use of and conduct in public areas, parks and recreational areas of the city. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.801) 
Sec. 62-64. - Application of article; governing body. 
    This article shall apply in all public areas, parks, school grounds and recreational areas under the jurisdiction of the city or the Buchanan community schools, unless expressly exempted. For the issuance of permits, temporary designations, authorizations, granting of approval and other actions the governing body shall be the city commission or its designee or designees for areas titled to the city and the board of education for areas titled to the schools. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.802) 
Sec. 62-65. - Unlawful acts re structures; plants, trees; earth; animals; water; litter; fires. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in a public park or recreation area to: 
(1)  Mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, bleachers, fireplaces, railways, paving or paving materials, water lines, or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices, placards, whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(2)  Dig or remove any soil, rocks, stones, sand, trees, shrubs, sod or plants or other wood or material or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting, or other means or agency. 
(3)  Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary, or run or string any public service utility into, upon or across such lands, except upon special written permit issued under this article. 
(4)  Damage, cut, carve, mark, transplant, or remove any plant, or injure the bark, or pick flowers or seed of any tree or plant, dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas or in any other way injure the natural beauty or usefulness of any area. 
(5)  Climb any tree or walk; climb, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, planters, fountains, railings, fences, or upon any other property not designed or customarily used for such purpose. 
(6)  Attach any rope or cable or other contrivance to any tree, fence, railing, bridge, bench or other structure. 
(7)  Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountains, ponds, lakes, streams or other bodies of water in or adjacent to any park or other tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of such waters. Take into, carry through, or put into any park, any rubbish, refuse, garbage or other material, except as created in the use of such areas. Such refuse or rubbish as created in the use of such areas shall be deposited in receptacles so provided. Where receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(8)  Bring any glass containers into any park or recreation area. 
(9)  Cause or permit to run loose any animal except in designated areas. 
(10)  Tie or hitch an animal to any tree or plant except in designated areas. 
(11)  Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, pursue, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, wildlife, reptile or bird; nor shall he remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs or nest of any reptile or bird. Exception to the foregoing is made in that snakes known to be deadly poison may be killed on sight. 
(12)  Ride a horse, except in designated areas; horses shall be thoroughly broken and properly restrained, and ridden with due care, and shall not be allowed to graze or go unattended. 
(13)  Walk a domestic animal without a leash, such leash to be no longer than six feet. Further, the owner or person having custody of the domestic animal shall be responsible for removal of any animal solid wastes. 
(14)  Kindle, build, maintain or use a fire except in places provided for such purpose or except upon written permit issued by the governing authority. All fires shall be continuously under the care and direction of a competent person from the time it is kindled until it is extinguished. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.805) 
Sec. 62-66. - Vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in a public park or recreation area to: 
(1)  Drive any vehicle on any area except park roads or parking areas, or such areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as temporary areas. 
(2)  Park a vehicle anywhere except on a designated parking area. 
(3)  Leave a vehicle standing or parked in established parking areas or elsewhere in a park and recreation area during hours when the park or recreation area is closed. 
(4)  Leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack when such is provided and there is space available. 
(5)  Ride a bicycle without reasonable regard to the safety of others. 
(6)  Use the parks, park drives, parking places or parkways for the purpose of preparing or cleaning of any vehicle, except in an emergency. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.806) 
Sec. 62-67. - Firearms; weapons; fireworks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to bring into or have in his possession in any park or recreation area: 
(1)  A pistol, revolver, rifle, shotgun, BB gun, airgun, spring gun, slingshot, bow or other weapon in which the propelling force is gunpowder, spring or air, except in areas specifically designated for the use of such weapons. 
(2)  Have in his possession or shoot off any fireworks. Permits may be given for conducting properly supervised fireworks in designated park areas. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.807) 
Sec. 62-68. - Advertising; assemblages; entertainment. 
    No person shall do any of the following without a permit; provided that no permit shall be required for any action or event sponsored by the city or the recreation board: 
(1)  Display any advertising sign or other advertising matter provided that a sign attached to a vehicle to identify the vehicle or a sign lawfully on a taxi or bus is not prohibited. 
(2)  Hold any public assemblages. 
(3)  Conduct exhibits. 
(4)  Hold a parade. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.808) 
Sec. 62-69. - Miscellaneous conduct regulations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in a park or recreation area to: 
(1)  Camp or stay overnight anywhere except in areas designated for camping or overnight stays in vehicles or trailers. 
(2)  Take part in the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects except in those areas designated for such forms of recreation. 
(3)  Play football, baseball, basketball, soccer, lacrosse, volleyball, or rugby, except in areas designated for such games. 
(4)  Rollerskate or use skateboards except in those areas specifically designated for such pastimes. 
(5)  Enter an area posted as closed to the public or designated for a particular purpose. 
(6)  Engage in threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language or engage in any disorderly, lewd or suggestive conduct or behavior tending to breach the public peace. 
(7)  Fail to produce and exhibit any permit claimed to be granted, upon request of any authorized person who shall desire to inspect the same for the purpose of enforcing compliance with any ordinance or rule. 
(8)  Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying any area or participating in any activity under the authority of a permit. 
(9)  Erect or occupy any tent, stand or other structure in any park or playground, or sell or give away from any tent, stand or other structure any food, drink or other thing, without a permit. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.809) 
Sec. 62-70. - Picnic areas. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to hold a picnic in any park, except in areas set aside or specifically designated as picnic areas. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.810) 
Sec. 62-71. - Closing hours. 
    Except for designated camping areas, no person shall be in any park, public area or recreation area during the hours the park or public area is designated as closed. The recreation board shall adopt from time to time hours of operation for parks and public areas of the city and the board of education shall adopt from time to time hours of operation for playgrounds and school grounds which shall be approved by the city commission. The hours of operation shall be clearly posted in conspicuous places in each park, public area or recreation area. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.811) 
Sec. 62-72. - Permits, charges and fees. 
(a)  Charges and fees. Pursuant to the authority granted under section 62-32, the recreation board shall establish from time to time fees and charges for the use of certain parks, public areas and recreation areas to effectively carry out its programs. All fees and charges as established shall be submitted to the city commission for formal adoption, and upon acceptance shall constitute valid and enforceable charges under this article. After adoption by the city commission, the city clerk shall cause a copy of the fees and charges to be kept at the city hall and at each park, public area or recreational area where the fees or charges shall apply. 
(b)  Park permits. The area recreation board may adopt permits for the use of certain parks, public areas or recreation areas, pursuant to the authority of section 62-32, for picnic areas, parking, boat launch facilities, fishing, camping or other special program usage. In any proceeding for the violation of this article, where a motor vehicle without the required permit affixed, displayed or recorded is found parked in any park, public area or recreation area, the registration plate displayed on the motor vehicle shall constitute prima facie evidence that the owner of the motor vehicle was the person who parked or placed it at the location where found. 
(c)  Special events permit. A person seeking the issuance of a special events permit under this article shall file an application stating: the name and address of the person making the application; the name and address of the person sponsoring the activity, if any; the day and hours for which the permit is desired; the park, public area, recreation area or portion thereof for which the permit is desired; any other information reasonably necessary to a determination as to whether a permit shall be issued; variances required from park rules and regulations. 
(d)  Standards, findings for issuance. Standards for establishing fees, charges, permits or the issuance of a special events permit shall include the following findings: 
(1)  The fees, charges or permits are reasonable and necessary assessments to reduce the costs or to enhance the programs of the recreation board. Such charges, fees or permits are reasonably related to the activity and will encourage a continuation, expansion or enhancement of the activity, shall not create a hardship on the citizens of the area being served by the board, nor detract from open use of parks, public areas and recreation areas by citizens. 
(2)  The special events permit and use of the park, public area or recreation area will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public's enjoyment of the park, public area or recreation area; that the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation; that the proposed activity or uses that are reasonably anticipated will not include violent crime, or disorderly conduct; that the proposed activity will not entail extraordinary or burdensome expense or police operation by the city; that the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use on the date and hour requested in the application. 
(e)  Appeal. At the first commission meeting following the receipt of an application for special events permit, the city commission or its designee shall inform an applicant in writing of its decision to grant or deny a permit; in the event of a denial the notification shall include the reason for the denial. Any aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal to the city commission by serving written notification thereof on the city clerk within five working days of the rejection. 
(1)  The city commission shall review and act upon the appeal at its next regular meeting. The decision of the city commission shall be final. 
(2)  A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances fully as though the same were inserted in the permit. 
(f)  Insurance requirements. An applicant for a permit shall be required to submit evidence of liability insurance covering injuries to members of the general public arising out of such permitted activities in such amounts as may be from time to time determined prior to the commencement of any activity or issuance of any permit. 
(g)  Revocation. The city commission shall have the authority to revoke a special events permit upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance or upon good cause shown. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.812) 
Sec. 62-73. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be fined as prescribed in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.813) 
Chapter 66 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Charitable solicitations, MCL 400.271 et seq., MSA 3.240(1) et seq.; transient merchants, MCL 445.371 et seq., MSA 16.691 et seq.; home solicitations sales, MCL 445.111 et seq., MSA 19.416(201) et seq.; exemption for a veteran's license, MCL 35.441, MSA 4.1241. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Charitable solicitor means any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot, motor vehicle or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, house to house or from street to street, seeking or attempting to seek contributions, pledges, donations, gifts or other support, either monetary or nonmonetary, of a charitable, religious, educational or other nonprofit activity; provided that such definition shall include beggars, almsmen, panhandlers and such other persons seeking money or property through contribution, donation, gift or pledge. 
    Peddler means any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, motor vehicle or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, house to house or from street to street, selling, or offering for sale, goods, merchandise, books or magazines, refreshments, personal property or services of any nature whatsoever, or who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from any motor vehicle or other type of conveyance. 
    Solicitor means any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot, motor vehicle or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, house to house or street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, merchandise, books or magazines, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not, provided, that such definition shall include any person who, for himself or for another person hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, premises, apartment, or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. The word "solicitor" shall include the word "canvasser" and shall include any person who, through the use of a telephone, solicits or attempts to solicit orders for the sale of tickets, goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery or for services to be furnished or performed in the future. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.351) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 66-2. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.363) 
Sec. 66-3. - Practices constituting a nuisance. 
    Entering a private residence in the city by a solicitor or peddler under false pretenses, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise or personal services, or for the purpose of disposing of and/or peddling the same, or remaining in a private residence or on the premises thereof after the owner or occupant thereof shall request any such person to leave, or going in and upon the premises of a private residence by such person for any of the purposes set forth in this section, when the owner or occupant thereof has displayed a "no soliciting" sign on such premises, is declared to be a nuisance and, in addition to any other penalties imposed, shall be punishable as a violation of this section. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.357) 
Sec. 66-4. - Noises, speaking devices. 
    No peddler, solicitor, charitable solicitor or any person acting on his behalf shall shout, cry out, use a horn, bell or any sound device, including any loud speaker, radio or sound-amplifying system, upon any street, alley, lane, boulevard, park or other public place in the city. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.359) 
Secs. 66-5-66-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE 

Sec. 66-31. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a solicitor, peddler or charitable solicitor within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a license therefor under the provisions of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.352) 
Sec. 66-32. - Application. 
    Applicants for license under this article must file with the city clerk an application in writing and acknowledged on a form to be furnished by the city clerk, which shall give the following information: 
(1)  Name of applicant. 
(2)  Address (both permanent and local) of applicant. 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the activities of the applicant. 
(4)  Length of time for which the license will be desired. 
(5)  If a motor vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, license number, proof of insurance and copy of driver's license for any operator; and in the case of the sale of food or other consumable items a current certificate of inspection by the department of health of the vehicle. If an inspection is not so available, applicant shall arrange for an inspection by the police department. 
(6)  An affidavit stating whether applicant, or any persons affiliated with applicant and operating under applicant's license, has been convicted of any crime or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
(7)  Reserved. 
(8)  At the time of filing of the application, a fee, as follows, shall be paid to the city clerk to cover the costs of investigation; provided, however, any nonprofit, religious or other charitable organization may request refund of the fee from the city commission. 
a.  A fee as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time for all applicants operating from a motor vehicle or other mode of transportation designed or used for the sale of prepared foods, beverages or other consumables. 
b.  A fee as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time for all other applicants regularly utilizing a motor vehicle or other mode of transportation in the activities covered hereunder. 
c.  A fee as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time for all other applicants. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.353; Ord. No. 343, 3-24-97) 
Sec. 66-33. - Investigation and issuance. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application under this article, the original shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. If a motor vehicle or other type of vehicle designed for use on a public street and used for the mobile sales of any goods, merchandise, books, magazines, refreshments, produce, personal property or services of any nature whatsoever, the chief of police or his designated agent shall inspect the vehicle and approve or prescribe such safety equipment and rules of operation as shall be deemed necessary and reasonable for the protection of the public good. 
(b)  If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse upon such application his disapproval and his reasons for the same, and return the application to the city clerk, who shall notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no license will be issued. 
(c)  If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his approval, and the city clerk, upon payment of the prescribed license fee, deliver to the applicant his license. Such license shall contain the signature and seal of the issuing officer and shall show the name, address and photograph of the licensee, the class of license issued and the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the amount of fee paid, the date of issuance and the length of time the same shall be operative, as well as the license number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in such soliciting or canvassing. The clerk shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.354) 
Sec. 66-34. - Fees. 
(a)  There shall be paid, in advance, at time of issuance of a license under this article, a license fee per annum as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time; provided, however, a license may be issued from day to day upon request of the applicant at the rate as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time per day. 
(b)  If the applicant believes the license fee places an undue burden upon such commerce, the applicant may apply to the city manager for an adjustment of the fee so that it shall not be discriminatory, unreasonable or unfair as to such commerce. Such application may be made before, at, or within six months after payment of the prescribed license fee. The applicant shall, by affidavit and supporting testimony, show his method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information as may be deemed necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden on such commerce. The city manager shall then conduct an investigation, comparing the applicant's business with other businesses of like nature, and shall make findings of fact from which he shall determine whether the fee fixed by this section is unfair, unreasonable or discriminatory as to applicant's business and shall fix, as the license fee for the applicant, an amount that is fair, reasonable and nondiscriminatory, or if the fee has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the fee so fixed. 
(c)  In fixing the fee to be charged, the city manager shall have the power to base the fee upon a percentage of gross sales, or any other method which will assure that the fee assessed shall be consistent under this article. 
(d)  Charitable, religious, educational or other nonprofit organizations shall be exempt from the payment of any fees; provided, however, that such organization furnish with its application a copy of its registration certificate furnished by the department of commerce, charitable trust registration division. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.355) 
Sec. 66-35. - Display of license. 
    Peddlers and solicitors shall exhibit their licenses at the request of any citizen. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.356) 
Sec. 66-36. - Transferability. 
    No license issued under the provisions of this article shall be transferred, assigned or used by any person except those individuals designated and reflected in the application. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.358) 
Sec. 66-37. - Revocation of licenses. 
(a)  Licenses issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the city manager after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license. 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on his business as peddler. 
(3)  Any violation of this chapter. 
(4)  Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(5)  Conducting the business of peddling in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his last known address at least five days prior to the date set for hearing. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.360) 
Sec. 66-38. - Expiration of license. 
    All annual licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall expire on May 1. Other than annual licenses shall expire on the date specified in the license. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.362) 
Sec. 66-39. - Appeal. 
    Any person aggrieved by the action of the city manager, chief of police or the city clerk in the denial of an application for permit or license as provided in section 66-32, or in the decision with reference to revocation of a license as provided in section 66-37, shall have the right to appeal to the city commission. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the commission, within 14 days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The commission shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided in section 66-37 for notice of hearing on revocation. The decision and order of the commission on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.361) 
Chapter 70 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; community development, ch. 30; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; subdivisions, ch. 90; vegetation, ch. 106. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate land use, MCL 125.581 et seq., MSA 5.2932 et seq.; municipal planning, MCL 125.31 et seq., MSA 5.2991 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 70-1-70-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015.06/392, adopted June 8, 2015, repealed the former Art. II,  70-26-70-33, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991; Ord. No. 2006.01/368, 1-9-06. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 70-26. - Creation. 
    There shall be a City of Buchanan Planning Commission pursuant to P.A. 33 of 2008, as amended, being the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, MCL 125.3801 et seq., hereinafter referred to as the commission, with the powers and duties as therein set forth and as hereinafter provided by such Act as amended. This article shall be officially known and described as the "The City of Buchanan Planning Commission Ordinance". 
(Ord. No. 2015.06/392, 6-8-15) 
Sec. 70-27. - Membership. 
(a)  The planning commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the mayor subject to a majority vote of the city commission. To be qualified to be a member and remain a member of the commission, the individual shall meet the following qualifications: 
(1)  Shall be a qualified elector of the city except two nonqualified electors may be members, and one member of the city commission; 
(2)  Shall not hold any elected office or employment with the city, unless an ex officio member; 
(3)  Shall not be a declared candidate for any political office, except for the city commission representative to the planning commission; 
(4)  After an individual's first appointment and before reappointment shall have attended training for commission members, pursuant to section 70-28; 
(5)  The membership shall be representative of the important segments of the community, such as the economic, governmental, educational, and social development of the city in accordance with the major interests as they exist in the city. The membership shall also be representative of the entire geography of the City of Buchanan to the extent practicable. 
(b)  Members shall be appointed for three-year terms. However when first appointed a number of members shall be appointed to one-year, two-year, or three-year terms such that, as nearly as possible, the terms of one-third of all commission members will expire each year. If a vacancy occurs, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as provided for an original appointment such that, as nearly as possible, the terms of commission members continue to expire each year. 
(c)  Ex officio members shall include one member of the city commission. The term of office of ex officio members shall coincide with their elected term of office on the legislative body on which they serve. 
(d)  A member of the city commission, city manager, person designated by the city manager, and mayor shall not be chair of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 2015.06/392, 6-8-15) 
Sec. 70-28. - Training. 
    Appointed members of the planning commission shall attend educational programs designed for training members of Michigan planning commissions. Nothing in this paragraph shall deem a member who has not had training from finishing his term of office unless the member resigns or is removed by action of the city commission. The member shall be ineligible for reappointment at the conclusion of the term of office if they did not attend training. The commission shall include in its bylaws what training programs qualify to meet this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2015.06/392, 6-8-15) 
Sec. 70-29. - Members, appointment and terms. 
(a)  In June of each year the city clerk shall determine which members' terms of office expire, shall determine what organizations qualify to nominate members and shall contact, by first class mail, those organizations to solicit nominations. 
(b)  In July of each year if the clerk has not received at least two nominations for each office, then the clerk shall discard those applications and shall place an advertisement(s) in a newspaper with paid circulation in the city to seek different applications. 
(c)  In August of each year the city commission shall consider the applications and nominations received, and appoint members to the commission by a majority vote for a three-year term of office which shall end June 30 of the respective year. 
(Ord. No. 2015.06/392, 6-8-15) 
Sec. 70-30. - Removal from office. 
(a)  The city commission may remove a member of the planning commission for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon written charges and after a public hearing. Failure to disclose a potential conflict of interest shall be considered malfeasance in office. Failure to repeatedly attend commission meetings shall be considered nonfeasance in office. 
(b)  The secretary of the planning commission shall report any member who has missed three regular meetings in a row to the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 2015.06/392, 6-8-15) 
Sec. 70-31. - Membership; vacancies. 
    The city commission shall fill any vacancy in the membership of the commission for the unexpired terms in the same manner as the initial appointment. 
(Ord. No. 2015.06/392, 6-8-15) 
Sec. 70-32. - Membership; transition. 
(a)  The transition from the previous City of Buchanan Plan Commission and the planning commission established in this article shall be gradual and shall take place over the next three years. The city shall continue to make annual appointments, appointing approximately one-third of the membership of the commission as specified in this article, so that three years from the effective date of this article the membership, membership representation, and number of members have completed the transition to fully comply with this article. 
(b)  All other aspects of this article shall have immediate effect. 
(Ord. No. 2015.06/392, 6-8-15) 
Editor's note- Ordinance 2015.06/392, adopted June 8, 2015 provides an effective date of June 23, 2015. 
Sec. 70-33. - Membership; compensation. 
    All members of the planning commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 2015.06/392, 6-8-15) 
Sec. 70-34. - Meetings. 
(a)  The planning commission shall hold not less than four regular meetings per year and a majority of the planning commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of the ordinary business of said commission and all questions which shall arise at their meetings shall be determined by a vote of the majority of the members of the planning commission. 
(b)  The affirmative vote of not less than two-thirds of the members of the commission, regardless if vacancies or absences exist or not, shall be necessary for the adoption, or recommendation for adoption, of any master plan or sub plan, or amendment to a master plan or sub plan. 
(Ord. No. 2015.06/392, 6-8-15) 
Sec. 70-35. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The planning commission shall have their powers and duties as set forth in P.A. 33 of 2008, as amended, being the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, MCL 125.3801 et seq.; and P.A. 110 of the Public Acts of 2006, as amended, being the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (MCL 125.3101 et seq.). 
(b)  The planning commission shall have authority to apply for and receive grants from any government agency or the federal government and to receive gifts. 
(Ord. No. 2015.06/392, 6-8-15) 
Sec. 70-36. - Staff. 
(a)  The city zoning administrator, city manager, and/or city manager's designee shall act as staff to the commission. 
(b)  The city may employ a zoning administrator and other personnel and contract for services it may deem necessary to provide planning and zoning services necessary to accomplish the work of the commission provided such funding is appropriated by the city commission in its annual budget. 
(Ord. No. 2015.06/392, 6-8-15) 
Sec. 70-37. - Meetings; records, bylaws. 
    The commission shall adopt bylaws for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations, which records shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 2015.06/392, 6-8-15) 
Sec. 70-38. - Approval, ratification, and reconfirmation. 
    All official actions taken by all the city plan commissions preceding the planning commission created by this article are hereby approved, ratified and reconfirmed. Any project, review, or process taking place at the effective date of this article shall continue with the commission created by this article, subject to the requirements of this article, and shall be deemed a continuation of any previous City of Buchanan Plan Commission. This article shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and publication. 
(Ord. No. 2015.06/392, 6-8-15) 
Chapter 74 - SECONDHAND GOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 74-1-74-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RUMMAGE OR GARAGE SALES 

Sec. 74-26. - Requirements, restrictions. 
    All rummage, garage, basement, barn, porch, carport, yard, or other like sales of secondhand goods on private property shall be subject to the following requirements and restrictions: 
(1)  A permit shall first be obtained from city hall and displayed on site during the time of sale. 
(2)  No sale shall be held for more than three consecutive days. 
(3)  Signs shall not exceed four square feet in area, and shall be located only on private property with the permission of the property owner. No sign shall be located on the right-of-way of any public street, utility pole, tree, and/or traffic sign. If a sidewalk does not exist, signs shall be placed no closer than ten feet from the street edge. 
(4)  Signs shall only be displayed on the days of the sale. All signs must be removed by 6:00 p.m. each night of the sale. 
(5)  All sales shall be conducted only on the private property of holder of the permit. 
(6)  Not more than two permits shall be issued to the same person or for the same location in any calendar year, except for the citywide garage sales and the chamber of commerce sponsored garage sales approved by the city commission. Nonprofit organizations which can provide off-street parking may receive four permits during a 12-month period. 
(7)  The permit fee shall be established by a fee schedule adopted by the city commission. An extra fee, according to the schedule of fees, shall be charged for any person who does not obtain a permit in advance. 
(8)  Any person violating provisions of this section, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.451; Ord. No. 348.99,  1, 11-22-99; Ord. No. 2013.08/388,  1, 8-12-13) 
Secs. 74-27-74-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEALERS IN USED AUTOMOBILE PARTS 

Sec. 74-46. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dealer in used automobile parts means any person who engages in the business of dismantling automobiles, or who deals in, buys, sells or receives used or secondhand automobile parts, accessories or salvaged automobiles. 
    Person means one or more natural persons, firms, copartnerships, corporations and all associations of natural persons incorporated or unincorporated, whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or employer. All persons who violate any of the provisions of this article whether as owner, servant or employee shall be equally liable as principal. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.381) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 74-47. - License and bond required. 
    No person directly or indirectly, himself, or by his clerk, agent or employee, shall engage in the business of a dealer in used automobile parts within the corporate limits of the city without first having obtained a license therefor from the city commission and executing a surety bond to the city in the sum of $500.00, to be approved by the city commission. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.382) 
Sec. 74-48. - Application for license. 
    Application for a license under this article shall be made in writing to the city commission and filed with the city clerk, it shall give all such information as may be deemed necessary for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this article, including the name and address of the applicant; the particular place in the city where such person shall carry on the business; the business or trade name under which the applicant is to operate; previous experience in the business; the name and address of all persons interested in the business and the issuing of the license and if the applicant is a corporation the names and addresses of the officers. The applicant shall also state whether or not the business of the dealer in used automobile parts is to be conducted on a vacant or partly vacant lot and whether the lot is enclosed or partly enclosed or the business is to be conducted in a building. The application shall contain an agreement on the part of the applicant that the license will be accepted, if granted, upon the condition that it may be suspended or revoked by the city commission on proper cause shown. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.383) 
Sec. 74-49. - Conditions for granting license. 
    If the city commission is satisfied that the applicant is a suitable person to engage in the business of dealer in used automobile parts, it shall grant a license. If the business of a dealer in used automobile parts is to be conducted on a vacant or partly vacant lot not enclosed or partly enclosed lot or structure, no license shall be granted until the applicant shall enclose such property with a properly painted tight board fence at least six feet high and erected in such a manner as to obliterate the premises from view, which fence shall at all times be properly maintained by the licensee. The city commission shall not grant a license to any person as dealer in used automobile parts in any residential community where 65 percent or more of the property owners within a radius of one city block of the dealer in used automobile parts or contemplated business petition the city commission not to do so. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.384) 
Sec. 74-50. - Amount of bond, license fee. 
    When a license has been granted under this article by the city commission the city clerk shall issue the license upon: 
(1)  Dealer in used automobile parts executing to the city a surety bond in the sum of $500.00 to be approved by the city commission. 
(2)  Payment of the license fee to the city treasurer as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time, for a dealer in used automobile parts. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.385) 
Sec. 74-51. - Conditions of license. 
    A license issued under this article shall designate the particular place in the city where such business may be conducted and it shall be unlawful for any licensee to engage in such business at any other place than that designated in such license. The license shall be subject to all the terms and conditions of this article. It shall always be conspicuously displayed on the licensee's premises. It shall not be assignable or transferable. No person, except the licensee, directly or indirectly shall do business or be permitted to do business under the license. It shall be unlawful for such licensee to remove, deface or obliterate anything contained in such license. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.386) 
Sec. 74-52. - Revocation and expiration of licenses. 
    License issued under the provisions of this article shall be revocable by the city commission at any time for the violation of any of the provisions of this article or if it shall be satisfied that the business as conducted is detrimental to the interests of the public. All licenses shall expire on April 30 of each year unless sooner revoked by the city commission. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.387) 
Sec. 74-53. - Pawning of articles prohibited. 
    No licensee under this article shall receive in the course of his business any article by way of pledge or pawn, nor shall he loan or advance on the security of any article or thing. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.388) 
Sec. 74-54. - Records required. 
    Every licensee or dealer in used automobile parts shall at his place of business named in the license keep a book in which shall be written, at the time of the purchase, a description of the parts, accessories and of secondhand and used automobiles, recording the license, motor and serial numbers of secondhand and used automobiles, together with the name, age, address and a personal description of the person from whom such purchase was made. The book shall at all times be open to the inspection of the police department and shall be substantially bound and in which shall be legibly written in ink, in the English language, the amount paid for each and every secondhand and used automobile, parts and accessories. No entry shall be erased, obliterated, altered or defaced. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.389) 
Sec. 74-55. - Purchase of questionable articles. 
    No licensee under this article shall purchase, receive or take any article mentioned in this article from any person under the age of 18 years, from an intoxicated person, from a habitual drunkard or from any person known by reputation or suspected of being a thief or associate of thieves or a receiver of stolen property. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.390) 
Sec. 74-56. - Procedure followed before wrecking. 
    No licensee under this article shall wreck or cause to be wrecked, dismantled or disassembled any used or secondhand automobile, without first having reported the license, motor and serial numbers of such used and secondhand automobile to the police department. Such report shall be made 24 hours before wrecking, dismantling or disassembling. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.391) 
Sec. 74-57. - Storage of automobiles. 
    No licensee under this article shall make use of any street, sidewalk, alley or any other part of the highway or any other property not in his possession or under his control for the storage or display of secondhand automobile parts, accessories or salvaged automobiles or other secondhand goods. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.392) 
Sec. 74-58. - Hours of business; business shall not create nuisance. 
    A licensee under this article may keep his place of business open and may purchase or sell only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on any day except that such business must be closed on Sunday. Such yard or shop shall be so conducted as not to create a nuisance by reason of noise or disagreeable fumes, no loads of iron or heavy materials may be unloaded or loaded, nor shall break hammers be used between the closing and the opening hours in the morning. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.393) 
Sec. 74-59. - Penalty. 
    Any violation or failure to comply with the provisions of this article or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto shall be punished as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. Upon conviction of a licensee, his license shall be revoked for a period of two years after such revocation. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.395) 
Chapter 76 - SIGNS 

Sec. 76-1. - Intent and purpose. 
    This chapter is intended to protect and further the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City of Buchanan; to further the intent of the City of Buchanan Zoning Ordinance and its zoning districts; to prevent traffic hazards; to provide safer conditions for pedestrians; to improve community appearance; and to promote economic development by regulating the construction, alteration, repair, maintenance, size, location and number of signs. 
    When more restrictive with respect to location, use, size, height, or other requirements relating to structural safety, the provisions of the building code of the city shall take precedence over this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 361.07/04, 7-26-04) 
Sec. 76-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases shall be interpreted and construed in accordance with the definitions delineated herewith. 
    Awning or canopy: A retractable or fixed shelter constructed of materials on a supporting framework that projects from the exterior wall of a building. 
    Balloon sign: A sign composed of an inflatable, nonporous bag, and exceeding 20 cubic feet. 
    Billboard or off-premises advertising sign: A sign which contains a message or advertises an establishment, product, service, space or activity not available on the platted lot on which the sign is located. 
    Building code: The current code or codes, including any subsequent amendments thereof subsequently amended, in effect in the city which governs the erection, alternation, maintenance, and removal of structures, including all signs not specifically exempted from the provisions thereof. 
    Canopy: Refer to "Awning or canopy" definition. 
    Construction sign: A sign which identifies the owners, suppliers, financiers, contractors, architects, engineers or tenants of a project under construction. 
    Directional sign: A sign which gives directions or instructions for the use on the lot on which the sign is located, such as parking, exit and entrance or handicapped parking designation signs. 
    Essential services: Equipment and accessories reasonably necessary for the furnishing of utility service or for the public health, safety, or general welfare by public utilities or municipal departments and commissions. 
    Flag: Any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive color, letters or symbols, used as symbol of a government, political subdivision or other entity. 
    Freestanding sign: A temporary or permanent sign erected by the City of Buchanan, Berrien County, or the state or federal government, including temporary signs as necessary in conjunction with the improvement of public infrastructure. 
    Marquee: A permanent structure constructed of rigid materials that projects from the exterior wall of a building. 
    Marquee sign: A sign affixed flat against the surface of a marquee. 
    Mural: A design or representation painted or drawn on a wall, which does not contain promotional or commercial advertising. 
    Pennant: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, whether single or in a series, designed to move in the wind. 
    Permanent sign: A sign that has a permanent location on the ground or which is painted on or attached to a structure having a permanent location and which meets the structural requirements for signs as established in the building code. 
    Political sign: A temporary sign used in connection with an official City of Buchanan, school district, county, site, or federal election or referendum. 
    Projecting sign: A double-faced sign attached to and not parallel with a building or wall. 
    Reader board: A portion of a sign on which copy can be changed periodically, either manually or electronically. 
    Real estate sign: A sign advertising the real estate upon which the sign is located as being for sale, rent or lease. 
    Roof line: The eave line of a roof or building parapet, whichever is higher, but excluding any cupolas, chimneys, or other minor projections. 
    Roof sign: Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure and extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof. 
    Roof sign, integral: Any sign erected or constructed as an integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and such that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six inches. 
    Sign: A devise, structure, fixture, or placard using graphics, symbols, and/or written copy designed specifically for the purpose of advertising or identifying an establishment, product, service or activity provided on the platted lot on which the sign is located. 
    Temporary sign: A sign intended for a limited period of display, including all portable signs, banners, pennants and/or balloon signs. 
    Wall sign: A single faced sign painted or attached directly to and parallel to the exterior wall of a building. 
    Window sign: A sign placed on the inside of a window and intended to be viewed from the outside. 
(Ord. No. 361.07/04, 7-26-04) 
Sec. 76-3. - General sign provision. 
(a)  Any sign and supporting structure which for a period of 60 days no longer advertises or identifies a bona fide business conducted or product sold on the premises shall be removed by the owner within 30 days of receipt of written notice by the building inspector. The sole exception to this provision shall be signs installed as an integral component of a building, such as an engraved corner stone, or a sign cut into a building's stone work. 
(b)  No light pole, utility pole, or other supporting member of a building or property shall be used for the placement of any sign unless the owner of the pole or supporting member has given approval for such use and the sign conforms with this chapter. 
(c)  Except for signs for home occupations, all signs may be internally or externally illuminated. If externally illuminated, the source of the light shall be enclosed and directed to prevent the source of light from shining directly onto traffic or residential property. If internally illuminated, the light luminating from the sign shall not shine directly onto traffic or be a nuisance, per se. 
(d)  A sign accessory to a nonconforming use or structure shall conform to the provisions of the zone district in which the nonconforming use or structure is located. 
(e)  Painted or paper-faced signs shall be maintained free of peeling paint or paper, sun fading, staining, rust or other conditions which impair the legibility or intelligibility of such sign. 
(f)  Any signs permitted by the provisions of this chapter, including all supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be maintained in conformance with this chapter and in such a manner so as not to cause a hazard to the public. 
(g)  Signs shall not be placed in, upon, or over any public right-of-way, alley, or other public place, except as may be otherwise permitted by this chapter and unless a revocable license is approved by the city commission. 
(h)  Reader boards are permitted on a wall sign or marquee sign or on one or both sides of a freestanding sign, but not on more than one sign at one business, property, address or location. 
(i)  Any sign exceeding six square feet and set back less than ten feet from the right-of-way, shall maintain a minimum clear space of eight feet from the bottom of the sign to the ground. 
(j)  Awning, canopy, marquee signs or projecting signs which extend over the city right-of-way shall maintain a clear space of eight feet from the bottom of the sign to the grade. 
(k)  The city shall require proof of current, in-force liability insurance in the aggregate amount of at least $500,000.00, as a condition of granting any party a sign permit or as a condition of allowing the continued use of an existing sign, in the following instances: 
(1)  Signs that extend over the city right-of-way. 
(2)  Freestanding signs whose height exceeds the horizontal distance of the base of the sign to the nearest city right-of-way. 
This requirement to furnish the city with proof of liability insurance shall be effective June 30, 1995, for all signs in existence prior to the effective date of this chapter. During June of each subsequent year, the owners of such signs shall be required to furnish the city with up-to-date proof of insurance as evidence of continuing compliance with this provision. 
(l)  All signs shall comply with the building and electrical codes of the City of Buchanan. Except for temporary signs, underground wiring shall be required for all illuminated signs, or signs requiring electrical connections which are not attached to a building. 
(Ord. No. 361.07/04, 7-26-04) 
Sec. 76-4. - General sign prohibitions. 
(a)  Signs, including reader boards, shall not employ any flashing, moving, oscillating, blinking, or variable intensity light, however, variable time-temperature signs may be permitted. 
(b)  Signs shall not contain any moving or animated parts or be designed so as to give the appearance of movement. 
(c)  A sign shall not be erected in any place where it may, by reason of its position, shape, color, or other characteristic, interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device, or constitute a nuisance per se. 
(d)  A wall sign shall not extend beyond the edge of the wall to which it is affixed nor extend above the roof line of the building. 
(e)  Roof signs are not permitted; integral roof signs are permitted in C-2, M-1 and M-2 districts. 
(f)  Billboards and off-premises advertising signs are prohibited throughout the city. 
(g)  Balloon signs are prohibited except as temporary signs for promotions. 
(h)  Any vehicle which has the primary function of acting as a sign shall not be permitted. 
(i)  Banner signs, where permitted, shall not have an overall area exceeding 76 square feet, must be placed along a building, mounted flush to the surface of that wall and may not extend beyond the edge of the wall to which it is affixed nor extend above the roof line of the building. 
(j)  Banner signs, or strings of pennants, where permitted, shall be installed in a location on the property such that, if one end of the banner sign or string of pennants blows free, it is not possible for that banner or string of pennants to blow into an adjacent city right-of-way. 
(k)  Any sign which is not specifically permitted by, or does not conform to, the provisions of this chapter is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 361.07/04, 7-26-04) 
Sec. 76-5. - Computation of sign area and height. 
(a)  The area of a sign shall be measured as the area within a single, continuous perimeter composed of either the smallest square, rectangle, or circle which encloses the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem, logo, or any other figure of similar character, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed, excluding only the structure necessary to support the sign. Reader boards shall be included in the sign measurement. 
(b)  The area of a freestanding or projecting sign that has two or more faces shall be measured by including the area of all sign faces, except if two such faces are placed back-to-back shall be counted as one face. If the two back-to-back faces are of unequal size, the larger of the two sign faces shall be counted as the one face. 
(c)  The height of a sign shall be measured as the vertical distance from the highest point to grade of the top of the curb or the center of the street immediately adjacent to the sign or parking lot surface whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 361.07/04, 7-26-04) 
Sec. 76-6. - Nonconforming signs, billboards or advertising signs. 
(a)  Every permanent legally existing sign, billboard or advertising sign which does not conform to the height, size, or area, or location requirements of this chapter as of the date of the adoption of this chapter, is hereby deemed to be nonconforming. 
(b)  Nonconforming signs, billboards or advertising signs may not be expanded, enlarged, or extended; however said signs may be maintained and repaired so as to continue the useful life of the sign. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, a nonconforming sign, billboard or advertising sign may be diminished in size or dimension or the copy of the sign amended or changed without jeopardizing the privilege of nonconforming use. 
(d)  Any nonconforming sign, billboard, advertising sign, sign structure, or frame substantially destroyed by fire or other causality loss shall not be restored or rebuilt. 
(e)  When a nonconforming sign, billboard, advertising sign, or portion thereof, is removed, it shall be replaced only with a sign that conforms with all requirements of the zoning district within which the property is located. A sign may be removed for maintenance or repair purposes in accordance with subsection (b) following issuance of a permit from the building and zoning inspector or authorized representative, provided that the sign will be reinstalled within 90 days of removal or the right of nonconforming use shall be deemed abandoned. 
(f)  Temporary signs in use as of the effective date of this chapter shall not be afforded existing/nonconforming status as described above, but shall conform fully to all provisions of this chapter within 90 days of its effective date. Banners and pennants, however, shall conform fully to all provisions of this chapter as of its effective date. 
(Ord. No. 361.07/04, 7-26-04) 
Sec. 76-7. - Removal of unsafe or unlawful signs. 
(a)  If the building and zoning inspector or his authorized representative determines that any sign regulated by this chapter is unsafe or constitutes a hazard to the public, such as obstructing vision of vehicle drivers or pedestrians, or has been constructed, erected or maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter, the inspector may remove the sign or require its immediate removal. If such removal requires the use of city personnel, or equipment, the city's cost for such removal shall be billed to the property owner. 
(b)  Any sign placed or erected in a public street, alley or right-of-way, or other public place, which is not specifically permitted in such place, shall be deemed an unlawful sign and the department of the city having jurisdiction over the maintenance of such public place shall remove such sign. Such removal may be without written or other notice to the owner, lessee, or person who placed such sign. 
(Ord. No. 361.07/04, 7-26-04) 
Sec. 76-8. - Sign permits. 
    No person shall erect, alter, place or permit to be placed, or replace any sign, except as provided herein, without first obtaining a permit as required. 
(Ord. No. 361.07/04, 7-26-04) 
Sec. 76-9. - Exempted signs. 
    The following signs are exempt from the regulations of this chapter regarding sign permits: 
(a)  Government signs. 
(b)  Highway and street signs erected by state, county or municipal road agency identifying streets or highways, giving direction to streets or places of interest or establishing restrictions or conditions of use for street or highways. This exemption shall further include all such signs authorized by a road agency in conjunction with street or utility construction projects denoting detours, or identifying access to business or industrial areas or sites when normal access is disrupted by such construction. 
(c)  Historic markers placed under the authority of the local, state or federal government. 
(d)  Window signs. 
(e)  Murals in zone districts other than C-3, where approval of the downtown development authority is required. 
(f)  Essential services signs. 
(g)  Placards not exceeding two square feet. 
(h)  Flags of any nation, state, city, corporation, educational institution, college, university, or nonprofit organization. Flags of corporations shall be exempt if displayed on a premises owned or leased by that corporation, or where a business operates under the name of that corporation. 
(i)  Notwithstanding [any] other provision of this chapter, the city commission by resolution may authorize placement of signs otherwise prohibited for a maximum of 14 days in conjunction with special community events, or may assign to the city manager the authority to allow for such placement. 
(j)  Signage with the international symbol of accessibility or van accessible recognized logo for such designation. 
(k)  Off-premises temporary signs used for holidays, public demonstrations, or promotions of civic welfare or charitable purpose, when authorized by city manager, subject to review by the city commission. 
(l)  Temporary garage, yard, and basement sale signs placed in conformity with the city's garage sale ordinance. 
(m)  One temporary sign for the promotion of special events or activities by churches, nonprofit or educational institutions, provided, that the sign is displayed no more than two weeks prior to the event or activity and that it must be removed within 48 hours of the conclusion of the event or activity; provided, further, that no sign be within 12 feet of the right-of-way unless it is flat against a building and further provided that the sign does not exceed 76 square feet. 
(n)  Political signs. 
(o)  Temporary auction or estate sale signs, to the extent that they are regulated under other ordinances specific to such activities. 
(p)  Real estate signs, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Real estate signs shall be no larger than six square feet in residential zone districts and no larger than 32 square feet in nonresidential zone districts. 
(2)  Real estate signs shall be placed only on the private property for sale or lease, with the permission of the property owner. 
(3)  Real estate signs shall be removed within 30 days after closing of the sale or lease of the property. 
(4)  Real estate signs shall be no higher than six feet from the grade. 
(5)  One real estate sign per street frontage except during the one week period prior to an open house, and during the actual hours of the open house, wherein signs directing traffic to the open house are permitted to be placed on other private properties with the permission of the proper owner(s). 
(6)  Real estate signs announcing the sale of properties within a subdivision, provided that such signs do not exceed 32 square feet in area and that the signs be removed at such time 76 percent or more of the lots in such subdivisions are sold. 
(q)  Construction signs as permitted within any zone district, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Construction signs shall not be erected until a building permit has been issued for the project which is the subject of the proposed sign, and construction activity has begun. 
(2)  Construction signs shall be removed immediately upon the issuance of any occupancy permit or completion of the structure(s) or facility which is the subject of the sign. 
(3)  Construction signs shall not exceed the maximum size of the type of sign in the zone district in which they are located. 
(r)  Directional signs permitted, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Directional signs shall not exceed six square feet in area and three feet in height. 
(2)  Directional signs shall be limited to the identification of functions such as traffic control, loading areas, employment office. 
(Ord. No. 361.07/04, 7-26-04) 
Sec. 76-10. - Residential zone districts. 
    The following provisions shall apply to signs located in the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 zone districts: 
(a)  Freestanding signs for residential subdivision, multiple-family complex, school, church or other use. 
(1)  Number: Two signs per subdivision, multiple-family complex, school, church or other use. 
(2)  Size: Each sign shall be no greater then 32 square feet. 
(3)  Location: Signs shall be set back at the minimum building setback for the zone district in which the sign is located. 
(4)  Height: No higher than six feet from the grade. 
(b)  Wall signs for home occupations: 
(1)  Number: One per lot or parcel. 
(2)  Size: No greater than four square feet. 
(3)  Location: On the wall of the house facing the street. 
(4)  Illumination: Prohibited. 
(c)  Wall signs for multiple-family complexes having six or more units, and for other permitted nonresidential uses: 
(1)  Number: Two per multiple-family complex or permitted nonresidential use. 
(2)  Size: No greater than 12 square feet (32 square feet if no freestanding signs are located on the property). 
(3)  Location: On the wall of the building facing the street. 
(d)  Signs for bed and breakfast establishment: One sign of a size not exceeding four square feet shall be permitted for every bed and breakfast facility. The sign shall identify the facility and name of owners only, and shall not contain scheduled rates, services or other information. 
(e)  Temporary signs for special activities located on the property of churches, schools or other property not used for residential purposes, provided that such signs meet the conditions required for placement of such signs in commercial district. 
(Ord. No. 361.07/04, 7-26-04) 
Sec. 76-11. - Commercial zone districts. 
    The following conditions shall be required in all commercial zone districts: 
(a)  Temporary signs for business promotions are permitted subject to a sign permit, provided: 
(1)  Such signs be displayed no longer than 14 consecutive days. 
(2)  Such signs be displayed up to a total of 60 days in any calendar year. 
(3)  Such signs comply with yard and dimensional requirements for other signs in the zoning district. 
(4)  There shall be no fee charged for temporary sign permits. 
(b)  Wall signs shall not exceed more than 12 inches from the wall of the building. 
(c)  Menu signs at drive-through restaurant facilities are permitted provided that the total area for such signs does not exceed 32 square feet and that the signs are not designed or located as to be read from the public right-of-way. Speakers on such signs shall be directed away from residential uses. 
(Ord. No. 361.07/04, 7-26-04) 
Sec. 76-12. - C-1 neighborhood commercial districts. 
(a)  Illuminated signs shall be lit only during the actual hours of business operation. 
(b)  Wall signs: 
(1)  Number: The maximum number of signs shall not exceed one per tenant per street frontage or parking area frontage. 
(2)  Size: The maximum area for all wall signs per building may not exceed one square foot of sign area for each one foot of building length of the wall upon which the sign is to be displayed. 
(c)  Awning, canopy, and marquee signs: 
(1)  Number: The maximum number of signs shall not exceed one per tenant per street frontage or parking area frontage. 
(2)  Size: The total sign area shall not exceed one square foot of sign area for each one foot of building length of the wall upon the awning, canopy or marquee is located. Signs shall be affixed flat to the surface of the awning, canopy or marquee. 
(d)  Projecting signs: 
(1)  Number: One per building wall which faces a street or parking lot. A building having multiple commercial tenants is permitted more than one projecting sign on a street or parking lot frontage provided that the number of projecting signs does not exceed one for each 25 feet of frontage and one per tenant. 
(2)  Size: Signs shall not exceed six square feet in area per sign. 
(3)  Location: 
a.  Signs shall not project more than 36 inches from the face of the building or wall, nor extend beyond the roof or eave line for a one-story building. 
b.  Signs shall maintain a clearance of eight feet from sidewalk. 
c.  Signs shall be located below the window sill of the second floor window. 
(Ord. No. 361.07/04, 7-26-04) 
Sec. 76-13. - C-2 shopping center districts. 
(a)  Restriction on total area. In no case shall the total area of signs located on one lot or parcel in the C-2 district exceed two square feet for each linear foot of street frontage. 
(b)  Wall signs. The maximum area for wall signs may not exceed ten percent of the wall area upon which the sign is placed. 
(c)  Integral roof signs. Permitted, subject to those restrictions that apply to wall signs. 
(d)  Freestanding signs: 
(1)  Number: One per lot or parcel; except that one per street frontage shall be permitted in the case of lots or parcels with frontage on more than one street, provided the frontage on each such additional street(s) is at least 100 feet in length. 
(2)  Size: Each permitted sign may not exceed 76 square feet in area. 
(3)  Location: Signs shall be located at least six feet from any property line. 
(4)  Height: Signs shall be no higher than 25 feet. 
(e)  Awning, canopy, and marquee signs: 
(1)  Number: One per building, or one per tenant in buildings housing one or more commercial tenants. 
(2)  Size: Total sign area may not exceed one square foot per lineal foot in length of the wall to which such sign is affixed. Signs shall be affixed flat to the surface of the awning, canopy, or marquee. 
(f)  Projecting signs: 
(1)  Number: One per building wall which faces a street or parking lot. A building having multiple commercial tenants is permitted more than one projecting sign on a street or parking lot frontage provided that the number of projecting signs does not exceed one for each 25 feet of frontage and one per tenant. 
(2)  Size: Signs shall not exceed six square feet in area per sign. 
(3)  Location: 
a.  Signs shall not project more than 36 inches from the face of the building or wall, nor extend beyond the roof or eave line for a one-story building. 
b.  Signs shall maintain a clearance of eight feet from the sidewalk. 
c.  Signs shall be located below the window sill of the second floor window. 
(Ord. No. 361.07/04, 7-26-04) 
Sec. 76-14. - C-3 central business district. 
(a)  Restriction on total area. In no case shall the total area of signs located on one lot or parcel in the C-3 district exceed two square feet for each linear foot of street frontage or parking lot frontage of that building. 
(b)  Wall signs. The maximum area for wall signs may not exceed ten percent of the wall area upon which the sign is placed. 
(c)  Projecting signs: 
(1)  Number: One per building wall which faces a street or parking lot. A building having multiple commercial tenants is permitted more than one projecting sign on a street or parking lot frontage provided that the number of projecting signs does not exceed one for each 25 feet of frontage and one per tenant. 
(2)  Size: Signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area per sign. 
(3)  Location: 
a.  Signs shall not project more than 36 inches from the face of the building or wall. 
b.  Signs shall maintain a clearance of eight feet from the sidewalk. 
c.  Signs shall be located below the window sill of the second floor window. 
(d)  Awnings, canopies, and marquees: 
(1)  Projection: An awning or canopy shall not project more than four feet beyond the face of a building. 
(2)  Location: The awning or canopy shall not extend over the vertical columns on either side of the first floor level. 
(3)  Signage: One sign is permitted on a face of an awning, canopy, or marquee. The total sign area shall not exceed two square feet for each linear foot of street or parking lot frontage of the wall upon which the awning, canopy, or marquee is located. Signs shall be affixed flat to the awning, canopy, or marquee. 
(e)  Freestanding signs: 
(1)  Number: One sign per parcel. 
(2)  Size: Each sign shall be no greater than 32 square feet. 
(3)  Location: Signs shall be set back at the minimum building setback for the zone district but in no case shall the sign obstruct pedestrian movement. 
(4)  Height: No higher than six feet from the grade. 
(Ord. No. 361.07/04, 7-26-04) 
Sec. 76-15. - M-1 light manufacturing district; M-2 heavy manufacturing district. 
(a)  The maximum area for all signs shall not exceed two square feet per linear foot of street frontage. 
(b)  Temporary signs or banners for business promotions are permitted subject to a sign permit provided: 
(1)  Signs be displayed no longer than 14 consecutive days. 
(2)  Signs occur not more than 60 days in any calendar year. 
(3)  Signs comply with yard and height requirements for other signs in the zoning district. 
(4)  The total sign area for such signs shall not exceed an amount equal to the maximum sign area permitted in the applicable zoning district. 
(c)  Wall signs, size. The maximum area for wall signs may not exceed ten percent of wall area upon which the sign is placed. 
(d)  Freestanding signs: 
(1)  Number: One sign per lot or parcel, except for a street frontage exceeding 300 continuous linear feet in which case two signs shall be permitted along that frontage. 
(2)  Size: The sign shall not exceed one square foot for each one foot of street frontage along which the sign(s) is to be located and in no case exceed 76 square feet. 
(3)  Location: A minimum of 25 feet from any property line. 
(4)  Height: The sign shall not exceed 25 feet in height. 
(e)  Awning, canopy, and marquee signs, signage. The total sign area shall not exceed two square feet for each linear foot of street or parking lot frontage of the wall upon which the awning, canopy, or marquee is located. Signs shall be affixed flat to the awning, canopy, or marquee. 
(Ord. No. 361.07/04, 7-26-04) 
Sec. 76-16. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-15 of the City of Buchanan Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 361.07/04, 7-26-04) 
Chapter 78 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 38. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate disposal, MCL 123.241, 123.361 et seq., MSA 5.2661, 5.2726(1) et seq.; solid waste management act, MCL 299.401 et seq., MSA 13.29(1) et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 78-1-78-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Brush means tree trimmings, limbs, small trees, and shrubbery trimmings greater than one-quarter inch in diameter but less than four inches in diameter, identified for curbside collection and chipping in accordance with policies of the city. Christmas trees, stripped of ornamentation, shall be considered brush. 
    Bulk items means discarded home appliances, furniture, miscellaneous equipment and other large-sized items authorized for pickup and disposal by the city during communitywide cleanup days only. 
    Garbage means putrescible animal, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetable wastes incidental to and resulting from the use, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. "Garbage" shall also include other solid wastes that are not classified as recyclable materials and are generated incidental to the use, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    Private solid waste hauler means any person engaged in the business of collecting, transporting, delivering or disposing of solid waste within the city, but excluding those persons who collect, transport, deliver or dispose of solid waste in a manner incidental to their primary business, such as construction and renovation contractors, lawn services, and persons who haul away solid wastes generated at their own residence or place of business. 
    Recyclable materials means those solid waste materials generated by households and businesses, identified by resolution of the city commission for collection in designated recycling containers. The city commission shall establish by resolution a listing of those solid wastes identified as recyclable materials, which may be updated from time to time based upon available recycling technologies and market conditions. Such resolution shall also specify the manner in which these recyclable materials are to be prepared for collection. 
    Rubbish means the waste materials from normal household or living conditions and business operations, but not including any solid wastes identified as recyclable materials. Rubbish includes by way of example, but not limitation: ashes, those plastic materials not identified as recyclable materials, ceramics, window glass, discarded clothing, and other nonputrescible solid wastes. 
    Solid waste means all of the waste types described in this section. 
    Yard wastes means grass clippings, leaves, weeds, shrub clippings, small twigs or branches less than one-quarter inch in diameter and less than four feet in length, and other yard and garden wastes which can be composted in accordance with guidelines set forth by the city for the collection and processing of yard wastes. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.001) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 78-27. - Scope. 
    Collection and disposal of solid wastes produced by residential, commercial and industrial facilities in the city shall be done in a manner consistent with the requirements of the policies of the city established by the city commission pursuant to this article, in accordance with applicable state laws. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.002) 
Sec. 78-28. - Penalty. 
    The city reserves the right to suspend solid waste collection services to any person who violates the provisions of this article, based on written documentation of such violation by the superintendent of environmental services. A notice of such suspension of service shall be furnished to the violating party via first class mail. Further, any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and be punished as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.011) 
Sec. 78-29. - Violations creating health hazard. 
(a)  If any person shall violate the provisions of this article, or any other ordinance of the city, code, statute or regulation of any county, state or federal agency or government so as to create or impose the possibility of an immediate health hazard, peril or danger to the community, the superintendent of environmental services shall take immediate corrective action through the removal of all garbage, refuse, ashes, garden rubbish or commercial waste and shall charge the property owner for all services, pursuant to the fee schedule adopted by resolution of this city commission. Except in the case of an emergency, the superintendent shall provide 48 hours prior notice of intent to require removal of all garbage, rubbish, garden rubbish, ashes or commercial waste, which notice shall contain the following: 
(1)  Name of property owner and any occupants, if known. 
(2)  Address of property. 
(3)  Nature of the violation. 
(4)  Action necessary to correct the health hazard, peril or danger. 
(5)  Time limit for completion of corrective action. 
(6)  Right of appeal. 
(b)  If anyone shall appeal the superintendent's determination, they shall present a written statement of appeal (as provided on the notice) to the city hall, attention: city manager. The city manager shall inspect the premises and attempt to resolve any disputes and shall make a written report to the property owner within 24 hours of receipt of the appeal. If the property owner accepts the determination, they shall sign a copy of the report and return it to the city manager within 24 hours. If no acceptance is received within that time, the city manager shall call an emergency meeting of the city commission and cause the police department to serve notice of the time and place of the meeting on the property owner and occupants of the affected property, if local, or make such service as shall provide notice of the meeting for nonresident owners. The city commission shall hold a hearing on the matter, allow all interested parties an opportunity to be heard, view the property and make a final determination. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.009) 
Sec. 78-30. - Emergency removal. 
(a)  If the county department of health shall determine that any person is violating this article, or any other ordinance of this city or any statute, code, rule or regulation of any county, state or federal agency or government, which violation imposes a serious hazard, peril or danger to the health, safety or welfare of the community, that department shall order the immediate removal by the city or correction of the conditions by the owner creating such hazard, peril or danger and the property owner shall be assessed for all costs related to the corrective action. 
(b)  If the city commission shall declare an emergency situation with regard to the removal of solid waste materials generated as the result of tornado, flood, or other disaster, the city commission may by resolution waive any of the limitations or requirements established in this article. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.010) 
Secs. 78-31-78-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 78-41. - Eligibility for collection; frequency. 
(a)  Each residential living unit located in a structure containing one to four living units shall be eligible for city collection and disposal of the solid wastes generated at that location. 
(b)  Each commercial or industrial facility and each multiunit residential structure containing more than four living units shall be eligible for city collection and disposal of the solid wastes generated at that location, to the same extent that such services are available to a single-family residential unit. 
(c)  The frequency of solid waste collections for residential, commercial and industrial properties shall be set by resolution of the city commission. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.004) 
Sec. 78-42. - Containers; specifications, placement. 
    To be eligible for city collection and disposal services as described in section 78-41, the owners or occupants of any property so served shall be required to conform to the following requirements regarding solid waste containers and placement: 
(1)  Types of containers. 
a.  For disposal of garbage or rubbish, containers shall be of metal, hard rubber, or rigid plastic material, of water-, vermin- and insect-tight construction, not to exceed 32 gallons capacity, equipped with tightfitting covers and with handles by which they may be lifted. 
b.  For disposal of yard wastes, containers shall be of a type designated by resolution of the city commission, for use in the city's yard waste composting program. There shall be a fee established by resolution of city commission for the collection of containerized yard wastes. 
c.  Brush shall not be placed in containers, but rather shall be cut in lengths not to exceed ten feet and neatly piled on the tree lawn (area between sidewalk and curb) just behind the curb, or just off the edge of the pavement in areas with noncurbed streets. Brush may not be tied or bundled, but shall be loose-stacked to facilitate chipping. Brush may not be piled within 30 feet of any street intersection, within 20 feet of any fire hydrant, nor in a manner that interferes with pedestrians' use of the public sidewalk. 
d.  All recyclable materials shall be placed in rigid plastic containers specified by resolution of the city commission for this purpose. Each household shall receive one such container free of charge from the city. Replacement of such containers or purchase of additional containers shall be at the property owner's expense. Such containers shall be available for purchase at city hall, at a cost to be determined by resolution of the city commission. Newspapers may be placed in grocery bags and placed beside the containers, if there is not sufficient room in the container. 
(2)  Maximum weight of containers. No loaded container shall exceed 60 pounds in weight. 
(3)  Placement of containers, piles of brush. 
a.  Location. Solid waste containers or stacks of brush shall be placed at the back edge of curb (edge of pavement on noncurbed streets) in front of the property where such waste originated. The sole exceptions to such placement shall be locations where the superintendent of public works determines that solid waste collection shall be from the public alley behind a property or where the superintendent authorizes special pickup services for handicapped or infirm individuals. 
b.  Time. Solid waste containers or stacks of brush shall be placed in the manner described in subsection (3)a. not earlier than 4:00 p.m. the day before a property's scheduled solid waste collection day. Containers must be removed by 10:00 a.m. of the day following collection. 
(4)  Maximum number of containers. No residential living unit, commercial facility nor industrial facility shall be eligible to have more than four containers of garbage or rubbish, as defined in this article, collected on any single collection day. There shall be no limitation on the number of containers of yard wastes or recyclable materials placed at streetside for collection. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.005) 
Sec. 78-43. - Deposit of certain materials prohibited. 
    No person shall place any hazardous materials, including but not limited to poisons, drugs, acids, dangerous chemicals, narcotics, radioactive wastes, or explosive substances, in any container for collection and disposal by the city's solid waste disposal program. It shall be illegal to place for collection any materials identified by state law as illegal for disposal in Type II landfills. The carcasses of dead animals shall not be placed for collection by the city. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.006) 
Sec. 78-44. - Scavenging. 
    Solid wastes placed at the edge of the street in city collection in accordance with this division shall be considered the exclusive property of the city or its authorized solid waste collection agent, between the time such materials are placed at curbside and the time they are collected by the city or its authorized collection agent. It shall be unlawful for any person, not duly authorized by the city, to collect, remove, pick up, or cause to be collected, removed, or picked up, any such solid waste materials. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.007) 
Secs. 78-45-78-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE SOLID WASTE HAULERS 
Subdivision I. - General Provisions 

Secs. 78-56-78-65. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - License 

Sec. 78-66. - Required. 
    No person shall operate as a private solid waste hauler within the city without first obtaining a license issued by the city clerk. A solid waste hauler license shall be valid from the date of issuance or renewal until the following June 30, unless revoked earlier. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.003(a)) 
Sec. 78-67. - Conditions for granting. 
    In order to be granted a license to operate as a private solid waste hauler in the city, or to have such a license renewed, an applicant must: 
(1)  Complete a license application on forms furnished by the city clerk's office. 
(2)  Pay an application fee as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(3)  Require all of its customers to place solid waste materials in containers of the type required by the city's collection service, or in commercial grade plastic or metal dumpsters, equipped with covers and of watertight, insecttight and vermintight construction. 
(4)  Furnish a schedule of pickup locations and times for all customers located within the city. 
(5)  Show evidence that the applicant's services include: 
a.  The collection, from all customers located within the city, of all recyclable materials as identified by the city, for recycling. 
b.  The collection of yard wastes for disposal by composting; landfilling of any yard wastes generated in the city shall constitute a violation of this division. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.003(b)) 
Sec. 78-68. - Denial of license or renewal; right of appeal. 
    The city clerk shall deny issuance of a solid waste hauler license or a renewal of a solid waste hauler license to any applicant who fails to meet the requirements set forth in section 78-67. Any such applicant who wishes to appeal the city clerk's denial of his application may request in writing a formal hearing before the city commission, with such request to be directed to the city clerk, who shall schedule such hearing before the city commission within 30 calendar days of the receipt of such request. The city commission shall then decide whether to approve or deny such application, based on its compliance with the conditions set forth in section 78-67. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.003(c)) 
Sec. 78-69. - Revocation; right of appeal. 
    The city shall have the right to revoke the license of any private solid waste hauler found to be in violation of any of the conditions outlined in section 78-67. In such cases, notice of such revocation shall be sent to the licensee at the address indicated on his most recent license application, via certified mail, or shall be personally served on such licensee by a member of the police department. Such notice of revocation shall be signed by the city clerk, and shall identify the specific conditions of this division which have been violated. Such revocation may be appealed to the city commission, by directing a request in writing to the city clerk. Upon the receipt of such a written request, the city clerk shall schedule a formal hearing before the city commission within 30 calendar days. The city commission shall then decide whether to uphold or overturn the revocation, based on its evaluation of the licensee's compliance with the conditions set forth in section 78-67. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.003(d)) 
Chapter 82 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq., MSA 5.3534(1) et seq.; deferment for older persons, MCL 211.761 et seq., MSA 5.3536(1) et seq.; powers re special assessments, MCL 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4d, 117.5, MSA 5.2074, 5.2075, 5.2077, 5.2084. 

Sec. 82-1. - Initiation. 
    Special assessment procedure may be initiated by either of the following methods: 
(1)  Petition of one or more interested property owners. Such petition may be written or oral, and may be presented to the city commission at any regular or special meeting. 
(2)  Action by the city commission. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.021) 
Sec. 82-2. - Resolution required. 
    Any petition for improvement by special assessment procedure shall require a resolution of the city commission as defined in section 7.2 of the Charter. Such resolution may be favorable to the petition and set a time for public hearing; may deny the petition; or may postpone action to a later date. If the petition is denied or action is postponed, petitioners shall be so notified by the city clerk. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.022) 
Sec. 82-3. - Public hearing on necessity. 
    Before ordering any public improvement, any part of the cost of which is to be defrayed by special assessment, the city commission shall first hold a public hearing to determine the necessity of the improvement. At that hearing all interested persons, whether in favor of or opposed to the improvement, shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.023) 
Sec. 82-4. - Resolution declaring necessity. 
    If the city commission shall find the making of the proposed improvement to be a necessity, and desirable in the public interest, it shall so declare by a resolution declaring necessity stating the nature of the improvement and preliminary estimate of cost and what part or portion of the cost thereof shall be paid by special assessment, and what part shall be paid by the city at large, and shall designate the district or lands and premises upon which the special assessment shall be levied. The resolution declaring necessity shall direct the city manager to prepare, or cause to be prepared, plans, specifications, and final estimates of cost, and shall direct the city assessor to prepare an assessment roll based on the manager's estimates of cost. Unless a majority of the persons to be assessed shall petition for an improvement no such improvement or work shall be ordered except by the concurrence of three commissioners. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.024) 
Sec. 82-5. - Preparation of roll. 
    The city assessor shall assess upon each lot or parcel of land such relative portion of the whole sum to be levied against all lots and parcels of land as shall be proportionate to the estimated benefit resulting to such lot or parcel of land from the improvement. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.025) 
Sec. 82-6. - Commission review of roll. 
    Upon receiving the special assessment roll from the city assessor the city commission shall examine the roll, and shall direct any changes deemed necessary, and shall set a time and place for public hearing on the confirmation of the roll. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.026) 
Sec. 82-7. - Roll open to public. 
    When the special assessment roll has been accepted by the city commission, or has been changed according to the commission's direction, it shall thereafter be a matter of public record and may be examined by any interested person during regular office hours. Such roll as approved or changed shall be available for examination at least two weeks prior to the date set for hearing on confirmation thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.027) 
Sec. 82-8. - Public hearing on confirmation of roll. 
    The city commission shall hear all interested persons at the time and place specified, and shall determine whether the roll is just and equitable. Notice of this hearing shall be made in compliance with Act No. 162 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1962 (MCL 211.741 et seq., MSA 5.3534(1) et seq.), as amended. The commission may make such changes or corrections in the assessment roll, prior to confirmation thereof, as may be necessary to assure that individual assessments are proportionate to benefits. The special assessment roll may be confirmed by a confirmation resolution voted affirmatively by not less than three members of the commission at any time after interested persons shall have had an opportunity to be heard. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.028) 
Sec. 82-9. - Payment by installments. 
(a)  All special assessments shall be payable in such number of approximately equal annual installments, not exceeding 15, as the city commission shall determine. The first installment of a special assessment shall be due and payable on the date specified by the city commission in the confirmation resolution provided such date shall not be less than 30 days nor more than 90 days from confirmation of the roll. If a date for first installment is not specified in the confirmation resolution such installment shall be due 30 days after confirmation of the roll. After the first installment each successive installment shall be due upon each succeeding anniversary of the first installment. 
(b)  Interest shall be charged on the unpaid or deferred balance of all special assessments at five percent per annum. 
(c)  Each annual special assessment billing shall show the total special assessment unpaid, the installment due and the interest on the unpaid balance. Interest charges will be credited as income to the special assessment district. The cost of financing construction prior to full payment of assessments shall be a charge against the assessment district. 
(d)  If any special assessment or any installment of a special assessment is not paid when due such assessment or installment shall be deemed delinquent. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.029) 
Sec. 82-10. - Confirmation of roll final. 
    When any assessment roll shall be confirmed by the city commission it shall be final and conclusive unless, within 15 days after such confirmation, action is instituted in a court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of contesting such assessment roll. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.030) 
Sec. 82-11. - Delinquent penalty. 
    In case any assessment or installment, or any part thereof, shall remain unpaid on the May 1 following the date when the same became delinquent, the same shall be reported by the city treasurer to the city commission. The whole amount thus reported shall be transferred and reassessed on the next annual city tax roll in a column headed "special assessment," and when so transferred and reassessed upon the tax roll shall be collected and paid in all respects as provided for the collection of city property taxes. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.031) 
Sec. 82-12. - Special assessments constitute lien. 
    All special assessments including deferred installments shall, from the date of confirmation thereof, constitute a lien upon the respective lot or parcels of land assessed, and until paid shall be a charge against the respective owners of the several lots and parcels of land, as assessed. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.032) 
Sec. 82-13. - Assessment not invalidated. 
    No judgment or decree, nor any act of the city commission vacating a special assessment, shall destroy or impair the lien of the city upon the premises assessed, for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the same, or as by a regular mode of proceeding might have been lawfully assessed thereon. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.033) 
Sec. 82-14. - Assessment accounts. 
(a)  Moneys raised by special assessment to pay the cost of any local improvement shall be held in a special fund to pay such cost or to repay money borrowed therefor. Special assessment funds shall be used only for the improvement projects for which the assessments were levied. A complete account shall be kept of the funds of each individual assessment district. 
(b)  If at the completion of work contemplated in the assessment district the assessments should exceed the amount necessary by over five percent, the excess shall be refunded on a pro rata basis to the owners of the property, as shown on the last city tax roll. 
(c)  If at the completion of or during work contemplated in the assessment district the assessments should lack the amount necessary by five percent or more the deficiency shall be reassessed to the owners of property in the original assessment district. 
(d)  No refund shall be made where the assessment has not been paid in full but rather a credit shall be made on the amount due on the assessment roll. No refund shall be made for an amount of less than $1.00. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.034) 
Sec. 82-15. - Payment of city's portion. 
    Whenever any portion of the cost of any improvement shall be assumed or charged to the city at large and the balance of such cost assessed to the property benefited, then the payment of the city's portion of such cost shall be in installments in the same manner as shall be provided for the payment of the portion assessed to the benefited property, except that the city shall pay no interest. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.035) 
Sec. 82-16. - Notice of hearings. 
    Due notice of any hearing required to be held pursuant to this chapter shall be considered as having been given to property owners by giving the following notice: 
(1)  Publication of a notice setting forth the improvement proposed, the time and place and date of the hearing, the fact that the improvement is to be financed in whole or in part by special assessment, and the proposed special assessment district, in a newspaper of general circulation in the city twice, the first notice to be published at least two weeks before the date of the hearing and the last notice at least four days prior to the hearing; and 
(2)  The mailing of a notice by first class mail, setting forth the same information as required in the publication under subsection (1) of this section, to each property owner in the special assessment district as shown by the current tax assessment rolls of the city, at least two full weeks prior to the date of the hearing. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.036) 
Sec. 82-17. - Sidewalk assessment procedure. 
(a)  A notice by registered mail to the last known address of the property owner, as shown on the last city tax roll ordering construction or reconstruction of sidewalk, shall be considered as a declaration of necessity of the sidewalk improvement. 
(b)  If the property owner then fails to construct sidewalk within 60 days of the mailing of such notice and in accordance with city specifications an assessment roll shall be prepared and a hearing held on confirmation of the roll. The hearing on confirmation of the roll may be held either prior to or after completion of the improvement. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  12.037) 
Chapter 86 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; parks and recreation, ch. 62; planning, ch. 70; special assessments, ch. 82; subdivisions, ch. 90; telecommunications, ch. 96; traffic and vehicles, ch. 98; utilities, ch. 102; vegetation, ch. 106. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 86-1-86-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREETS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 86-26-86-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 86-36. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided by section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  30.109) 
Sec. 86-37. - Permit required. 
    No person shall make or cause to be made any opening in any street, alley or other public place unless a valid permit therefor is first obtained from the city. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  30.101) 
Sec. 86-38. - Form of permit. 
    The form of permit to be used shall be as follows: 
STREET OPENING PERMIT 
    Permission is hereby granted to ___________ to make an opening in ___________ Street, _____ feet long, _____ feet wide and _____ feet deep, for the purpose of ___________. The street opening is located ___________ (describe exactly). The permittee agrees to return the street to as good condition as before the opening was made, and to maintain same for a period of one year. All proper safeguards are to be used for the protection of the public. 
Permittee _____ Approved: _____ By _____ Date: _____  
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  30.102) 
Sec. 86-39. - Conditions for valid permit. 
    In order for any street opening permit to be valid, it shall be approved by the city commission, or by some person designated by it for the purpose, and the fee shall be paid. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  30.103) 
Sec. 86-40. - Fees. 
    Fees for street opening permits shall be as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time and shall be in the following categories: 
(1)  For opening in the travelled way, gravel surface, per square yard. 
(2)  For opening in the travelled way, concrete, brick, asphalt or other improved surface, per square yard. 
(3)  For opening in tree lawn, parkway or other area not used for travel, per square yard. 
(4)  For cutting curb, per linear foot. 
(5)  For opening in sidewalk, per square yard. 
The minimum permit fee shall be $1.00. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  30.104) 
Sec. 86-41. - Circumstances requiring increased fees. 
    When any street, alley or other public place has been surfaced or resurfaced with concrete, brick, asphalt or other hard-surfacing material, opening thereof within three years thereafter shall be considered contrary to the public interest and increased fees shall be charged, as follows: 
(1)  Within the first year, four times the regular required fee. 
(2)  Within the second year, three times the regular required fee. 
(3)  Within the third year, double the regular required fee. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  30.105) 
Sec. 86-42. - Valid period of permits. 
    Street opening permits shall be valid for a period of 30 days from the date of issue and void thereafter, except that for large projects which by their nature cannot be completed within that time, the permit may specify a longer period but in no case for longer than three months. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  30.106) 
Sec. 86-43. - Fees to reimburse city for inspections. 
    The fees charged for street opening permits shall reimburse the city for such inspections as may be necessary in the public interest. In those cases where the city commission shall determine that the actual cost of inspection exceeds the permit fee, the permittee shall pay the additional cost upon demand. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  30.107) 
Sec. 86-44. - Exemptions. 
    Operations by city forces on work authorized by responsible city officials is in the public interest, and such operations shall be exempt from the provisions of this division. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  30.108) 
Secs. 86-45-86-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 86-76 of Ord. No. 2006.02/369, adopted Feb. 27, 2006, repealed  86-66-86-73 in their entirety. Similar provisions were enacted by said ordinance to read as herein set out. Former  86-66-86-73 derived from Ord. No. 362.10/04, adopted Oct. 25, 2004. 

Sec. 86-66. - Penalty. 
    Any violation of this article is punishable as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2006.02/369, 2-27-06) 
Sec. 86-67. - Duty to keep sidewalk clear of obstruction. 
(1)  The owner or occupant of any lands and premises butting upon any public sidewalk shall keep the same free of all sand, rubbish, dirt and litter, and shall remove promptly all snow which shall fall thereon and all ice which shall form thereon. 
(2)  If the occupant(s) and/or the owner(s) fail to remove all sand, rubbish, dirt, litter, ice or snow from said sidewalks within 24 hours of being notified by the city of such violation, the failure to remove may result in any offending accumulation to be removed by the city at the expense of the occupant(s) and/or owner(s). 
(Ord. No. 2006.02/369, 2-27-06; Ord. No. 2015.03/391, 3-9-15) 
Sec. 86-68. - Obstructions and encroachments. 
    No person shall obstruct or encroach upon any public sidewalk in any manner whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 2006.02/369, 2-27-06) 
Sec. 86-69. - Maintenance. 
    All sidewalks within the city shall be kept in good repair by the owner of the lot adjacent to such sidewalk. Whenever any sidewalk within the city shall require repair because it is defective or unsafe as determined by the city manager, the city manager shall give the owner written notice and the owner shall repair the sidewalk within 60 days. If the owner fails to repair the sidewalk within 60 days after service of notice, the city manager shall report this to the city commission, requesting that authorization be granted to repair such sidewalk. If the city commission shall make a determination to repair such sidewalk it shall order the city manager to do all work required to repair such sidewalk and it shall determine the time for payment by the owner of the adjacent lot for the work which has been done. 
(Ord. No. 2006.02/369, 2-27-06) 
Sec. 86-70. - Installation areas. 
    The city commission may by resolution designate any area within the city where sidewalks do not exist as a sidewalk installation area and, when so designated, sidewalks shall be ordered to be constructed in such area by a notice sent to each property owner. Notice procedures for installing sidewalk in installation areas shall be in accordance with the current special assessment ordinance and policies as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2006.02/369, 2-27-06) 
Sec. 86-71. - Enforcement. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city manager or his designate to make a survey of sidewalk conditions in the city at least once each year. The city manager or his designate shall mail a notice to each property owner advising him of his responsibility to repair defective and unsafe sidewalk adjacent to his lot. The annual survey shall be based on reasonable standards to eliminate defective and unsafe sidewalk. Such standards may be set by resolution by the city commission. 
(b)  Failure of the city manager or his designate to notify the owner of the adjacent lot of the existence of hazardous sidewalk shall not be construed as negligence on the part of the city or relieving the owner of the adjacent lot of his responsibility to maintain and keep sidewalks in good repair. 
(Ord. No. 2006.02/369, 2-27-06) 
Sec. 86-72. - Grades, specifications. 
    All sidewalk work shall be done in strict conformity to the alignment and grade as established by the city manager or his designate and shall be constructed according to specifications as set forth in section 86-75. 
(Ord. No. 2006.02/369, 2-27-06) 
Sec. 86-73. - Permit to construct or repair. 
    No sidewalk located on the public right-of-way shall be constructed or repaired in the city unless a permit has been obtained from the city manager or his designate. A permit shall be required for all new construction and for repair of sidewalks where more than 32 square feet of sidewalk is repaired at one time. There shall be no fee for such permit. The permit may be revoked by the city manager or his designate for any violation of this article and the work ordered to be redone to conform to this article. This section does not preclude the responsibility of a penalty for such violation. 
(Ord. No. 2006.02/369, 2-27-06) 
Sec. 86-74. - Cost of repair and construction. 
    All sidewalk repair and construction work shall be paid by the owner of the adjacent lot in accordance with the special assessment ordinance and policies as adopted by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 2006.02/369, 2-27-06) 
Sec. 86-75. - Specifications for construction and repair of public sidewalk. 
    All sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications set forth in the "City of Buchanan Specifications for Construction of Improvements," as the same was approved by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 2006.02/369, 2-27-06) 
Sec. 86-76. - Repeal. 
    Chapter 86, article III, Sidewalks, sections 86-66 through 86-73, is hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2006.02/369, 2-27-06) 
Sec. 86-77. - Effective date. 
    This chapter shall become effective 15 days after enactment and publication pursuant to chapter 7, section 7.4 and section 7.5, of the Charter of the City of Buchanan, Michigan. 
(Ord. No. 2006.02/369, 2-27-06) 
Secs. 86-78-86-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DRIVEWAYS AND CURBS 

Sec. 86-96. - Curb cuts. 
    No opening in or through any curb shall be made without first obtaining a written permit from the city. Curb cuts and sidewalk driveway crossings to provide access to private property shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  No single curb cut shall be less than ten feet, provided, however, that the removal of curb to construct the driveway approach radius shall not be included in computing the minimum width. 
(2)  The minimum distance between any curb cut and the public crosswalk shall be ten feet. 
(3)  The minimum distance between curb cuts, except those serving residential property, shall be 20 feet. 
(4)  The maximum number of lineal feet of sidewalk or driveway crossings permitted for any lot, parcel of land, business or enterprise, shall be 45 percent of the total abutting street frontage up to and including 200 lineal feet of street frontage plus 20 percent of the lineal feet of street frontage in excess of 200 feet. 
(5)  Necessary adjustments to public sidewalk, utility poles, lights standards, fire hydrants, catch basins, street or railway signs, signals, or other public improvements or installations shall be accomplished without cost to the city and shall conform with standards established by the city or utility company. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  30.001) 
Sec. 86-97. - Exceptions. 
    No permit shall be granted in the following cases, except by special permission of the city commission: 
(1)  When such curb cut is to serve a one-car garage and is intended to be more than 16 feet wide; provided, however, that the removal of curb to construct the driveway approach radius shall not be included in computing the maximum width. 
(2)  When such curb cut is to serve a two-car garage and is intended to be more than 22 feet wide; provided, however, that the removal of curb to construct the driveway approach radius shall not be included in computing the maximum width. 
(3)  When such curb cut is to be made permanent, for any other purpose, and is intended to be more than 30 feet wide; provided, however, that the removal of curb to construct the driveway approach radius shall not be included in computing the maximum width. 
(4)  When such curb cut is permanent, and, in the opinion of the city manager, will interfere with the safety of the public. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  30.002) 
Sec. 86-98. - Specifications. 
    Specifications for curb cuts and driveway approaches shall be as follows: 
(1)  All work shall be done in a workmanlike manner to keep maintenance and repair at a minimum. Poor workmanship which will not serve satisfactorily over a period of time shall be cause for revocation of a permit. When any permit has been revoked, no further permits will be issued to the owner until such condition is corrected. 
(2)  All curb cuts shall be made in such manner that existing surface drainage on the streets shall not be impeded. 
(3)  All curb cuts shall be completed by removal of the back of the existing curb. The gutter for surface drainage shall remain in place insofar as possible. The back shall be removed by scoring the curb with a concrete saw to provide a regular break before removing the back of the curb. Existing gutter shall remain in place in order not to disturb existing street drainage. 
(4)  The driveway approach which connects to an improved public street that has curb and gutter and public sidewalk, and which is located on the public street right-of-way shall be constructed of concrete in accordance with the current standard plans and specifications of the Michigan Department of Transportation, Bureau of Highways (MDOT). Driveway approaches in existence and surfaced with asphalt, brick, or other hard-surfaced paving materials, as of October 12, 1994, shall not be considered non-complying, but must be reconstructed with concrete when resurfacing becomes necessary. 
(5)  All driveway approaches shall be constructed with a four-foot radius which shall be measured from a point which is perpendicular to and located four feet from street curb and the edge of the driveway. When the street tree lawn width is less than four feet the radius of the driveway approach shall be equal to the distance from the sidewalk to the street curb. 
(6)  In all cases where a driveway approach is to be constructed in a location where no street tree lawn or parkway area exists the driveway approach shall be constructed in such manner that the encroachment on the public sidewalk will not result in a hazard to pedestrians. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  30.003; Ord. No. 336, 9-26-94) 
Sec. 86-99. - Permit required. 
    No opening in or through any curb or any street shall be made without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  30.004) 
Sec. 86-100. - Permit fee. 
    The fee for a curb cut permit shall be as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time but if such permit is requested at the time of making application for a building permit for the same premises, the payment of such fee shall not be required. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  30.005) 
Sec. 86-101. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  30.006) 
Secs. 86-102-86-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SNOW REMOVAL 

Sec. 86-121. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Person shall not include the state or political subdivision of the state operating within the scope of its duties. 
    Safety vision means an unobstructed line of sight enabling a driver to travel upon, enter, or exit a roadway in a safe manner. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.751) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 86-122. - Penalty. 
    Any violation or failure to comply with the provisions of this article or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto shall be punished as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.754) 
Sec. 86-123. - Creating obstruction of vision, interference with movement on street or sidewalk. 
(a)  A person shall not remove, or cause to be removed, snow, ice, or slush onto or across a roadway or the shoulder of the roadway or sidewalk, street or alley in any manner which obstructs the safety vision of the driver of a motor vehicle other than off-road vehicles. 
(b)  A person shall not deposit, or cause to be deposited, snow, ice or slush onto or across a roadway or any sidewalk, street or alley in a manner which obstructs the safety vision of the driver of a motor vehicle. 
(c)  A person shall not deposit, or cause to be deposited, snow, ice or slush on the street side of the curb or in any manner or place that will damage property, public or private; or hamper the steering, braking or accelerating of a motor vehicle; or hamper pedestrian traffic. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.752) 
Chapter 90 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; community development, ch. 30; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; planning, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; utilities, ch. 102. 
State Law reference- Subdivision control act, MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 90-1. - Standards required. 
    A lot in a well developed subdivision, with essential improvements already installed, is a better investment for a prospective purchaser than one which does not have the necessary facilities and such improvement contributes directly to an individual health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, in the best interests of the purchaser, subdivider and city at large certain standards to be required of future subdivisions are hereby established. It is not the intent of this chapter to discourage subdividing but it is rather the intent to encourage development and subdividing which will make for an orderly and well developed community and preserve land values within the community. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  14.002) 
Secs. 90-2-90-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLATS 

Sec. 90-26. - Preliminary plat. 
    A preliminary plat shall be prepared for submission before consideration by the city commission. The following information shall be required on a preliminary plat: 
(1)  The scale of the drawing, not more than 200 feet to the inch, the date, a north arrow and identification of existing bordering streets, property lines, buildings, watercourses, railroads, utilities and other physical features so that the proposed plat may be adequately located in respect to adjoining property. 
(2)  Names and addresses of the owner and surveyor or engineer preparing the preliminary plat. Names, location and width of proposed streets, alleys, easements, parks, lot lines and existing utilities. 
(3)  Relative ground elevations at the intersections of all streets and at the extremities of the plat. 
(4)  The zoning classification requested for the plat or parts of the plat. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  14.011) 
Sec. 90-27. - Final plat. 
    A final plat prepared in accordance with the subdivision control act (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.), as amended, and containing the features of the accepted preliminary plat must be submitted within one year from the date of acceptance of the preliminary plat, otherwise approval of the preliminary plat shall become null and void. Final plat approval shall be conditioned upon the developer meeting the conditions of section 90-81 et seq. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  14.012) 
Secs. 90-28-90-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 90-51. - Generally. 
    The subdivision shall be so arranged as to be in harmony with the adjoining subdivisions and provide for the continuation of existing streets. Provision shall be made for streets through the subdivision for platting of contiguous property. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  14.020) 
Sec. 90-52. - Streets. 
    The minimum width of streets shall be 60 feet for local streets and 80 feet for arterial or section line streets; provided, however, that the city commission may at its discretion accept lesser widths for streets of length of less than 600 feet or streets ending in a cul-de-sac. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  14.021) 
Sec. 90-53. - Blocks. 
    No block shall be more than 1100 feet in length between the centerlines of intersecting streets nor less than 500 feet in length. The optimum length of a block shall be considered 800 feet. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  14.022) 
Sec. 90-54. - Alleys. 
    Alleys not less than 18 feet in width shall be provided to serve the rear of all lots proposed for business use. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  14.023) 
Sec. 90-55. - Easements. 
    Easements not less than six feet in width shall be required at the rear of all lots, such easements to be dedicated and provide for utility service from street to street. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  14.024) 
Sec. 90-56. - Lot frontage. 
    Minimum lot frontage and lot depth requirements shall be as established in the city zoning ordinance. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  14.025) 
Sec. 90-57. - Parks and public spaces. 
    The city commission may accept the dedication of suitable parks and other public open spaces when it appears that the city at large will benefit from such dedication. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  14.026) 
Secs. 90-58-90-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 90-81. - Generally. 
    The developer shall provide the following improvements set out in this article before approval of a plat or shall provide the city commission with a certified check sufficient to cover full faith and compliance or shall provide a performance bond in an amount necessary to ensure compliance with this article. Sewer and water facilities shall be installed to serve each building before occupancy and street construction and sidewalks shall be completed within one year after occupancy. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  14.040) 
Sec. 90-82. - Water. 
    The minimum size water main shall be six inches in diameter and all water mains must be looped so that water is available from two sources to any point. Fire hydrants, gate valves and appurtenances shall be installed in accordance with accepted engineering practice. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  14.041) 
Sec. 90-83. - Sewer facilities. 
    Adequate sanitary sewer facilities shall be provided to service the subdivision. If due to topography or other circumstances it is not advisable to require sanitary sewers, lot sizes shall conform to section 90-55 and septic tanks shall be constructed to serve each property individually. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  14.042) 
Sec. 90-84. - Streets. 
    Streets not less than 29 feet in width with adequate storm drainage, curb and gutter and a six-inch gravel compacted base shall be installed by the subdivider in accordance with the "City of Buchanan Specifications for Construction of Improvements," as approved by resolution of the city commission. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  14.043) 
Sec. 90-85. - Sidewalks. 
    Concrete sidewalks not less than four feet in width and four inches in thickness shall be installed by the subdivider. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  14.044) 
Sec. 90-86. - Design of improvements; exceptions. 
(a)  The improvements required by this article shall be designed by a registered professional engineer prior to final plat approval. Installation of improvements shall be to specifications of the city and under inspection by the city engineer. If in any instance the city should decide that it is necessary to install a larger water main, sewer or greater width of street, the city will bear a pro rata share of the cost of the particular improvement. 
(b)  In some cases the proposed area to be platted will not be served at its borders by water mains or adequate sewers. The city commission may require a petition for the creation of an assessment district to furnish such sewer and water or may require the developer to bear the full cost of extensions to the area to be platted. The city commission may accept petitions for an assessment district in lieu of a certified check or performance bond for installation of improvements, provided, that no building permits shall be issued within the subdivision until the assessment district is confirmed and the roll spread. 
(c)  Where extraordinary circumstances exist or there are practical difficulties in complying with a certain provision or requirements of this article the city commission may at its discretion vary or modify any of the provisions or requirements in a particular instance so that the spirit of the article shall be observed and an adequate development encouraged. 
(d)  The building inspector of the city is authorized, within the limitations of existing ordinances of the city, particularly Ordinance No. 154, and the limitations of Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 28.430(101) et seq.), as amended, to grant permission for the partitioning or dividing of lots, outlots or other parcels of land (as defined in Act No. 288). A first appeal from an adverse decision may be taken to the city plan commission and a second appeal may be taken to the city commission. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  14.045) 
Sec. 90-87. - Construction standards. 
    All improvements required by this article shall be constructed in accordance with the "City of Buchanan Specifications for Construction of Improvements," as approved by resolution of the city commission. 
Chapter 94 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; community development, ch. 30. 
State Law reference- General property tax act, MCL 211.1 et seq., MSA 7.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 94-1-94-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOUSING SERVICE CHARGE IN LIEU OF PROPERTY TAX[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 94-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Annual shelter rent means the total collections during an agreed annual period from all occupants of a housing project representing rent or occupancy charges, exclusive of charges for gas, electricity, heat or other utilities furnished to the occupants. 
    Authority means the state housing development authority. 
    Consumer housing cooperative means a nonprofit corporation incorporated pursuant to the corporation laws of this state. 
    Federally aided mortgage means any of the following: 
(1)  A below market interest rate mortgage insured, purchased, or held by the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
(2)  A market interest rate mortgage insured by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and augmented by a program of rent supplements. 
(3)  A mortgage receiving interest reduction payments provided by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development. 
(4)  A mortgage receiving special benefits under other federal law designated specifically to develop low and moderate income housing, consistent with this article. 
    Housing development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for persons of low or moderate income and elements of other housing and commercial, recreational, industrial, communal, and education facilities which the authority determines improve the quality of the development as it relates to housing for persons of low or moderate income. 
    Housing project means any of the following: 
(1)  Residential real property developed or to be developed or receiving benefits under this article. 
(2)  A specific work or improvement either for rental or for subsequent sale to an individual purchaser undertaken by a nonprofit housing corporation, consumer housing cooperative, or limited dividend housing corporation pursuant to or receiving benefits under this article to provide dwelling accommodations, including the acquisition, construction, or rehabilitation of lands, buildings and improvements. 
(3)  Social, recreation, commercial, and communal facilities as the authority finds necessary to serve and improve a residential area in which housing pursuant to subsection (1) or (2) is located or is planned to be located, thereby enhancing the viability of the housing. 
    Limited dividend housing corporation means a corporation incorporated or qualified pursuant to the corporation laws of this state and a limited dividend housing association organized and qualified pursuant to state law. 
    Low income or moderate income persons means families and persons who cannot afford to pay the amounts at which private enterprise, without federally aided mortgages or loans from the authority, is providing a substantial supply of decent, safe and sanitary housing and who fall within income limitations set by the authority in its rules. Among low income or moderate income persons, preference shall be given to the elderly and those displaced by urban renewal, slum clearance or other governmental action. 
    Nonprofit housing corporation means a nonprofit corporation incorporated pursuant to the corporation laws of this state. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.021) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 94-27. - Exceptions. 
    This article shall not affect housing projects for which an exemption has already been granted. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.022) 
Sec. 94-28. - Exclusion. 
    The tax exemption established in subsection 1 of section 15a of Act No. 346 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1966 (MCL 125.1401 et seq., MSA 16.114(1) et seq.), as amended, shall not apply to any housing project with the city, except as approved by the commission as a specific exception to this article. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.023) 
Sec. 94-29. - Application procedure. 
(a)  The sponsor of any housing project whether a nonprofit housing corporation, consumer housing cooperative or limited dividend housing corporation shall: 
(1)  File a request in writing with the commission for exemption as provided in this article. 
(2)  Submit with the request certification from the authority that the project qualifies as a housing project qualified for exemption under this article. 
(3)  Submit financial reports, budgets, description of the program financing the housing project, the individuals to be served by the housing project and proposed rental schedules. 
(b)  The commission shall either refuse to grant the exemption or shall establish by ordinance by any amount it chooses the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by said housing project; provided, however, the service charge shall not exceed the taxes that would be paid. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.024) 
Sec. 94-30. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all housing projects for which the owner of the housing project eligible for exemption shall have filed with the local assessing officer a notification of exemption in the year in which this article is adopted, being the calendar year 1981, and future years. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.025) 
Sec. 94-31. - Benefits. 
    Any exemption granted under this article shall be allocated, by the sponsor of the housing project, exclusively to low income persons or families in the form of reduced housing charges. The service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for that part of a housing project which is occupied by other than lower income persons or families shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes which would be paid on that portion of the housing project if the project were not tax exempt. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.026) 
Secs. 94-32-94-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - METEA COURT 

Sec. 94-41. - Tax exemption. 
    Metea Court, a Michigan state housing development authority project, being a housing project eligible for tax exemption pursuant to section 15a of Act No. 346 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1966 (MCL 125.1401 et seq., MSA 16.114(1) et seq.), as amended, is hereby granted exemption from taxes. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.151) 
Sec. 94-42. - Payment in lieu of taxes. 
    In lieu of taxes, the Buchanan Area Nonprofit Housing Corporation, a Michigan nonprofit corporation, sponsors of Metea Court, shall pay to the city on August 15 of each year a sum equivalent to ten percent of 95 percent of the total shelter rents, as defined in this chapter, available for charge by the Buchanan Area Nonprofit Housing Corporation from the Metea Court during the preceding 12 months ending as of June 30 of each year. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.152) 
Sec. 94-43. - Exemption period. 
    The tax exemption and payments in lieu of taxes as specified in section 94-42 shall remain in effect for so long as Metea Court shall be a qualified housing project as specified in this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.153) 
Sec. 94-44. - Project exemption. 
    The tax exemption granted in this division shall apply to Metea Court as a completely qualified housing project. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.154) 
Secs. 94-45-94-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - METEA COURT, PHASE II 

Sec. 94-56. - Tax exemption. 
    Metea Court II, a Michigan state housing development authority project, being a housing project eligible for tax exemption pursuant to section 15a of Act No. 346 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1966 (MCL 125.1401 et seq., MSA 16.114(1) et seq.), as amended, is hereby granted exemption from taxes. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.181) 
Sec. 94-57. - Payment in lieu of taxes. 
    In lieu of taxes, Metea Court II, a limited dividend housing association, sponsors of Metea Court II, shall pay to the city on August 15 of each year hereafter a sum equivalent to five percent of the total shelter rents, as defined in this chapter, available for charge by Metea Court II, a limited dividend housing association, from Metea Court II during the preceding 12 months ending as of June 30 of each year. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.182) 
Sec. 94-58. - Exemption period. 
    The tax exemption and payments in lieu of taxes as specified in section 94-57 shall remain in effect for so long as Metea Court II shall be a qualified housing project as specified in this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.183) 
Sec. 94-59. - Project exemption. 
    The tax exemption granted in this division shall apply to Metea Court II as a completely qualified housing project. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  18.184) 
Chapter 96 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 356, adopted Oct. 28, 2002, enacted provisions designated as ch. 21,  21-1-21-23. In order to maintain the alphabetical order of the Code and allow for future expansion, said provisions have been redesignated, at the discretion of the editor, as ch. 96,  96-21-96-43. 
Cross reference- Cable communications, ch. 20; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 96-1-96-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS 

Sec. 96-21. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this article are to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002) ("Act") and other applicable law, and to ensure that the city qualifies for distributions under the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the Act. 
(Ord. No. 356,  21-1, 10-28-02) 
Sec. 96-22. - Conflict. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict with the act or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 356,  21-2, 10-28-02) 
Sec. 96-23. - Terms defined. 
    The terms used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
    Act means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002), as amended from time to time. 
    City means the City of Buchanan. 
    City commission means the City Commission of the City of Buchanan or its designee. This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the city commission. 
    City manager means the city manager or his or her designee. 
    Permit means a nonexclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this article to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities. 
    All other terms used in this article shall have the same meaning as defined or as provided in the Act, including without limitation the following: 
    Authority means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to Section 3 of the Act. 
    MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning as the term "Commission" in the Act. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity, or any other legal entity. 
    Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. "Public right-of-way" does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way. 
    Telecommunication facilities or facilities means the equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals. Telecommunication facilities or facilities do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of title III of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. 
    Telecommunications provider, provider and telecommunications services means those terms as defined in Section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2102. "Telecommunication provider" does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in Section 332(d) of part I of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of the Act and this article only, a provider also includes all of the following: 
(a)  A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way. 
(c)  A person providing broadband internet transport access service. 
(Ord. No. 356,  21-3, 10-28-02) 
Sec. 96-24. - Permit required. 
(a)  Permit Required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with Section 6(1) of the Act. A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the application with the city clerk and one copy with the city building inspector. Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the Act, including without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with Section 6(5) of the Act. 
(c)  Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, pursuant to Section 6(5) of the Act, the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map. 
(d)  Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the application shall be accompanied by a one-time nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $500.00. 
(e)  Additional information. The city manager may request an applicant to submit such additional information which the city manager deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the city manager. If the city and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested by the city, the city or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in Section 6(2) of the Act. 
(f)  Previously issued permits. Pursuant to Section 5(1) of the Act, authorizations or permits previously issued by the city under Section 251 of the Michigan telecommunications act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251 and authorizations or permits issued by the city to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this article. 
(g)  Existing providers. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, within 180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the city as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251, shall submit to the city an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this article. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is not required to pay the $500.00 application fee required under subsection (c) above. A provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional 180 days to submit the permit application if allowed by the Authority, as provided in Section 5(4) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 356,  21-4, 10-28-02) 
Sec. 96-25. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for a permit is delegated to the city manager. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, the city manager shall approve or deny an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under section 96-24(b) of this article for access to a public right-of-way within the city. Pursuant to Section 6(6) of the Act, the city manager shall notify the MPSC when the city manager has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied. The city manager shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit. 
(b)  Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the city manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with Sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act. 
(c)  Conditions. Pursuant to Section 15(4) of the Act, the city manager may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Bond requirement. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, and without limitation on subsection (c) above, the city manager may require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use. 
(Ord. No. 356,  21-5, 10-28-02) 
Sec. 96-26. - Construction/engineering permit. 
    A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining a construction or engineering permit as required under the Buchanan Building Code and of this Code, as amended, for construction within the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 356,  21-6, 10-28-02) 
Sec. 96-27. - Conduit or utility poles. 
    Pursuant to Section 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the Act or under this article does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles. 
(Ord. No. 356,  21-7, 10-28-02) 
Sec. 96-28. - Route maps. 
    Pursuant to Section 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the city. The route maps should be in paper or electronic format unless and until the commission determines otherwise, in accordance with Section 6(8) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 356,  21-8, 10-28-02) 
Sec. 96-29. - Repair of damage. 
    Pursuant to Section 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the city, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition. 
(Ord. No. 356,  21-9, 10-28-02) 
Sec. 96-30. - Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. 
    In addition to the non-refundable application fee paid to the city set forth in Section 96-24(0d) of this article, a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the city's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance fee to the authority pursuant to Section 8 of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 356,  21-10, 10-28-02) 
Sec. 96-31. - Modification of existing fees. 
    In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(1) of the Act, the city modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the Act, which shall be paid to the authority. In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(4) of the Act, the city also approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the city's boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required under Section 8 of the Act. The city shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of this article, in compliance with the requirement of Section 13(4) of the Act. To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the Act, such imposition is declared to be contrary to the city's policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error. 
(Ord. No. 356,  21-11, 10-28-02) 
Sec. 96-32. - Savings clause. 
    Pursuant to Section 13(5) of the Act, if Section 8 of the Act is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under section 96-31 above shall be void from the date the modification was made. 
(Ord. No. 356,  21-12, 10-28-02) 
Sec. 96-33. - Use of funds. 
    Pursuant to Section 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the city from the authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related purposes. in conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the city from the authority shall be deposited into the major street fund and/or the local street fund maintained by the city under Act No. 51 of the Public Acts of 1951. 
(Ord. No. 356,  21-13, 10-28-02) 
Sec. 96-34. - Annual report. 
    If required by the Act, the city manager shall file an annual report with the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the authority. 
(Ord. No. 356,  21-14, 10-28-02) 
Sec. 96-35. - Cable television operators. 
    Pursuant to Section 13(6) of the Act, the city shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through broadband internet transport access services. 
(Ord. No. 356,  21-15, 10-28-02) 
Sec. 96-36. - Existing rights. 
    Pursuant to Section 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this article shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the city may have under a permit issued by the city or under a contract between the city and a telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 356,  21-16, 10-28-02) 
Sec. 96-37. - Compliance. 
    The city declares that its policy and intent in adopting this article is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and its provisions should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The city shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the Act, including but not limited to the following: 
(a)  Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 215.246, as provided in section 96-24(c) of this article; 
(b)  Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy these permit requirements, in accordance with section 96-24(f) of this article; 
(c)  Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the $500.00 application fee, in accordance with section 96-24(g) of this article; 
(d)  Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in accordance with section 96-25(a) of this article; 
(e)  Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with section 96-25(a) of this article; 
(f)  Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance with section 96-25(a) of this article; 
(g)  Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, as provided in section 96-25(b) of this article; 
(h)  Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way, in accordance with section 96-25(c) of this article; 
(i)  Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's access and use, in accordance with section 96-25(d) of this article; 
(j)  Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with section 96-26 of this article; 
(k)  Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city's right-of-way fees with a copy of this article, in accordance with section 96-31 of this article; 
(l)  If required by the Act, submitting an annual report to the authority, in accordance with section 96-34 of this article; and 
(m)  Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with section 96-35 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 356,  21-17, 10-28-02) 
Sec. 96-38. - Reservation of police powers. 
    Pursuant to Section 15(2) of the Act, this article shall not limit the city's right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the city's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 356,  21-18, 10-28-02) 
Sec. 96-39. - Severability. 
    The various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections, and clauses of this article are declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section, or clause of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the constitutionality or validity of any remaining provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 356,  21-19, 10-28-02) 
Sec. 96-40. - Authorized city officials. 
    The city manager or his or her designee is designated as the authorized city official to issue civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) for violations under this article as provided by the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 356,  21-20, 10-28-02) 
Sec. 96-41. - Municipal civil infraction. 
    A person who violates any provision of this article or the terms or conditions of a permit is responsible for a civil infraction, and shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00, plus any court costs. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the city in the event of a violation by a person of this article or a permit. 
(Ord. No. 356,  21-21, 10-28-02) 
Sec. 96-42. - Repealer. 
    All ordinances and portions of ordinances inconsistent with this article are repealed. 
(Ord. No. 356,  21-22, 10-28-02) 
Sec. 96-43. - Effective date. 
    This article shall become effective ten days after its final passage. 
(Ord. No. 356,  21-23, 10-28-02) 
Chapter 98 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18; offenses, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Michigan Vehicle Code, MCL 257.1 et seq.; regulation by local authorities, MCL 257.605, 257.606, 257.610. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 98-1-98-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE AND VEHICLE CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 6 of Ord. Nos. 2005.1/364 and 2005.01/365, adopted Jan. 24, 2005, repealed Ord. No. 350.2000, from which  98-26-98-29 derived. Similar provisions were enacted which renamed Art. II and have been codified to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 98-26. - Michigan Motor Vehicle Code-Code and amendment and revision adopted. 
    The Michigan Motor Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.1 to 257.923, as amended by Act No. 61 Public Acts of 2003 effective September 30, 2003, and all future amendments and revisions to the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code when they are effective in this state are incorporated and adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2005.1/364,  1, 1-24-05) 
Sec. 98-27. - Same-References in code. 
    References in the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code to "local authorities" shall mean the City of Buchanan, Michigan. 
(Ord. No. 2005.1/364,  2, 1-24-05) 
Sec. 98-28. - Same-Notice to be published. 
    The city clerk shall publish Ordinance No. 2005.1/364 in the manner required by law and shall publish, at the same time, a notice stating the purpose of the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code and the fact that a complete copy of the code is available to the public at the office of the city clerk, Buchanan City Hall for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2005.1/364,  3, 1-24-05) 
Sec. 98-29. - Same-Penalties. 
    The penalties provided by the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code are adopted by reference, provided, however, that the city may not enforce any provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code for which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater that 93 days. 
(Ord. No. 2005.1/364,  4, 1-24-05) 
Sec. 98-30. - Uniform Traffic Code-Code and amendment and revision adopted. 
    The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages as promulgated by the director of the Michigan Department of State Police pursuant to the administrative procedures act of 1969, 1969 PA 306, MCL 24.201 to 24.328 and made effective October 30, 2002, and all future amendments and revisions to the Uniform Traffic Code when they are promulgated and effective in this state are incorporated and adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2005.01/365,  1, 1-25-05) 
Sec. 98-31. - Same-References in code. 
    References in the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages to a "governmental unit" shall mean the City of Buchanan, Michigan. 
(Ord. No. 2005.01/365,  2, 1-25-05) 
Sec. 98-32. - Same-Notice to be published. 
    The city clerk shall publish Ordinance No. 2005.01/365 in the manner required by law and shall publish, at the same time, a notice stating the purpose of the Uniform Traffic Code and the fact that a complete copy of the code is available to the public at the office of the city clerk, Buchanan City Hall for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2005.01/365,  3, 1-25-05) 
Sec. 98-33. - Same-Penalties. 
    The penalties provided by the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages are adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2005.01/365,  4, 1-25-05) 
Secs. 98-34-98-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 98-51. - Blocking of public alleys more than 30 minutes. 
    No person shall park or leave standing in any public alley any motor or horse drawn vehicle except that such vehicles may use said alley for the purpose of loading or unloading such vehicle for the time necessarily needed. But that no such public alley shall be blocked to traffic in any place more than 30 minutes. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.551) 
Sec. 98-52. - Blocking of private alley or driveway without permission. 
    No person shall park any vehicle in any private alley or driveway so as to block such driveway without the permission of the owner thereof. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.552) 
Sec. 98-53. - Enforcement. 
    No person shall interfere with or hinder the enforcement of the parking, standing or stopping ordinances and regulations of the city, by removing, erasing, altering, concealing or in any manner modifying any tags, stickers, chalk or other marks or symbols placed on a vehicle by a police officer or other designated parking enforcement official or by any other act designed or intended to prevent such ordinance. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.561) 
Sec. 98-54. - Penalty. 
    Any person shall upon conviction of the violation of this article before any court of competent jurisdiction be punished by a fine as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.553, 20.562) 
Sec. 98-55. - Overnight parking-Public streets. 
    No person shall park any motorized or nonmotorized vehicle, trailer, recreational vehicle or implement, or place an object of any type in any public street or alley within the city limits of Buchanan between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. The Buchanan City Police Department may issue a temporary parking permit, not to exceed seven days in duration, to any city resident upon receipt of a verbal or written request to the City of Buchanan Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 2008.11/377, 11-24-08) 
Sec. 98-56. - Overnight parking-Public parking lots. 
    No person shall park any motorized or nonmotorized vehicle, trailer, recreational vehicle or implement, or place an object of any type, excluding trash receptacles, in any public parking lot within the city limits of Buchanan between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. without first obtaining a parking permit issued by the Buchanan City Police Department. Roll-off construction or waste containers used for any purpose must have a permit approved by the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 2008.11/377, 11-24-08) 
Sec. 98-57. - Public parking lots. 
    No resident of any downtown residence, loft or apartment or person shall place and/or store any recreational vehicle, trailer, or boat in any city public parking lot. 
(Ord. No. 2008.11/377, 11-24-08) 
Sec. 98-58. - Resident parking in public parking lots. 
    Only two vehicles per residential and/or rental unit will be allowed to park in a public parking lot in the C-3 central business district for overnight parking. Residential and/or rental unit parking will require a parking permit issued by the Buchanan City Police Department. In addition, any vehicle issued a permanent parking permit (renewable annually) for the North Parking Lot will be assigned a parking space per vehicle. Additional vehicles per residential and/or rental units may park in one of four available overflow lots (Days Avenue, the Nelson Transfer Lot on Oak Street, the parking lot adjacent, on the west side, to the Common and Farmers Market (also known as the Senior Center Parking Lot) and the municipal lot on N. Redbud Trail at the corner of Dewey and N. Redbud Trail) with a Buchanan City Police Department issued parking permit. Disabled and/or abandoned vehicles that have been issued permits will have the permit revoked and will be ticketed. Failure to remove disabled and/or abandoned vehicle will result in the vehicle being towed at the owner's expense. Those residents needing additional temporary permits for overnight parking for guests will be issued a maximum of two additional permits not to exceed seven days in duration for the North Parking Lot per instance, and a maximum of 14 days in any of the excess municipal overflow lots per instance; of which dates will be filled out by the Buchanan City Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 2008.11/377, 11-24-08) 
Sec. 98-59. - Public parking in the C-3 central business district. 
    Parking in the C-3 central business district on Front Street, Main Street, Days Avenue and Oak Street will be limited to three hours between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. Business owners and employees of businesses, not-for-profit and for-profit, are required to park their vehicles either in the rear of their property or in any of the municipal parking lots. Private contractors or employees of private contractors are required to park in municipal lots; city and/or state contractors or employees working in the public right-of-way are exempt from this provision. Boundaries of the C-3 central business district are as follows: Redbud Trail north to Third Street, Third Street west to Main Street, Main Street south to Dewey Street, Dewey Street west to Oak Street, Oak Street south to Roe Street, Roe Street east to Days Avenue, and Days Avenue north to Central Court and Central Court east to Redbud Trail. 
(Ord. No. 2008.11/377, 11-24-08) 
Sec. 98-60. - Issuance of parking permits-Establishment of fees. 
    The city commission shall set the costs and/or fees for the issuance of parking permits issued by the Buchanan City Police Department and roll-off construction or waste containers issued by the building inspector. The police department shall not issue a parking permit for a period longer than one year for residential and/or rental permits of occupants in the C-3 central business district. 
(Ord. No. 2008.11/377, 11-24-08) 
Sec. 98-61. - Violations. 
    Violations of sections 95-55 through 98-60 shall be handled by the traffic violations bureau (see division 2 of chapter 98, article III). 
(Ord. No. 2008.11/377, 11-24-08) 
Secs. 98-62-98-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 313A,  5, adopted Feb. 28, 1994, repealed the former Div. 2,  98-66-98-82, which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.492, 20.493,  20.501-20.505,  20.511-20.516,  20.521-20.524. 

Sec. 98-66. - Established. 
    There is established in the city a traffic violations bureau for handling of such traffic violations as prescribed by Ordinance No. 251 as amended by Ordinance No. 312. 
(Ord. No. 313A,  1.1, 2-28-94) 
Sec. 98-67. - Organization. 
    The traffic violations bureau shall be composed and under the supervision of the city clerk. The city clerk shall have full charge of the traffic violations bureau, and all books and records thereof, and shall be responsible to the city manager or other authorized representative of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 313A,  1.2, 2-28-94) 
Sec. 98-68. - Collection of fines. 
    The traffic violations bureau shall be authorized to collect fines in accordance with the schedule of fines set forth in this division unless such function is to be handled by the district court as set forth in this division. The city clerk may authorize the officers of the police department or other designated city employees to collect such fines and issue receipts for the same. 
(Ord. No. 313A,  2.1, 2-28-94) 
Sec. 98-69. - Payment of fine satisfies violation; disposition of fine monies. 
    Acceptance of the prescribed fine by the traffic violations bureau shall be deemed to be complete satisfaction for the violation and the violator shall be given a receipt which so states, and the city clerk shall deposit all fine money so collected with the city treasurer who shall deposit fine monies in the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 313A,  2.2, 2-28-94) 
Sec. 98-70. - No waiver of fines. 
    No representative of the traffic violations bureau shall be authorized to waive the prescribed fine as set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 313A,  2.3, 2-28-94) 
Sec. 98-71. - Limitations of power. 
    The traffic violations bureau shall be empowered to accept payment of fines for offenses in chapter 8 of the Uniform Traffic Code as adopted by the city relating to stopping, standing and parking violations. Any violation that is not contained in chapter 8 of the Uniform Traffic Code as adopted by the city shall not be disposed of by the traffic violations bureau. 
(Ord. No. 313A,  2.4, 2-28-94) 
Sec. 98-72. - Traffic violations notice. 
(a)  A traffic violations notice shall be used in issuing tickets for violations of the traffic ordinances of the city for fines covered by this article. 
(b)  The issuance of a traffic violations notice or ticket by a police officer or other designated parking enforcement official of the city shall be deemed an allegation of a traffic violation. Such traffic violations notice or ticket shall indicate the length of time in which the person to whom the same was issued must respond before the traffic violation bureau. It shall also indicate the address of the traffic violations bureau, the hours during which the traffic violations bureau is open and the amount of the penalty scheduled for the offense for which the traffic violations notice or ticket was issued. 
(Ord. No. 313A,  3.1, 2-28-94) 
Sec. 98-73. - Record of violations; audit of bureau. 
    When a police officer or other designated parking enforcement official of the city issues a traffic violations notice, he shall deliver the original copy of the notice to the traffic violations bureau. The traffic violations bureau shall keep a record of all such violations. At least once each year, at the time of the regular city audit, an audit shall be conducted of the receipts and handling of the traffic violations bureau. 
(Ord. No. 313A,  3.2, 2-28-94) 
Sec. 98-74. - Parking; responsibility of owner. 
    Except as provided in section 98-75 involving leased vehicles, in a prosecution for the violation of this division relating to the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the citation or complaint was parked in violation of this division together with proof, by verifying ownership of the vehicle with the secretary of state, that the defendant named in the citation or complaint was at the time of the violation the registered owner of the vehicle, creates in evidence a presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, the violation occurred. 
(Ord. No. 313A,  3.3, 2-28-94) 
Sec. 98-75. - Parking; responsibility of lessee. 
    In a prosecution for a violation of this division involving a leased motor vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the citation or complaint was used in the violation, together with proof that the defendant named in the citation or complaint was the lessee of the vehicle at the time of the violation, constitutes in evidence a presumption that the lessee of the vehicle, not the registered owner, was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point, and for the time during which, the violation occurred. 
(Ord. No. 313A,  3.4, 2-28-94) 
Sec. 98-76. - Fines shall not be collected in case of denial of responsibility. 
(a)  No fine for any violation shall be accepted from any person who denies having committed the offense and in no case shall the person who is in charge of the traffic violations bureau determine the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to such alleged violation. No person shall be required to dispose of a traffic violation at the traffic violations bureau and all persons shall be entitled to have any such violation processed before the court having jurisdiction thereof if they so desire. 
(b)  Any person who denies responsibility for a violation and is desirous of having a hearing, shall submit a written request for hearing to the traffic violations bureau or the district court, if the case already has been transferred to the district court. If the case was not transferred to the district court before the written request for hearing was filed, the city clerk, immediately upon receipt of the written request for hearing, shall request the issuance of a State of Michigan Uniform Law Citation so that the case can be immediately transferred to the district court for the scheduling of a hearing and further disposition. 
(Ord. No. 313A,  3.5, 2-28-94) 
Sec. 98-77. - Pleading responsible to violation in person. 
    Any person who has received a traffic violations notice may, within the time specified in such notice, answer at the traffic violations bureau to the charges set forth in such notice, and, plead responsible to the charge by paying the fine as shall be prescribed by Chapter 4 of the ordinance from which this division derives (see section 98-82), which fine cannot be waived by the bureau. A copy of Chapter 4 shall be conspicuously displayed at the traffic violations bureau. Any person who pleads responsible to a charge before the traffic violations bureau by tendering payment of the appropriate fine, in person, or by mail, before or to the traffic violations bureau, shall, by the payment of such fine waive their right to a hearing in court and give power of attorney to the traffic violations bureau to make a plea of responsible. The person who pleads responsible in person shall be given a receipt by the traffic violations bureau stating that payment of the fine is in full satisfaction of the violation. The person who pleads responsible by mailing in the appropriate fine shall be given a receipt by the traffic violations bureau stating that payment of the fine is in full satisfaction of the violation, if a request is made for such a receipt and is accompanied by a self-addressed stamped envelope. 
(Ord. No. 313A,  3.6, 2-28-94) 
Sec. 98-78. - Pleading responsible to violation by mail. 
(a)  Any person who has received a traffic violations notice may, within the time specified in such notice, answer at the traffic violations bureau to the charges set forth in such notice by mailing the appropriate fine to the traffic violations bureau. Such fine shall be as prescribed by section 98-82, which fine cannot be waived by the bureau. Any person who pays the fine by mailing the same as set forth above, shall be deemed to have pled responsible to the charge and shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing in court and gives power of attorney to the traffic violations bureau to make a plea of responsible. 
(b)  If any payment is mailed to the traffic violations bureau as set forth above, the date of the postmark on the envelope containing such payment shall be deemed to be the date of the plea. 
(c)  If the amount of fine submitted is not correct, such fine shall be returned to the sender by the traffic violations bureau with a letter of explanation and the violation will be considered unpaid until the appropriate amount of fine is paid as prescribed by section 98-82. 
(Ord. No. 313A,  3.7, 2-28-94) 
Sec. 98-79. - Hearing upon request. 
    Nothing contained in this division shall operate to deprive any person of a full and impartial informal and/or formal hearing in court should such person so choose and demand. 
(Ord. No. 313A,  3.8, 2-28-94) 
Sec. 98-80. - Officers able to prosecute violations. 
    Nothing in this division shall prevent or restrict any officer or other designated parking enforcement official from prosecuting any violator in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 313A,  3.9, 2-28-94) 
Sec. 98-81. - Schedule of fines not binding. 
    The schedule of fines prescribed by section 98-82 shall not be binding upon the district court having jurisdiction of such violation and any fine so assessed by the district court shall be within the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 313A,  3.10, 2-28-94) 
Sec. 98-82. - Fine enforcement. 
    Whenever a police officer or other designated parking enforcement official shall observe a parking violation as set forth in the Uniform Traffic Code, except as set forth below, the officer shall notify the driver of the vehicle involved in the alleged violation by placing a copy of the parking violation notice on the windshield of the vehicle, and such notice shall direct the owner of such vehicle to pay a fine at the office of the city clerk in the city hall. Such person shall pay a fine as specified by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 313A,  4.1, 2-28-94) 
Sec. 98-83. - Failure to appear or pay; denial of responsibility. 
(a)  In the event the owner or driver of any vehicle involved in a violation of this division, or his representative, shall, within 30 calendar days of the issuance of traffic violations notice, fail to appear at the office of the city clerk in response to a parking ticket and/or handicap violation, shall fail to pay the appropriate fine by mail, or, in appearing shall fail to pay the fine imposed by this division or shall deny that he/she is responsible for the alleged violation, it shall be the duty of the police officer or other designated parking enforcement official having knowledge of the facts to forthwith issue a state uniform law citation and deliver the same to the district court charging such owner or driver with the alleged violation. 
(b)  Once a state uniform law citation is issued pursuant to this division, the traffic violations bureau no longer shall handle the matter and the case shall be transferred to the district court for adjudication. 
(Ord. No. 313A,  4.2, 2-28-94) 
Sec. 98-84. - Time limit/holidays/weekends. 
    If the time limit for any violation expires on a national holiday, weekend or other day when the city clerk's office is closed, the deadline shall be extended until the next regular business day of the clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 313A,  4.5, 2-28-94) 
Secs. 98-85-98-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 98-106. - Findings. 
    Owing to the condition and the construction of certain streets in the city, it is necessary that traffic be limited to cars or trucks of certain weights. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.571) 
Sec. 98-107. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate the provision of this article and shall be found guilty in any court of competent jurisdiction of transporting loads heavier than is permitted by the signs posted on said streets shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. As a further punishment, the person found guilty of a violation of this article and had caused damage to the street or streets over which he transported an excessive load shall be liable for such damage to the street as can be shown was caused by such excessive load and may be sued in any court of competent jurisdiction and any judgment obtained by such a case shall be collectable the same as any other suit in assumpsit. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.574) 
Sec. 98-108. - Power to zone streets; post signs. 
    The city commission shall have power to zone the streets in the city by a resolution passed at any regular or special meeting of the city commission; setting forth designated streets that in its opinion will be damaged by the hauling of excessive loads over them. Such resolution shall describe the streets or parts of streets over which they deem a damage will be done by excessive loads and shall set a weight above which no weight shall be transported over the streets so designated and it shall order the police or highway department to post signs upon such streets or parts of streets stating the maximum weight which may be transported over such streets. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.572) 
Sec. 98-109. - Exceeding load limit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, over any street that is posted as to weight, any load that exceeds the load limit posted thereon. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.573) 
Secs. 98-110-98-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TRUCKS 

Sec. 98-131. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Buchanan extended business area means the city boundary and an area contiguous thereto necessary to service business and industry as determined by the city commission by resolution. 
    Exempt vehicle means any truck operated by a nonprofit institution or any publicly owned or operated vehicle used in the furtherance of the purpose of the organization; recreational vehicles; trucks operated in connection with the rendering of emergency services to a citizen in the city and public utility vehicles while engaged in repair, maintenance or installation within the city; service and delivery vehicles while making pickups or deliveries of property; and moving vans while making pickups or deliveries of property. 
    Local truck traffic means a truck which is used or employed by its operator or owner as a vehicle by which products, goods, commodities or raw materials are transported either from an origin or place within the Buchanan extended business area to a place or destination within or without the Buchanan extended business area or are transported from an origin or a place outside the Buchanan extended business area to a place or destination within the Buchanan extended business area. 
    Semitrailer means every vehicle with or without motive power designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. 
    Through truck traffic means a truck which is used or employed by its operator or owner as a vehicle by which products, goods, commodities or raw materials are transported from an origin or place other than within the Buchanan extended business area to a place or destination other than within the Buchanan extended business area. 
    Trailer means every vehicle with or without motive power designed for carrying property or persons and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. 
    Truck means a motor vehicle, having a combined estimated gross vehicle weight of 8,000 pounds or more, designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property or persons and includes, either separately or combined, a semitrailer, trailer or truck tractor. 
    Truck tractor means every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.671) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 98-132. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates a prohibition or limitation established pursuant to this article is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.678) 
Sec. 98-133. - Restrictions; establishment of truck routes. 
    The city commission shall designate by resolution the streets, lanes, avenues or other public right-of-ways designated as truck routes for both through truck traffic and local truck traffic. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.672) 
Sec. 98-134. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to exempt vehicles. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to local truck traffic when use of a nondesignated street by a truck is necessitated for pickups and/or deliveries to a location on such street or a street served only by a nondesignated local truck traffic route. All trucks within the city when finished delivering or picking up goods on nondesignated local truck traffic routes shall return to the nearest truck route by the most direct route. This includes such trucks which have additional destinations within the city. Short cuts on nontruck routes are expressly prohibited. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.673) 
Sec. 98-135. - Truck, trailer and/or semitrailer parking. 
    Traffic control orders may be issued to regulate, limit or prohibit the stopping, standing or parking of trucks, trailers or semitrailers in the city. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.674) 
Sec. 98-136. - Special permit. 
    The city manager, or another he may designate, upon application in writing and good cause being shown, may issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or remove a vehicle not in conformity with this article upon a street, lane, avenue or other public right-of-way within the city. A permit shall specify the date or dates for which it is to be valid and may restrict or prescribe conditions of operations of the vehicle, when necessary to protect the safety of the public or to insure against undue damage to the streets, surfaces, structures or installations, and may require a reasonable inspection fee and other security as may be deemed necessary to compensate for damages caused by the movement. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.675) 
Sec. 98-137. - Signs. 
    The chief of police is hereby authorized to cause all streets and portions thereof established and designated by this article as through truck routes and local truck routes to be clearly marked or a sign posted at their intersections with other truck routes or boundary lines of the city with appropriate signs, in conformance with the official Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, displaying in letters not less than four inches in height the words "Through Truck Route" or "Local Truck Route." 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.676) 
Secs. 98-138-98-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BICYCLES 

Sec. 98-161. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, before a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.596) 
Sec. 98-162. - License and tag required; application; fees; altering license plate or serial number. 
    No person shall operate a bicycle upon the public streets of the city without a license having been first obtained therefor by the owner thereof. An application for a license must be filed with the police department giving, the name and address of the owner of the bicycle together with the description of the bicycle, including its name, serial number and any number, letter or sign by which the same may be identified. The police department shall issue a license for operation of said bicycle which shall be valid for the life of the bicycle and which shall be transferred as an incident to a transfer of the ownership thereof. The fee for registration and license shall be as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time. The fee for any transfer of such license shall be as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time. A metal tag with a distinctive color or insignia shall be issued by the police department to the owner of each license granted. The metal tag shall be firmly affixed to the bicycle in such place and in such manner as shall be determined by the police department. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any license plate, seal or registration card. It shall also be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously remove, destroy or mutilate or alter the number of any bicycle frame licensed pursuant to this article. Nothing in this article shall prohibit the police department from stamping numbers on the frames of bicycles on which no serial numbers can be found, or on which the number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.591) 
Sec. 98-163. - Transfer of license; replacement licenses. 
(a)  Transfer of license as provided for in this article shall be subject to the following conditions: The purchaser shall present a bill of sale and apply to the police department for transfer of license within seven days following such purchase. If the bicycle was purchased from a minor child under the age of 21 years, the bill of sale shall be signed by a parent or guardian of such minor child. 
(b)  Lost, stolen, destroyed or mutilated license plates shall be replaced by procuring an entirely new license, as if no license had ever been procured. The applicant for a replacement license shall report the facts concerning the loss, theft, destruction or mutilation of the original license plate to the police department. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.592) 
Sec. 98-164. - Regulations for operating. 
    It shall be unlawful: 
(1)  For any person to operate a bicycle upon the streets, alleys or public ways of the city unless the same is in good mechanical condition. 
(2)  For more than one person to ride on a bicycle at the same time, unless the bicycle has been designed for more than one passenger, with a regular and firmly attached seat for each person. The number of riders shall in no case exceed the number of such seats. 
(3)  For any person to operate a bicycle from an hour after sundown to one hour before sunrise unless the bicycle shall be equipped with a lighted white light on the front thereof, visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of at least 300 feet in front of such bicycle, and also equipped with a mirror reflector or lamp on the rear showing a red light under like conditions from a distance of at least 200 feet to the rear of such bicycle, which lamps and/or reflector shall at all times be in good mechanical condition and unobstructed as to visibility. 
(4)  For any person riding a bicycle to carry any package, bundle or article, or to engage in any activity which prevents the rider from keeping both hands upon the handlebars. 
(5)  For any persons to ride bicycles other than next to the righthand side of any roadway, or more than two abreast. 
(6)  For any person riding a bicycle to fail to yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian, or to operate the bicycle at such speed or in such a manner that the safety of one or more pedestrians is endangered. 
(7)  For any person riding a bicycle to attach the bicycle to any vehicle in motion, either by clinging or any other means, or to attach himself to the bicycle. 
(8)  For any person riding a bicycle to disobey the instructions of any official traffic sign, signal, control device or any traffic rule or regulation applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise specifically directed by a police officer. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.593) 
Sec. 98-165. - Sale or disposing of bicycle; report to police. 
    Any person who sells or otherwise disposes of a bicycle licensed under this article shall report the fact to the police department within seven days following the sale or other disposition. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.594) 
Sec. 98-166. - Reciprocity in recognizing licenses. 
    Valid bicycle licenses issued by other municipalities to their residents shall be recognized as valid within the city, if reciprocity is extended to residents of the city; provided, that if such person becomes a resident of the city such person shall procure a city bicycle license within 30 days of becoming a resident. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  20.595) 
Chapter 102 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; community development, ch. 30; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; subdivisions, ch. 90. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 102-1-102-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-26. - Definitions. 
(a)  The revenue bonds to be issued pursuant to the provisions of Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1993 (MCL 141.101 et seq., MSA 5.2731 et seq.), as amended, are referred to in this article as "the bonds." 
(b)  Whenever the words "the system" are referred to in this article, they shall be understood to mean the complete water supply and sewage disposal system of the city and all appurtenances thereto, including all extensions and improvements thereto. 
(c)  Whenever the words "public improvements" are used in this article, they shall be understood to mean the improvements authorized to be acquired and constructed under the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Whenever the words "revenues" and "net revenues" are used in this article, they shall be understood to have the meanings as defined in Section 3 of Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq., MSA 5.2731 et seq.), as amended. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.053) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 102-27. - Necessity. 
    It is hereby determined to be necessary for the public health, benefit and welfare of the city to combine the water supply system and the sewage disposal system of the city into one system, to be known as the water supply and sewage disposal system, and to be operated on a combined-rate basis, under the provisions of Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq., MSA 5.2731 et seq.), as amended. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.051) 
Sec. 102-28. - One system on combined-rate basis. 
    The water supply system and the sewage disposal system of the city shall be operated and maintained as one system on a combined-rate basis, to be known as the water supply and sewage disposal system, which shall include all water mains and laterals, pumping stations, wells, pumps, pumphouses, standpipes, elevated tanks, sewers (whether sanitary or combined storm and sanitary sewers), sewage treatment plant, sewage lift stations and all attendant facilities and equipment which are used or useful in the operation and maintenance of the water supply or sewage disposal system and shall include all of the same which may hereafter be acquired. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.052) 
Sec. 102-29. - Operating year. 
    The system shall be operated on the basis of an operating year commencing on July 1 and ending on June 30 next following or such other basis as shall be mandated by the state or established by the city commission. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.062) 
Sec. 102-30. - Management of system. 
    The operation, repair and management of the system, and the acquiring of the public improvements authorized in this article, shall be under the immediate supervision and control of the city manager. The city commission may make such rules, orders and regulations as they deem necessary to ensure the efficient management and operation of the system. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.057) 
Secs. 102-31-102-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 102-61. - No free service. 
    No free service shall be furnished by the system to any person, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality, except for fire protection purposes. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.059) 
Sec. 102-62. - Rates; service and connection, billing, enforcement. 
    Water and sewer service rates, fees and charges shall be reviewed at least annually by the joint sewer and water board and may be changed by resolution of the city commission at any time. 
(1)  Water rates. 
a.  Water to be furnished by the water supply system to each tap shall be measured by a meter purchased by the user and installed and controlled by the city. 
b.  Water shall be charged for on the basis of amount actually used as shown by the meter, except for established minimums as shall be adopted by the city commission or except for penalty provision for violations of this article or bypass of metering devices. 
c.  Any rates as shall be adopted by the city commission from time to time hereunder shall be subject to a penalty as set by the city commission to be added to the total of the bill if not paid within 30 days after the same becomes due and payable. 
d.  The term "tap" as used in this division shall mean any opening or outlet made in the water supply system for the purpose of withdrawing water therefrom for any purpose, public or private, either commercial or domestic, except fire hydrants, and no taps shall be made to the system unless authorized by proper city authorities. 
e.  The city shall pay for all water used by it at the foregoing rates, except that for water used through fire hydrants, a flat annual charge shall be paid by the city out of its appropriate general fund. Such rates shall be fixed by the city commission from time to time. 
f.  For repair or replacement of existing service, the city commission shall adopt policies for service fees and charges. Any repair or replacement from the main to the property line shall be the sole liability of the city. The property owner shall be solely responsible for repair and replacement of any tap from the property line to and including the dwelling. In the event the city is requested to make such repairs, and the problem is found not within the city right-of-way, then the property owner shall pay the city cost at the current charges as set by the city commission. 
g.  All properties located within 250 feet of any municipal water main shall connect to the water system within 90 days of date of availability. After the 90-day period, the city shall charge the property the minimum water charge for services, whether connection has been complete or not. 
(2)  Sewage disposal rates. 
a.  The foregoing rate shall be subject to a penalty in an amount as set by the city commission to be added to the total of the bill if not paid within 30 days after the same becomes due and payable. 
b.  For repair or replacement of existing service, the city commission shall adopt policies for service fees and charges. 
c.  All premises lying within 250 feet of any municipal sanitary sewer main shall connect to the main within 90 days of date of availability. The city shall have the right to mandate connections under the statutes of the state and shall have the right to assess minimum sewer charges for any structure located on the property whether the service has been connected or not. 
(3)  Enforcement. 
a.  The charges for water and sewer services which are under the provisions of Section 21 of Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq., MSA 5.2731 et seq.), as amended, or whether owner occupied or not, are hereby recognized to constitute such lien and whenever any such charge against any piece of property shall be delinquent for six months, the city official or officials in charge of the collection thereof shall certify annually, not later than the date of the second regular meeting of the city commission in May of each year, to the tax assessing officer of the city, the fact of such delinquency, whereupon such charge shall be by him entered upon the next tax roll as a charge against such premises and shall be collected and the lien thereof enforced in the same manner as general city taxes against such premises are collected, and the lien thereof enforced. All applications for service shall identify the fee titleholder of the property. 
b.  In addition to other remedies provided, the city shall have the right to shut off and discontinue the supply of water to any premises for the nonpayment of water and/or sewer rates when due. If such charges are not paid within 30 days after the due date thereof, water services to such premises shall be discontinued. 
c.  A representative of the city shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply and sewage disposal system of the city for the purposes of inspection or maintenance. The city shall request permission to enter before its performance of an inspection or maintenance. Failure on the part of any owner or occupant to permit entry upon any property serviced by the city's water supply and sewer disposal service at a reasonable time and upon a reasonable request shall constitute reasonable grounds for the city to terminate city water supply and sewer disposal service. The city shall give 15 calendar days' notice prior to the termination of services. The water supply and sewage disposal service shall not be restored until the property is in full compliance with city ordinances. 
In the case of an emergency or upon presentment of a subpoena, the city may enter at any time. 
(4)  Inspections or maintenance authorized. It shall be the obligation of the city to regularly conduct inspections or maintenance of its water supply and sewage disposal system. The city manager shall appoint a representative of the city to administer and enforce the provisions of this division. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.058; Ord. No. 2013.02/387, 2-11-13) 
Sec. 102-63. - Authority for additional charges. 
    If the character of sewage from any manufacturing or industrial plant or any other building or premises shall be such as to impose an unreasonable additional burden upon the sewers of the system, an additional charge may be made over and above the regular rates as provided under article VI of this chapter. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.060) 
Sec. 102-64. - Rates shall be sufficient to meet expenses. 
    The rates fixed by this division are estimated to be sufficient to provide for the payment of the expenses of administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the system as are necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order, to provide for the payment of the interest upon and the principal of all the bonds as and when the same become due and payable, and the creation of the reserve therefor required by this article, and to provide for such other expenditures and funds for the system as this article may require. Such rates shall be fixed and revised from time to time as may be necessary to produce these amounts, and it is hereby covenanted and agreed at all times to fix and maintain such rates for services furnished by the system as shall be sufficient to provide for the foregoing. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.061) 
Sec. 102-65. - Conflict. 
    All ordinances or parts thereof in conflict herewith are hereby repealed and shall be of no further force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2013.02/387, 2-11-13) 
Sec. 102-66. - Severability. 
    Any and all sections, terms, provisions and/or clauses herein shall be deemed independent and severable. Should any court of competent jurisdiction hold any section, term, provision or clause void and/or invalid, all remaining sections, terms, provisions and/or clauses not held void and/or invalid shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2013.02/387, 2-11-13) 
Sec. 102-67. - Effective date. 
    This amended division shall take effect upon the day after the date of publication of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(Ord. No. 2013.02/387, 2-11-13) 
Secs. 102-68-102-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION 

Sec. 102-101. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the Wellhead Protection Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 323,  I(a), 4-13-92) 
Sec. 102-102. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aquifer means a saturated, permeable geologic formation that contains and will yield significant quantities of water. 
    Hazardous waste or material means any waste or material which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may: 
(1)  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or 
(2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Well field means a piece of land used primarily for the purpose of locating wells to supply a municipal water system. 
    Wellhead means the upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves and other attachments. 
(Ord. No. 323,  II, 4-13-92) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 102-103. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to ensure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the city by the establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells which are the supply sources for the city water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within each zone. 
(Ord. No. 323,  I(b), 4-13-92) 
Sec. 102-104. - Administration. 
    The water/wastewater department of the city shall establish policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection red zone under this article. 
(Ord. No. 323,  VI, 4-13-92) 
Sec. 102-105. - Enforcement officer. 
    The provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the director of environmental services or such other as appointed by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 323,  VII, 4-13-92) 
Sec. 102-106. - Penalty. 
    Any person who commits, takes part or assists in any violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon conviction thereof before any court of competent jurisdiction he shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-15 of this Code. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist after conviction shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 323,  VIII, 4-13-92) 
Sec. 102-107. - Establishment of wellhead protection red zone. 
    There is hereby established a use district to be known as a wellhead protection red zone, identified and described as all the area within the following property description: 
COM 1631.2' S & 177' W OF N1/4 PST SEC 35 T7S R18W TH S64 DEG 51' W 485.25' TH S TO NLY LINE OF MCRR TH NELY ON SD LINE TO A POINT WHERE THE SIDE TRACK LEAVES THE MAIN TRACK TH NELY ON NLY LINE OF SIDE TRACK TO THE N LINE OF S1/2 SEC 35 TH W TO A POINT S9 DEG 47' W OF BEG TH N 9 DEG 48' E TO POB CITY ANNEXATION NO. 6876. 
ALSO COM 1631.2' S & 177' W OF N1/4 PST SEC 35 TH S9 DEG 47' W TO E & W 1/4 LINE SEC 35 TH E TO N & S1/4 LINE SEC 35 TH N TO C/L OF SMITH ST TH W 70' TH S 48 DEG 15' W TO A POINT N9 DEG 47' E OF BEG TH S9 DEG 47' W TO POB UNRECORDED SURVEY & REFERENCE FILE. 
THENCE COM 435.75' W OF SW COR OF OAK & SMITH STS IN SEC 35 T7S R18W CITY OF BUCHANAN TH S47 DEG 13'30? W 325.36' TH S 0 DEG 14' W 593.84' TH S42 DEG 32' W 60' TO NLY R/W OF FORMER MCRR TH S70 DEG W 65.64' TH ON A 1101.54' RAD CUR LEFT A CHORD DIS OF S61 DEG 56'17? W 334.2' TH S53 DEG 52'35? W 289.6' TH N 0 DEG 05' E TO A POINT ON E & W1/4 LIN SEC 35 & TRUE POB TH W TO CEN OF SEC 35 TH N TO WATERS EDGE OF MILL RACE TH ELY ON WATER EDGE TO A POINT N 0 DEG 05' E OF BEG TH S 0 DEG 05' W TO POB. 
EXCEPT THAT PT DESCRIBED AS FOLLOWS: FROM SW COR OF OAK & SMITH STS MEAS W 435.75' TH S47 DEG 13'30? W 325.36' TH S 0 DEG 14' W 593.84' TH S42 DEG 32' W 60' TH S70 DEG W65.64' TH ON A 1101.54' RAD CUR LEFT A CHORD DIS OF S61 DEG 56'17?W 334.2' TH S53 DEG 52'35?W 289.6' TO TRUE POB TH N 0 DEG 05' E TO E & W1/4 LINE SEC 35 TH E TO A POINT N53 DEG 52'35? E OF BEG TH S53 DEG 52'35? W TO POB. 
(Ord. No. 323,  III, 4-13-92) 
Sec. 102-108. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted within the wellhead protection red zone. Uses not listed are to be considered prohibited uses. 
(1)  Parks, provided there is no onsite waste disposal or fuel storage tank facilities associated within this use, including buildings located on the premises, which buildings are incidental and accessory to use of the premises as a park. 
(2)  Playgrounds, including buildings located on the premises, which buildings are incidental and accessory to use of the premises as a playground. 
(3)  Wildlife areas. 
(4)  Nonmotorized trails, such as biking, skiing, nature and fitness trails. 
(5)  Landscaping maintenance (i.e., mowing and trimming). 
(6)  Maintenance of wellheads and infrastructure. 
(7)  Police department firing range as operated by the city police department. 
(Ord. No. 323,  IV, 4-13-92) 
Sec. 102-109. - Prohibited activities. 
    Even if a use is permitted as specified in this article, the following activities shall be and are hereby prohibited within the wellhead protection red zone: 
(1)  Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including commercial use of agricultural pesticides. 
(2)  The application of any material which could be harmful or detrimental to the municipal water supply. 
(3)  Storage, use or placement of any machinery which leaks any material which could be harmful or detrimental to the municipal water supply. 
(Ord. No. 323,  V, 4-13-92) 
Secs. 102-110-102-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CROSS CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 102-131. - Rules adopted. 
    The city adopts by reference the Water Supply Cross Connection Rules of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, being Mich. Admin. Code R.325.431 to R.325.440. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.151; Ord. No. 2019.3/411,  1, 3-11-19) 
Sec. 102-132. - Penalty. 
    Any person or customer found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this article, or any written order of the city in pursuance thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-15 of this Code. Each day upon which a violation of the provisions of this act shall occur shall be deemed a separate and additional violation for the purpose of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.156) 
Sec. 102-133. - Inspections authorized. 
    It shall be the duty of the water superintendent (or their designated agent) of the city to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply where cross connections with the public water supply is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the city and as approved by the state department of public health. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.152; Ord. No. 2019.3/411,  2, 3-11-19) 
Sec. 102-134. - Right of entry. 
    The representative of the city shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the city for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross connections. On request the owner, lessee or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.153) 
Sec. 102-135. - Service discontinued for violations. 
    The city is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation of this article exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connection has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.154) 
Sec. 102-136. - Potable water to be protected. 
    The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by this article and by the State Water Supply Cross Connection Rules of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, being rules R325.114012 to R325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative Code, adopted by reference in this article. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.155; Ord. No. 2019.3/411,  3, 3-11-19) 
Secs. 102-137-102-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL 

Sec. 102-156. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    BOD means biochemical oxygen demand or the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Commercial wastes means the liquid or water-carried wastes from commercial establishments or those concerns engaged in buying, selling, or exchanging goods and/or services. 
    Director means the superintendent of wastewater treatment plant of the city under the direction of the city manager, or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    Garbage means the waste from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Industrial wastes means the liquid or water-carried wastes from industrial processes as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    mg/l means milligrams per liter. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration in grams per liter of solution. 
    Properly shredded garbage means garbage that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles shall be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in the public sanitary or combined sewer; with no particles larger than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer that is controlled by the city. 
    Sanitary sewage means the liquid or water-carried waste discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, and commercial establishments where the public is served. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer to which stormwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage means any liquid or water-carried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions, laboratories, industrial and commercial establishments, together with stormwaters as may be present. 
    Sewage disposal system or system means the complete sewage disposal system of the city, and shall be construed to include all plants, works, collecting mains, instrumentalities and properties, now or hereinafter existing, used or useful in connection with the collecting, pumping, disposal and treatment of sanitary sewage and industrial wastes, as now or hereafter added to, expanded or improved. 
    Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Storm drain or storm sewer means any drain or sewer, either natural or artificial, which is intended expressly for the conveyance of stormwater and uncontaminated industrial wastes. 
    Stormwater means that part of precipitation which reaches the sewers as runoff from the natural land surface, building roofs, or pavements or as groundwater infiltration. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering in accordance with standard laboratory procedure. 
    Wastewater means the same as or is equivalent to "sanitary sewage." 
    Watercourse means an open, natural channel in which a flow of water occurs either continuously or intermittently. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.002) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 102-157. - Organization. 
(a)  The sewerage system of the city, including all property and employees in connection therewith, shall be known as the Buchanan sewerage department, and shall be under the direction of the city manager. 
(b)  Authority for construction, repair and maintenance of the sewage disposal system may be delegated by the city manager to the superintendent of environmental services. 
(c)  The city treasurer shall collect all money due to the sewage department and shall maintain an accurate separate account of the same. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.001) 
Sec. 102-158. - Management of system. 
(a)  The sewers of the department are under the exclusive control of the commission and no person other than agents or employees of the department shall disturb, tap, change, obstruct or interfere with them in any way. 
(b)  Extensions of, or changes in the sewers shall be made only by the direction of the commission. Petition for the extension of old or construction of new sewers shall be addressed to the commission who will thereupon consider same and advise the petitioners of their decision. If the petition be granted, the commission shall stipulate the proportions of the cost to be borne by the petitioners and by the department. 
(c)  Any person installing sewers at their own expense shall first submit plans and specifications for such work to the manager for state approval. After such plans and specifications have been approved the work shall be done under the supervision of the manager, who shall require such test made as he considers necessary, and shall accept the installation for the city before any sewer service pipe shall be placed in service. All inspection cost for such installation shall be paid by the party installing this sewer. The provisions of this subsection shall also apply to any installations of sewers outside the corporate limits of the city where permission may be granted by the commission to connect to the city sewers. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.003) 
Sec. 102-159. - Scope of regulations. 
    The standards and regulations established in this article are deemed to be the absolute minimum consistent with the preservation of the public health and safety and to fulfill the obligations of the city with respect to state and federal law and all rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. The discharge into any sewer in the city of any substance which exceeds the limitations contained in this article, or in any manner fails to conform, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and a violation of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.004) 
Sec. 102-160. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
    The director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. Any person who applies for and/or receives sewer services from the city under this article shall be deemed to have consented to inspections pursuant to this section, including entrance upon that person's property at reasonable times to make inspections under this article. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.016) 
Sec. 102-161. - Reserved. 
Sec. 102-162. - Notice of violation. 
    Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within or at the expiration of the period of time stated in such notice permanently cease all violations. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.022) 
Sec. 102-163. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof before any court of competent jurisdiction shall be fined as prescribed in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.023) 
Sec. 102-164. - Protection of system from damage. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage works. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.015) 
Sec. 102-165. - Application for service connection. 
(a)  Before any connection shall be made to any sewer, application for same shall be made in writing to the department by the owner of the premises to be served, or by his or her authorized agent. A condition to the granting of a service connection shall be an agreement by the owner to abide by all of the rules and regulations of the department in all respects but more especially with those respecting the responsibility for payment for sewage disposal service. 
(b)  That part of the sewer service pipe on private property shall be inspected by the department prior to covering the pipe. The fee for such inspection shall be set by resolution of the city commission. 
(c)  Whenever the ownership of a premises changes, the use by the new owner or his or her agent or tenant of any of the facilities of the department shall be prima facie evidence that the new owner agrees to abide by the rules and regulations of the department and requirements of this article, but more especially with those respecting the responsibility for the payment for sewage disposal service. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.018) 
Sec. 102-166. - Payment for service. 
(a)  Bills for sewage disposal service shall be levied on each lot or parcel of land, building or premises having access to any sewer, or discharging sewage or waste into the sewage system, either directly or indirectly. These sewage disposal bills may be rendered with the water bills and made payable at the same time and under the same conditions as for the water bills. 
(b)  Billing for water consumption as provided for in another ordinance, and for sewage disposal as provided by this article shall not be severable but shall be paid as one bill. 
(c)  The rates charged for sewage disposal service shall be established by resolution of the city commission. The sewer rates shall be independent of the water rates. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.019) 
Sec. 102-167. - Use of sewage disposal system. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any material or waste into the sewage disposal system except in compliance with section 102-211. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.005) 
Sec. 102-168. - Interceptors. 
(a)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided for the handling of liquid wastes containing grease or oil in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the director, and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperatures. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight. 
(b)  Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.006, 25.007) 
Secs. 102-169-102-173. - Reserved. 
Sec. 102-174. - Storm sewer system. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any storm sewer or natural or artificial watercourse, waters or wastes other than stormwater or uncontaminated industrial wastes as heretofore defined, except upon special agreement or arrangement with the city, which may seek review by the appropriate state or local agency. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.014) 
Sec. 102-175. - Sewer and drain connections required. 
    The owner or occupant of any property situated within the city upon which is located a structure or structures in which water is used or available for household, commercial, industrial or other purposes shall, at his own expense, cause such property to be connected to an available public sanitary sewage collection facility. Such owner or occupant shall also be required to install suitable toilet facilities within such structures. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.017) 
Sec. 102-176. - Disposal of waste from private systems at sewage treatment plant. 
    Any water or waste discharged into the sewage disposal system shall comply with the requirements of section 102-211. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.020) 
Sec. 102-177. - Reserved. 
Sec. 102-178. - User charges. 
(a)  Established. Pursuant to Section 601-34, Industrial Waste Treatment, Title 18, Chapter V, Federal Register, Volume 35, No. 128, Thursday, July 2, 1970, user charges for operation and maintenance of publicly owned treatment works are herein established. The operation and maintenance costs shall include debt retirement. 
(b)  Implementation. Implementation of user charge system assures that each recipient of waste treatment services will pay its proportionate share of the costs of operation and maintenance of treatment works provided by the city. 
(c)  Definition of industrial user. The industrial user shall mean any industry identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1967, as amended and supplemented, under the category Division D-Manufacturing, and such other wastes as deemed appropriate by the city commission. A user listed in the said division may be excluded if it is determined that it will introduce primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences. 
(d)  Factors influencing share. An industrial user's share shall be based on all factors which significantly influence the cost of the treatment works. Factors such as strength, volume and delivery flow rate characteristics shall be considered and included to ensure a proportional distribution of the operation and maintenance costs allocable to all industrial users of the treatment works. 
(e)  Adjustment of share. When a substantial change in the strength, volume or delivery flow rate characteristics occurs in the wastewater introduced to the treatment works by an industrial, institutional or commercial user, such user's share shall be adjusted accordingly to generate revenue adequate to treat the wastewater contributed by such user. 
(f)  Formula for charges. Users of the sewage disposal system shall be charged a wastewater collection and treatment rate based on the quantity formula, subject to surcharges for higher strength wastewater in accordance with the amended rate ordinance. 
(g)  Estimates. Any residential, industrial, commercial or institutional user subject to a user charge shall furnish, as and when requested by the city commission, an estimate of the volume discharged into the wastewater treatment systems; and an estimate of the representative value of the strength of the waste, BOD and suspended solids discharged, whether or not such amounts are in excess of the permitted amount. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of such wastewater shall be determined in accordance with this chapter or by other methods generally accepted under the established sanitary engineering practices and approved by the superintendent. The reports submitted shall be subject to certification by the superintendent, but may serve as the basis for billing with all necessary adjustments in the amounts to be made after verification. If an analysis and volume of the waste is not furnished to the city commission in the specified time, the charges shall be based upon estimates made by the superintendent, and approved by the city commission. The superintendent shall have the right at any reasonable time to enter upon the land of the user to set up such equipment as is necessary to verify the reports submitted. In cases where measurements are difficult to make, or the industrial waste composition changes frequently, or representative samples are difficult to get or where other methods of measurements are necessitated for other sound engineering reasons as determined by the superintendent, the superintendent shall have the authority to use such other basis for determining said charges as shall be reliably indicative of volume and BOD and SS strength of the particular industrial waste, such as, but not limited to, water purchase or usage, character of products, comparisons between the subject data and collection data from like persons. All billings for said charges shall be payable within ten days after mailing of billings. All payments made, based upon the reports submitted, shall become final unless verification is made and notice given by the superintendent of necessary adjustments within one year of the payment. Underpayment of charges based on errors in users' reports and estimates shall be billed forthwith on ascertainment thereof. Overpayment of charges arising from any cause shall first be applied to unpaid billings and then the excess forthwith refunded. 
(h)  Billing estimates. The superintendent shall have the authority to estimate the volume and strength of the industrial waste in the event the user subject to the rate and charges fails to file a timely report as provided in this section. The estimates shall be based upon analyses and volumes of a similar installation or the amount of water supplied to the premises by the water utility, the amount of water supplied to the premises by any private sources of water or volume and analysis as determined by measurements and samples taken by the superintendent or an estimate determined by the superintendent by any combination of the foregoing or by any other equitable method. Failure to file written objection to such estimates within ten days after the mailing of written notice thereof of the user liable therefor shall constitute a waiver of any right to object or appeal the estimates made by the superintendent pursuant to this section. 
(i)  Appeals to the city commission. Any user may appeal the charges assessed against him to the city commission and shall have a hearing upon the following conditions: 
(1)  That the user submits estimates or authorizes the superintendent to make such estimates. 
(2)  That the user has good cause to believe that the charges assessed are in error. 
(3)  That notice in writing has been given to the city commission within 180 days of receipt of the charges in question. 
The city commission shall notify the user making the appeal of the time and place when his appeal will be heard. Upon evidence sufficient to the city commission submitted at the hearing that the charges are in error, the city commission shall make adjustments in the charges. Adjustments may be in the form of a refund or a credit against subsequent assessments of the charges provided for in this article. 
(j)  Rate review. The city commission shall cause an annual report to be made concerning the effect of the user charge system on the various classes of users. Such report shall include the amount, character and strength of the wastes discharged into the sewerage system and accounting of the revenues produced by the various classes of users. The city commission may appoint a committee to aid and assist in the preparation of the report and the committee membership may include representatives of various classes of users and other persons professionally qualified to work on the committee as determined by the city commission. If the revenues are shown in the report to be inequitable, the city commission will review the user charges and cause the necessary adjustments to be made in the rate structure. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  25.029) 
Secs. 102-179-102-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT 

Sec. 102-201. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Unless otherwise specified, terms adopted are from the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water/Wastewater, published by the American Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation, or Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes by the Environmental Protection Agency. Waste constituents and characteristics shall be measured by or as established by federal or state regulatory agencies. 
    Agency means the city. 
    Authorization means a written letter authorizing various conditions of wastewater discharges. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building well. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the community sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Community sewer means a sewer owned and operated by the agency. 
    Compatible pollutant means biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the agency's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit if the publicly owned treatment works was designed to treat such pollutants, and in fact does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree. While the term "substantial removal" is not subject to precise definition, it generally contemplates removals in the order of 80 percent or greater. Minor incidental removals in the order of ten to 30 percent are not considered "substantial." 
    Department means the water/wastewater department for the agency. 
    Federal act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, PL 92-500, and any amendments thereto; as well as any guidelines, limitations, and standards promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the act. 
    Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks including, but not limited to, septic tank waste and waste from vacuum pump tank trucks. 
    Incompatible pollutant means any pollutant which is not defined as a compatible pollutant. 
    Manager means the manager of the agency. 
    Mass emission rate means the weight of material discharged to the sewer system during a given time interval. Unless otherwise specified, the mass emission rate shall mean pounds per day of a particular constituent or combination of constituents. 
    New source means the same as defined in 40 CFR 403.3(k). 
    NPDES means the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System pursuant to section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended. 
    Pollution means an alteration of the quality of the waters of the state by waste to degree which unreasonably affects such waters for beneficial use or facilities which serve such beneficial uses. 
    Premises means a parcel of real estate including any improvements thereon which is determined by the agency to be a single user for purposes of receiving, using, and paying for service. 
    Significant industrial user means the same as defined in 40 CFR 403.3(t). 
    Superintendent means the superintendent of the department. 
    Unpolluted water means water to which no constituent has been added, either intentionally or accidentally, which would render such water unacceptable to the agency having jurisdiction thereof for disposal to storm or natural drainages or directly to surface waters. 
    User means any person that discharges, causes, or permits the discharge of wastewater into a community sewer. 
    User classification means a classification of user based on the latest edition of the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Manual, prepared by the Executive Office of Management and Budget. 
    Waste means sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous, or radioactive, associated with human habitation, or of human or animal origin, or from any producing, manufacturing or processing operation of whatever nature, including such waste placed within containers of whatever nature prior to, and for purposes of, disposal. 
    Wastewater means waste and water, whether treated or untreated, discharged into or permitted to enter a community sewer. 
    Wastewater constituents and characteristics means the individual chemical, physical, bacteriological, and radiological parameters, including volume and flow rate and such other parameters that serve to define, classify, or measure the contents, quality, quantity, and strength of wastewater. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .01, 7-8-91) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 102-202. - Purpose and policy. 
    This article sets uniform requirements for discharges into the wastewater collection and treatment system and enables the agency to comply with administrative provisions of the state water resources commission and the applicable effluent limitations, national standards of performance, toxic and pretreatment effluent standards, and any other discharge criteria which are required or authorized by state or federal law and to derive the maximum public benefit by regulating the quality and quantity of wastewater discharge into those systems. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .02, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 102-203. - Penalty. 
    Any person who intentionally or negligently violates any provision of this article or authorization condition or who discharges wastewater which causes pollution, or who violates any cease and desist order, prohibition, effluent limitation, or pretreatment standard shall, upon conviction, be punished as prescribed in section 1-15 of this Code. Every day any violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .31, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 102-204. - Prohibited practices. 
    No person shall discharge to a community sewer waste which causes, threatens to cause, or is capable of causing, either alone or by interaction with other substances, the following: 
(1)  A fire or explosion. 
(2)  Obstruction of flow in a sewer system or injury of the system, or damage to the wastewater collection, treatment or disposal facilities. 
(3)  Danger to life or safety of personnel. 
(4)  A nuisance or prevention of the effective maintenance or operation of the sewer system. 
(5)  Air pollution by the release of toxic or malodorous gases or malodorous gas-producing substances. 
(6)  Interference with the wastewater treatment process for the quality of the effluent as established by the NPDES permit. 
(7)  Discoloration or any other condition in the quality of the agency's treatment works effluent in such a manner that receiving water quality requirements established by law cannot be met. 
(8)  Conditions at or near the agency's treatment works which violate any statute or ordinance or any rule or regulation of any public agency or state or federal regulatory body. 
(9)  Quantities or rates of flow which overload the agency's collection or treatment facilities or cause excessive agency collection or treatment costs, or may use a disproportionate share of the agency facilities. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .03, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 102-205. - Prohibitions on storm drainage and groundwater. 
    Stormwater, groundwater, rainwater, street drainage, subsurface drainage, or yard drainage shall not be discharged through direct or indirect connections to a community sewer unless authorized by the agency. The department may approve the discharge of such water only when no reasonable alternative method of disposal is available. If authorization is granted for the discharge of such water into a community sewer the user shall pay the applicable user charges and fees and meet such other condition as required by the agency. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .04, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 102-206. - Prohibition on unpolluted water. 
(a)  Unpolluted water, including, but not limited to, cooling water, process or evaporative coolers will not be discharged through direct or indirect connection to a community sewer unless authorization is issued by the agency. The agency may approve the discharge of such water only when no reasonable alternative method of disposal is available. 
(b)  If authorization is granted for the discharge of such water into a community sewer, the user shall pay the applicable user charges and fees and shall meet such other conditions as required by the agency. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .05, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 102-207. - Prohibition on radioactive wastes. 
    No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any radioactive wastes into a community sewer. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .06, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 102-208. - Limitations on use of garbage grinders. 
(a)  Waste from garbage grinders shall not be discharged into a community sewer except: 
(1)  Wastes generated in preparation of food normally consumed or prepared on the premises; or 
(2)  Where the user has obtained authorization for that specific use from the agency, and agrees to undertake whatever self-monitoring is required to enable the agency to equitably determine the user charges based on the waste constituents and characteristics. 
(b)  Such grinders must shred the waste to a degree that all particles will be carried freely under normal flow conditions prevailing in the community sewer. Garbage grinders shall not be used for grinding plastic, paper products, inert materials, or garden refuse. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .07, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 102-209. - Limitations on points of discharge. 
    No person shall discharge any substances directly into a manhole or other opening in a community sewer other than through an approved building sewer, unless authorized by the agency. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .08, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 102-210. - Industry holding tank waste. 
    A user proposing to discharge holding tank waste, where pretreatment is not provided, into a community sewer must secure a permit from the department. This permit will state the specific location of discharge, the time of day the discharge is to occur, the volume of the discharge, and wastewater constituents and characteristics, with minimum review every two years. If authorization is granted for discharge of such waste into a community sewer, the user shall pay the applicable user charges and fees and shall meet such other conditions as required by the department. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .09, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 102-211. - Limitations on wastewater strength. 
(a)  No user, unless permitted through a special agreement (see section 102-222) from the manager, shall discharge, on a daily average, wastewater containing in excess of: 
Arsenic, total 1.0 mg/l Cadmium, total 1.3 mg/l Chromium, total 0.7 mg/l Copper, total 2.0 mg/l Cyanide, total 0.5 mg/l Lead, total 1.8 mg/l Mercury, total 0 Nickel, total 2.1 mg/l Silver, total 0.3 mg/l Zinc, total 1.0 mg/l PCBs No Discharge Allowed Phosphorus, total (as P) 15.0 mg/l Ammonia 15.0 mg/l  
Maximum discharge at any time shall not exceed three times the allowed daily average. 
(b)  No person shall discharge any wastewater: 
(1)  Having a closed cup flashpoint less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Celsius using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(2)  Containing more than 50 mg/l of oil or grease of animal or vegetable origin. 
(3)  Containing more than 40 mg/l of oil or grease of mineral or petroleum. 
(4)  Having a pH lower than 5.5 or above 9.0 unless authorized by the agency. 
(5)  Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such quantities that the temperature at the POTW treatment plant exceeds 30 degrees Celsius unless the approval authority, as defined in 40 CFR 403, upon request of the POTW, approves alternate temperature limits. 
(c)  Effluent limitations promulgated by the federal act shall apply in an instance where they are more stringent than those in this article. Under section 403.6 of the act, federal pretreatment standards are designed to achieve two purposes: 
(1)  To protect the operation of publicly owned treatment works; and 
(2)  To prevent the discharge of pollutants which pass through such works inadequately treated. 
(d)  Where the treatment works was designed to and does achieve substantial removal of pollutants other than the four pollutants listed in the definition for compatible pollutants in section 102-201 (BOD, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria), it is not appropriate to require the industrial user to achieve best practicable control technology currently available since this would lead to an uneconomical duplication of treatment facilities. While the term "substantial removal" is not subject to precise definition, it generally contemplates removal in the order of 80 percent or greater. Minor incidental removals in the order of ten to 30 percent are not considered substantial. For some industrial categories, it may be necessary to define pretreatment guidelines for problems that may arise as a result of the discharge into a publicly owned treatment works. However, any adjustments required for particular industrial categories should be considered in connection with the department's requirements rather than the national pretreatment standard. Limitations on wastewater strength in subsections (a) and (b) of this section may be supplemented with more stringent limitations pursuant to section 102-216(b): 
(1)  If the department determines that the limitations in subsections (a) and (b) of this section may not be sufficient to protect the operation of the treatment works; 
(2)  If the department determines that the limitations in subsections (a) and (b) of this section may not be sufficient to enable the treatment works to comply with water quality standards or effluent limitations specified in the department's NPDES permit; 
(3)  Nothing in this regulation is intended to affect any pretreatment requirements, including any standards or prohibitions, established by state or local law as long as the state or local requirements are not less stringent than any set forth in the national pretreatment standards, or any other requirements or prohibitions established under the act or this article. States with an NPDES permit program approved in accordance with section 402(B) and (C) of the act, or states requesting NPDES programs, are responsible for developing a state pretreatment program in accordance with 403.10 of the act; 
(4)  Except where expressly authorized to do so by applicable categorical pretreatment standard, no industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any other way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a categorical pretreatment standard. The control authority (as defined in 40 CFR 403.12(A)) may impose mass limitations on industrial users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .10, 7-8-91; Ord. No. 2014.08/389, 8-11-14) 
Sec. 102-212. - Metered water supply. 
    User charges and fees shall be based upon the total amount of water used from all sources unless, in the opinion of the department, significant portions of water received are not discharged to a community sewer. The total amount of water used from public and private sources will be determined by means of public meters or private meters, installed and maintained at the expense of the user and approved by the department. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .11, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 102-213. - Metered wastewater and metered diversions. 
    For users where, in the opinion of the department, a significant portion of the water received from any metered source does not flow into the community sewer because of the principal activity of the user or removal by other means, the user charges and fees will be applied against the volume of water discharged from such premises into the community sewer. Written notification and proof of the diversion of water must be provided by the user if the user is to avoid the application of the user charges and fees against the total amount of water used from all sources. The user may install a meter of a type and at a location approved by the department and at the user's expense. Such meters may measure either the amount of sewage discharge or the amount of water diverted. Such meters shall be tested for accuracy at the expense of the user when deemed necessary by the department. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .12, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 102-214. - Estimated wastewater volume. 
(a)  Users without source meter. For users where, in the opinion of the department, it is unnecessary or impractical to install meters, the quantity of wastewater may be based upon an estimate prepared by the superintendent. This estimate shall be based upon a rational determination of the wastewater discharged and may consider such factors as the number of fixtures, seating capacity, population equivalent, annual production of goods and services or such other determinants of water use necessary to estimate the wastewater volume discharged. 
(b)  Users with source meters. For users who, in the opinion of the superintendent, divert a significant portion of their flow from a community sewer, the user charges may be based upon an estimate of the volume prepared by the user, provided the user obtains wastewater discharge authorization and pays the applicable user charges and fees. The estimate must include the method and calculations used to determine the wastewater volume and may consider such factors as the number of fixtures, seating capacity, population equivalents, annual production of goods and services, or such other determinations of water use necessary to estimate the wastewater volume discharged. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .13, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 102-215. - Discharge reports. 
    The agency shall require that any person discharging or proposing to discharge wastewater into a community sewer file a periodic discharge report on a form furnished by the control authority if the provisions of sections 102-204, 102-207, 102-208, 102-210 and 102-211 are violated. 
(1)  Reporting requirement for industrial users effective date of categorical pretreatment standard-baseline report. Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the final administrative decision made upon a category determination submission under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to a POTW, as defined in 40 CFR 403 shall be required to submit to the control authority a report which contains the information listed in subsections (1)a through g of this section, where reports containing this information already have been submitted to the superintendent or regional administrator in compliance with the requirements of 40 CFR 128.140(B), the industrial user will not be required to submit this information again. New sources shall be required to submit to the control authority a report which contains the information listed in subsections (1)a through g of this section: 
a.  Identifying information. The user shall submit the name and address of facility including the name of the operator and owners. 
b.  Permits. The user shall submit a list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
c.  Description of operations. The user shall submit a brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classification of the operation carried out by such industrial user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
d.  Flow measurement. The user shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from actual measurements and other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e). (See subsection (1)e5 of this section.) The control authority may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where justified by cost or feasibility considerations. 
e.  Measurement of pollutants. 
1.  The user shall identify the pretreatment standards applicable to regulated process. 
2.  In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass, where required by the standard or control authority) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations. 
3.  Where feasible, samples must be obtained through the flow-proportional composite sampling techniques specified in the applicable categorical pretreatment standard. Where composite sampling is not feasible, a grab sample is acceptable. 
4.  Where the flow of the stream being sampled is less than or equal to 950,000 liters/day (approximately 250,000 gpd), the user must take six samples within a two-week period. 
5.  Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream of 40 CFR 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 403.6(e), this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the control authority. 
6.  Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the administrator determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, then any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the POTW or other parties may be approved by the administrator. 
7.  The control authority may allow the submission of a baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures. 
8.  The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW. 
f.  Certification. A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the industrial user (as defined in subparagraph (k) of the act) and certified to by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O & M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the industrial user to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
g.  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards; the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O & M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standards. 
1.  Where the industrial user's categorical pretreatment standard has been modified by a removal allowance (403.7), the combined wastestream formula (403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally different factors variance (403.13) at the time the user submits the report required by this section, the information required shall pertain to the modified limits. 
2.  If the categorical pretreatment standard is modified by a removal allowance (403.7), the combined wastestream formula 403.6(e), and/or a fundamentally different factors variance (403.13) after the user submits the report required any necessary amendments to the information requested by this section shall be submitted by the user to the control authority within 60 days after the modified limit is approved. 
(2)  Compliance schedule for meeting categorical pretreatment standards. The following conditions shall apply to the schedule required by subsection (1)g of this section: 
a.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the industrial user to meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract(s) for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.). 
b.  No increment referred to in subsection (3)a of this section shall exceed nine months. 
c.  Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report to the control authority including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the control authority. 
(3)  Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the control authority a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the industrial user which are limited by such pretreatment standards and requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O & M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the industrial user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, as defined in this article, and certified to by a qualified professional. 
(4)  Periodic reports on continued compliance. 
a.  Any industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the control authority during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the control authority or the approval authority, as defined in 40 CFR 403, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such categorical pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period for the discharge reported except that the control authority may require more detailed reporting of flows. At the discretion of the control authority and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the control authority may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted. 
b.  Where the control authority has imposed mass limitations on industrial users as provided for by 40 CFR 403.6(d), the report required by subsection (4)a of this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the discharge from the industrial user. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .14, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 102-216. - Wastewater discharge authorization. 
(a)  All major users proposing to connect or to discharge into a community sewer must obtain authorization before connecting to or discharging into a community sewer. For purposes of this article, a major user is defined as any user whose user classification is identified in the Standard Industrial Classifications (SIC) Manual in any of divisions A, B, D, E, and I and who: 
(1)  Has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average work day. 
(2)  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant. 
(3)  Has in his wastes toxic pollutants in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under section 307(a) of the federal act. 
(4)  Is found by the agency to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the treatment or collection system. 
(b)  Users seeking authorization shall complete and file with the superintendent an application in the form prescribed by the superintendent. The applicant may be required to submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and SIC number of applicant. 
(2)  Volume of wastewater to be discharged. 
(3)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, those mentioned in section 102-211 as determined by a laboratory approved by the agency. 
(4)  Time and duration of discharge. 
(5)  Average and 30-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any. 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation. 
(7)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant process on the premises, including all materials, processes and types of materials which are or could be discharged. 
(8)  Each product produced by type, amount and rate of production. 
(9)  Number and type of employees and hours of work. 
(10)  Any other information as may be deemed by the superintendent to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
(c)  The superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the superintendent may issue wastewater discharge authorization subject to terms and conditions provided herein. 
(d)  An authorization for wastewater discharge shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this ordinance and all other regulations, user charges, and fees established by the agency. The conditions of authorization shall be uniformly enforced by the superintendent in accordance with this article, and applicable state and federal regulations. Authorization may contain the following: 
(1)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer. 
(2)  The average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
(3)  Limits on rate and time of discharges or requirements for flow regulations and equalization. 
(4)  Requirements for installation of inspection and sampling facilities. 
(5)  Pretreatment requirements. 
(6)  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency and method of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule. 
(7)  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports. 
(8)  Requirements for maintaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the agency and affording the agency access thereto. 
(9)  Mean and maximum mass emission rates, or other appropriate limits when incompatible pollutants are proposed or present in the user's wastewater discharge. 
(10)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the agency to ensure compliance with this article. 
(e)  Duration of authorization. Authorization shall be issued for no more than a five-year time period. A temporary authorization shall be issued for a specified duration. The terms and conditions of the authorization shall be subject to modification and change by the agency during the life of the authorization as limitations or requirements as identified in section 102-211 are modified and changed. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his authorization at least 60 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes of new conditions in the authorization shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(f)  Transfer of authorization. A wastewater discharge authorization shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises or a new or changed operation. 
(g)  Revocation of authorization. Any user who violates the following conditions of the authorization of this article, or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having his authorization revoked: 
(1)  Failure of user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge. 
(2)  Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
(3)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring. 
(4)  Violation of conditions of the authorization. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .15, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 102-217. - Monitoring facilities. 
(a)  The agency may require the user to construct at his own expense monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer or internal drainage systems, and may also require sampling or metering equipment to be provided, installed and operated at the user's expense, if the provisions of sections 102-204, 102-207, 102-208, 102-210 and 102-211 may be violated. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the agency may, when such places an undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
(b)  If the monitoring facility is inside the user's property, there shall be accommodations to allow access for agency personnel. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole to allow accurate sampling and compositing of samples for analysis. The manhole, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
(c)  Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the agency's requirements and all applicable local agency construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within a reasonable period of time following written notification by the agency. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .16, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 102-218. - Inspection and sampling. 
    The agency may inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this article is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the agency or its representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection or sampling or in the performance of any of their duties. The agency shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. Where a user has security clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the agency will be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .17, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 102-219. - Pretreatment. 
    Users shall make wastewater acceptable under the limitations established in this article before discharging to any community sewer. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the agency shall be provided and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the agency for review, and shall be acceptable to the agency before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the agency under the provisions of this article. The agency shall be notified 48 hours prior to start-up of new or modified pretreatment facilities. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the agency. Pretreatment requirements which will be enforced through the remedies set forth in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(A) will include, but not be limited to, the duty to allow or carry out inspections, entry or monitoring activities; any rules, regulations or orders issued by the POTW; or any reporting requirements imposed by the POTW or these regulations. The POTW shall have authority and procedures (after informal notice to the discharger) immediately and effectively to halt or prevent any discharge of pollutants to the POTW which reasonably appears to present an imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The POTW shall also have authority and procedures (which shall include notice to the affected industrial users and an opportunity to respond) to halt or prevent any discharge to the POTW which presents or may present an endangerment to the environment or which threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW. The approval authority shall have authority to seek judicial relief for noncompliance by industrial users when the POTW has acted to seek such relief but has sought a penalty which the approval authority finds to be insufficient. The procedures for notice to dischargers where the POTW is seeking ex parte temporary judicial injunctive relief will be governed by applicable state or federal law and not by this provision; and comply with the confidentiality requirements set forth in 40 CFR 403.14. 
(1)  Procedures. The POTW shall develop and implement procedures to ensure compliance with the requirements of a pretreatment program. At a minimum, these procedures shall enable the POTW to: 
a.  Identify and locate all possible industrial users which might be subject to the POTW pretreatment program. Any compilation, index or inventory of industrial users made under this paragraph shall be made available to the regional administrator or superintendent upon request. 
b.  Identify the character and volume of pollutants contributed to the POTW by the industrial users identified under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(i). This information shall be made available to the regional administrator or superintendent upon request. 
c.  Notify industrial users identified under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(i) of applicable pretreatment standards and any applicable requirements under section 204(b) and 405 of the act and subtitles C and D of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. 
d.  Receive and analyze self-monitoring reports and other notices submitted by industrial users in accordance with the self-monitoring requirements in 40 CFR 403.12. 
e.  Randomly sample and analyze the effluent from industrial users and conduct surveillance and inspection activities in order to identify, independent of information supplied by industrial users, occasional and continuing noncompliance with pretreatment standards. The results of these activities shall be made available to the regional administrator or superintendent upon request. 
f.  Investigate instances of noncompliance with pretreatment standards and requirements, as indicated in the reports and notices required under 40 CFR 403.12, or indicated by analysis, inspection, and surveillance activities described in this article. Sample taking and analysis and the collection of other information shall be performed with sufficient care to produce evidence admissible in enforcement proceedings or in judicial actions. 
g.  Comply with the public participation requirements of 40 CFR 25 in the enforcement of national pretreatment standards. These procedures shall include provision for at least annually providing public notification, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality in which the POTW is located, of industrial users which, during the previous 12 months, were significantly violating applicable pretreatment standards or other pretreatment requirements. For the purposes of this provision, a significant violation is a violation which remains uncorrected 45 days after notification of noncompliance; which is part of a pattern of noncompliance over a 12-month period; which involves a failure to accurately report noncompliance; or which resulted in the POTW exercising its emergency authority under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) of the act. 
(2)  Funding. The POTW shall have sufficient resources and qualified personnel to carry out the authorities and procedures described in paragraphs (f)(1) and (2) of the act. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .18, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 102-220. - Protection from accidental discharge. 
(a)  Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this article. Such facilities shall be provided and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedure to provide this protection shall be submitted to the agency for review, and shall be acceptable to the agency before construction of the facility. 
(b)  The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to provide the protection necessary to meet the requirements of this article. Users shall notify the agency immediately upon accidentally discharging wastes in violation of this article to enable countermeasures to be taken by the agency to minimize damage to the community sewer, treatment facility, treatment processes and the receiving waters. This notification shall be followed, within five days of the date of occurrence, by a detailed written statement describing the causes of the accidental discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrence. Such notification will not relieve users of liability for any expense, loss, or damage to the sewer system, treatment plant, or treatment process, or for any fines imposed on the agency. 
(c)  Definition. For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(1)  Effect of an upset. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of this subsection are met. 
(2)  Conditions necessary for a demonstration of an upset. An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
a.  An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the specific cause of the upset. 
b.  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures. 
c.  The industrial user has submitted the following information to the POTW and control authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
1.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance. 
2.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue. 
3.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(3)  Burden of proof. In any enforcement proceeding the industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(4)  Reviewability of agency consideration of claims of upset. In the usual exercise of prosecutorial discretion, agency enforcement personnel should review any claims that noncompliance was caused by an upset. No determinations made in the course of the review constitute final agency action subject to judicial review. Industrial users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(5)  User responsibility in case of upset. The industrial user shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .19, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 102-221. - Confidential information. 
(a)  All information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit application, permits and monitoring programs, and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the agency that the release of such information would divulge processes or methods which are important to the user's competitive position. 
(b)  When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available to governmental agencies for use in making studies. However, such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. Except as allowed for above, information accepted by the agency as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency, or to the general public by the agency, until and unless prior and adequate notification is given to the user. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .20, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 102-222. - Special agreements. 
    Special agreements and arrangements between the agency and any user may be established when, in the opinion of the manager, unusual or extraordinary circumstances compel special terms and conditions. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .21, 7-8-91; Ord. No. 2014.08/389, 8-11-14) 
Sec. 102-223. - Adjustment of charges based on strength and character of sewage. 
(a)  Surcharge. Each person discharging wastes into the community sewers shall be subject to a surcharge in addition to the regular sewage service charge based on the biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and the suspended solids (SS) content of the wastes, if the wastes have a concentration higher than 250 ppm of BOD and/or 250 ppm of SS. 
(1)  Biochemical oxygen demand: 250 ppm. 
(2)  Suspended solids: 250 ppm. 
(b)  Sampling and testing for surcharges or user charges. The discharged sewage will be sampled during each sewage billing period for a minimum of a one-day period (24 continuous hours) by means of a composite sample. An extended sampling period of up to one week (seven continuous days) or reduction may be requested to enable the gathering of a sample representative of a business's sewage. The extension or reduction of the sampling period beyond the initial one-day sampling period may be requested by either the sewer user involved or the department. If an extended sampling period is requested, the parameter values used to calculate the surcharge will be the arithmetical average of the individual values. If a business or industry has multiple discharges of sewage, each discharge shall be sampled according to quality. The volume of each discharge shall be determined by actual measurement or by means of process usage. If significant process changes are made to affect quality of any discharge, resampling may be requested by either the sewer user involved or the department. 
(c)  Measurement. The sewage sample shall be measured for the following parameters: biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), and suspended matter or solids (SS). These tests shall be made in accordance with the latest editions of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes by the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .22, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 102-224. - Issuance of cease and desist orders. 
    When the agency finds that a discharge of wastewater has taken place, in violation of prohibitions or limitations of this article, the superintendent may issue an order to cease and desist and direct that those persons not complying with such prohibitions, limits, requirements or provisions: 
(1)  Comply forthwith; 
(2)  Comply in accordance with a time schedule set forth by the agency; or 
(3)  Take appropriate remedial or preventive action in the event of a threatened violation. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .23, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 102-225. - Submission of time schedule. 
    When the agency finds that a discharge of wastewater has been taking place, in violation of prohibitions or limitations prescribed in this article, or wastewater source control requirements, effluent limitations or pretreatment standards, or the provisions of a wastewater discharge authorization, the agency may require the user to submit for approval, with such modifications as it deems necessary, a detailed time schedule for specific actions which the user shall take in order to prevent or correct a violation of requirements. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .24, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 102-226. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any user affected by any decision, action or determination, including cease and desist orders, made by the superintendent interpreting or implementing the provisions of this article or in any authorization issued pursuant to this article, may file with the superintendent a written request for reconsideration within ten days of such decision, action or determination, setting forth in detail the facts supporting the user's request for reconsideration. 
(b)  If the ruling made by the superintendent is unsatisfactory to the person requesting reconsideration, he may, within ten days after notification of agency action, file a written appeal to the manager of the agency. If the ruling made by the manager is unsatisfactory to the person requesting reconsideration, he may, within ten days after notification of agency action, file a written appeal to the city commission. The written appeal shall be heard by the body within 30 days from the date of filing. The agency's governing body shall make a final ruling on the appeal within ten days of the close of the meeting. The superintendent's decision, action or determination shall remain in effect during such period of reconsideration. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .25, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 102-227. - Creation of public nuisance. 
    Discharges of wastewater in any manner in violation of this article or of any order issued pursuant to this article, are declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the superintendent. Any person creating a public nuisance is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .26, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 102-228. - Injunction. 
    Whenever a discharge of wastewater is in violation of the provisions of this article or otherwise causes or threatens to cause a condition of contamination, pollution or nuisance, the agency may petition any court of competent jurisdiction for the issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction, or both, as may be appropriate in restraining the continuance of such discharge. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .27, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 102-229. - Damage to facilities. 
    When a discharge of wastes causes an obstruction, damage or any other impairment to agency facilities, the agency may assess a charge against the user for the work required to clean or repair the facility, and add such charge to the user's charges and fees. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .28, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 102-230. - Falsifying of information. 
    Any person who knowingly makes any false statement or representation, record, report, plan, or other documents filed with the agency or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of no more than $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .29, 7-8-91) 
Sec. 102-231. - Termination of service. 
    The agency may revoke any wastewater discharge authorization, or terminate or cause to be terminated wastewater service to any premises if a violation of any provision of this article is found to exist, or if a discharge of wastewater causes or threatens to cause a condition of contamination, pollution, or nuisance as defined in this article. This provision is in addition to other statutes, rules or regulations, authorizing termination of service for delinquency in payment. 
(Ord. No. 318,  .30, 7-8-91) 
Secs. 102-232-102-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - STORMWATER REGULATIONS; ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-261. - Statutory authority and title. 
    This article [Ordinance No. 2005.11/367] is adopted in accordance with the Home Rule City Act, as amended, being MCL 117.1 et seq. (for townships and villages, cite proper statute); the Drain Code of 1956, as amended, being MCL 280.1 et seq.; the Land Division Act, as amended, being MCL 560.1 et seq.; the Revenue Bond Act, as amended, being MCL 141.101 et seq.; the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, as amended, being MCL 324.101 et seq.; Section 401(p) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (also known as the Clean Water Act), as amended, being 33 USC 1342(p) and 40 CFR Parts 9, 122, 123, and 124; and other applicable state and federal laws. 
    The City of Buchanan shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of the article. Any powers granted, or duties imposed, upon the City of Buchanan may be delegated in writing by the city commission of the City of Buchanan to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of, or in the employ of the City of Buchanan. 
(Ord. No. 2005.11/367, 11-14-05) 
Sec. 102-262. - Findings. 
    The City of Buchanan finds that: 
(1)  Illicit discharges contain pollutants that will significantly degrade the waterbodies and water resources of the City of Buchanan, thus threatening the health, safety, and welfare of the citizenry. 
(2)  Illicit discharges enter the stormwater drainage system through either direct connections (e.g., wastewater piping either mistakenly or deliberately connected to the storm drains) or indirect connections (e.g., infiltration into the storm drain system or spills connected by drain inlets). 
(3)  Establishing the measures for controlling illicit discharges and connections contained in this article and implementing the same will address many of the deleterious effects of illicit discharges. 
(4)  Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2005.11/367, 11-14-05) 
Sec. 102-263. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to accomplish, among others, the following objectives: 
(1)  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the stormwater drainage system and waterbodies by stormwater discharges by any user; 
(2)  To prohibit illicit discharges and connections to the stormwater drainage system and waterbodies; 
(3)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article; and 
(4)  To provide appropriate remedies for failure to comply with this section. 
(Ord. No. 2005.11/367, 11-14-05) 
Sec. 102-264. - Applicability and general provisions. 
    This article shall apply to all discharges entering the stormwater drainage system and waterbodies generated on any developed and undeveloped lands. 
(Ord. No. 2005.11/367, 11-14-05) 
Sec. 102-265. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, unless the context in which they are used specifically indicates otherwise. 
    Authorized enforcement agency means the City of Buchanan, and/or any persons or agencies designated to act as the authorized enforcement agency by the City of Buchanan. 
    Best management practices (BMPs) means structural devices or nonstructural practices that are designed to prevent pollutants from entering stormwater flows, to direct the flow of stormwater, or to treat polluted stormwater flows. BMPs may include, but shall not be limited to, those described in the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality Guidebook of BMPs for Michigan Watersheds. Equivalent practices and design criteria that accomplish the purposes of this article including, but not limited to, minimizing stormwater runoff and preventing the discharge of pollutants into stormwater, shall be as determined by the city public services director. 
    Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 USC Section 1251 et seq., as amended, and the applicable regulations promulgated thereunder. 
    Discharge means the introduction (intentionally or unintentionally, and directly or indirectly) of any liquid, substance, pollutant, or other material into a stormwater drainage system or water body. 
    Discharger means any person who directly or indirectly discharges stormwater from any premises. Discharger also includes any employee, officer, director, partner, contractor, or other person who participates in, or is legally or factually responsible for any act or omission that is, or results in, a violation of this article. 
    Drain means any and all conduits, facilities, measures, areas and structures that serve to convey, catch, hold, filter, store, and/or receive stormwater or groundwater, either on a temporary or permanent basis. 
    Drainage means the collection, conveyance, or discharge of groundwater and/or surface water. 
    Drainageway means a drain, water body, or floodplain. 
    EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 
    Floodplain means the area, usually lowlands, adjoining the channel of a river, stream, or watercourse or lake, or other body of standing water, that has been or may be covered by floodwater. 
    Hazardous materials means any solid, liquid, semisolid, or gaseous substance or material that because of its quantity, quality, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible illness or serious incapacitating but reversible illness, or may pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment if improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Illicit connection means any method, means, or conduit for conveying an illicit discharge into a water body or a stormwater drainage system. 
    Illicit discharge means any discharge to a water body or a stormwater drainage system that does not consist entirely of stormwater, that is not authorized by the terms of an NPDES permit, or that is not an authorized discharge as defined by this article. 
    MDEQ means Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit means a permit issued by the EPA or a state under authority delegated pursuant to the Clean Water Act that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States. 
    Nonstormwater discharge means any discharge to the stormwater drainage system or a water body that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    Person means an individual, firm, partnership, association, public or private corporation, public agency, instrumentality, or any other legal entity. 
    Pollutant includes, but is not limited to, the following: any dredged spoil, solid waste, vehicle fluids, yard wastes, animal wastes, agricultural waste products, sediment, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological wastes, radioactive materials, hazardous materials, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, commercial, and agricultural waste, or any other contaminant or other substance defined as a pollutant under the Clean Water Act. Pollutant also includes properties or characteristics of water, including, but not limited to pH, heat, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, and odor. 
    Premises means any building, structure, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, or property, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    Property owner means any person having legal or equitable title to premises or any person having or exercising care, custody, or control over any premises. 
    State of Michigan Water Quality Standards means all applicable state rules, regulations, and laws pertaining to water quality, including the provisions of Section 3106 of Part 31 of 1994 Public Acts 451, as amended. 
    Stormwater drainage system means storm sewers, conduits, curbs, gutters, catchbasins, drains, ditches, pumping devices, parking lots, roads, or other manmade channels that are designed or used, singly or together in combination with one another, for collecting or conveying stormwater. 
    Stormwater pollution prevention plan means a document that describes the BMPs and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, a stormwater drainage system, and/or a water body to the maximum extent practicable. 
    Stormwater runoff or stormwater means the runoff and drainage of precipitation resulting from rainfall, snowmelt, or other natural event or process. 
    Toxic material means any pollutant or combination of pollutants that is or can potentially be harmful to the public health or the environment, including, without limitation, those listed in 40 CFR 401.15 as "toxic" under the provisions of the Clean Water Act, or listed in the Critical Materials Register promulgated by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, or as otherwise provided by local, state, or federal laws, rules, or regulations. 
    Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a premises. The term includes any water that has in any way been used and degraded or physically or chemically altered. 
    Water body means a river, lake, stream, creek, or other watercourse or wetlands. 
(Ord. No. 2005.11/367, 11-14-05) 
DIVISION 2. - PROHIBITIONS AND AUTHORIZATIONS 

Sec. 102-266. - Prohibited discharges. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to discharge, or cause to be discharged, to a stormwater drainage system or water body, any substance or material, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater or an authorized discharge. This prohibition includes the commencement, conducting, or continuance of any illicit discharge by any person to a stormwater drainage system or water body. 
(2)  Any person discharging stormwater shall effectively prevent pollutants from being discharged with the stormwater, except in accordance with BMPs. 
(3)  The authorized enforcement agency is authorized to require dischargers to implement pollution prevention measures, using stormwater pollution prevention plans and BMPs, as determined necessary by the authorized enforcement agency to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to a stormwater drainage system or water body. 
(4)  The discharge prohibitions of this section shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge authorized under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the EPA, provided the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the stormwater drainage system. 
(Ord. No. 2005.11/367, 11-14-05) 
Sec. 102-267. - Prohibited illicit connections. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to construct, use, maintain (or to allow the construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of) an illicit connection. 
(2)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made prior to the effective date of this article, and regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(Ord. No. 2005.11/367, 11-14-05) 
Sec. 102-268. - Authorized discharges. 
    The following nonstormwater discharges are permissible, but only if they do not result in a violation of the State of Michigan water quality standards and provided that they are undertaken in compliance with any applicable or required BMPs: 
(1)  Water supply line flushing; 
(2)  Landscape irrigation runoff; 
(3)  Diverted stream flows; 
(4)  Rising groundwater; 
(5)  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to storm drains; 
(6)  Uncontaminated pumped groundwater; 
(7)  Discharges from potable water sources; 
(8)  Foundation drains; 
(9)  Air conditioning condensate; 
(10)  Irrigation water; 
(11)  Springs; 
(12)  Water from crawl space pumps; 
(13)  Footing drains; 
(14)  Lawn watering runoff; 
(15)  Waters from noncommercial car washing; 
(16)  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
(17)  Residential swimming pool water and other dechlorinated swimming pool water, provided that any filter backwash water that is present is treated; 
(18)  Residual street washwater; 
(19)  Discharges or flows from emergency firefighting activities; and 
(20)  Discharges specifically authorized in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health, welfare, and safety or the environment. 
(Ord. No. 2005.11/367, 11-14-05) 
Sec. 102-269. - Storage of hazardous or toxic materials in drainageway. 
    Except as permitted by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to store or stockpile, within a drainageway, any hazardous or toxic materials, unless adequate protection and/or containment has been provided so as to prevent any such materials from entering a stormwater drainage system or water body. 
(Ord. No. 2005.11/367, 11-14-05) 
DIVISION 3. - INSPECTION, MONITORING, REPORTING, AND RECORDKEEPING 

Sec. 102-270. - Inspection and sampling. 
    The authorized enforcement agency may inspect and/or obtain samples from any discharger's premises as necessary to determine compliance with the requirements of this article. Upon request, the discharger shall allow properly identified representatives of the authorized enforcement agency to enter the premises of the discharger at all hours necessary for the purposes of such inspection or investigation, including, but not limited to, smoke/dye testing, televising pipes, sampling and excavation. The authorized enforcement agency shall provide the discharger reasonable advance notice of the need for such access, if possible and consistent with protection of public health and safety and the environment. The properly identified representatives may place on the discharger's premises the equipment or devices used for such sampling or inspection. Unreasonable delays in allowing access to a premises is a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005.11/367, 11-14-05) 
Sec. 102-271. - Stormwater monitoring facilities. 
    If directed in writing to do so by the authorized enforcement agency, a discharger of stormwater runoff from any premises used for commercial or industrial purposes shall provide and operate equipment or devices for the monitoring of stormwater runoff to provide for inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of each discharge to a water body or a stormwater drainage system, as specified by the authorized enforcement agency. The authorized enforcement agency may require a discharger to provide and operate such equipment and devices if it is necessary or appropriate for the inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of discharges in order to determine whether adverse effects from, or as a result of, such discharges may occur. All such equipment and devices for the inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of discharges shall be installed and maintained at the discharger's expense in accordance with applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2005.11/367, 11-14-05) 
Sec. 102-272. - Accidental discharges. 
    Any discharger who accidentally discharges into a stormwater drainage system or a water body any substance other than stormwater or an authorized discharge shall immediately notify the authorized enforcement agency of the discharge. If the notification is given orally, a written report concerning the discharge shall be filed with the authorized enforcement agency within five weekdays. The written report shall specify all of the following: 
(1)  The composition of the discharge and the cause thereof; 
(2)  The exact date, time, and estimated volume of the discharge; 
(3)  All measures taken to clean up the discharge, all measures taken or proposed to be taken to mitigate any known or potential adverse impacts of the discharge, and all measures proposed to be taken to reduce and prevent any recurrences; and 
(4)  The names and telephone numbers of the individual making the report and, if different, the individual who may be contacted for additional information regarding the discharge. 
(Ord. No. 2005.11/367, 11-14-05) 
Sec. 102-273. - Recordkeeping requirement. 
    Any person who violates any requirement of this article or that is subject to monitoring under this article shall retain and preserve for no less than three years any and all books, drawings, plans, prints, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and records, including records on magnetic or electronic media, and any and all summaries of such records relating to monitoring, sampling, and chemical analysis of any discharge or stormwater runoff from any premises connected with the violation or subject to monitoring. 
(Ord. No. 2005.11/367, 11-14-05) 
DIVISION 4. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 102-274. - Sanctions for violation. 
(1)  Violation; municipal civil infraction. Except as provided by subsection (6), and notwithstanding any other provision of the city's laws, ordinances, and regulations to the contrary, a person who violates any provision of this article including, without limitation, any notice, order, permit, decision or determination promulgated, issued or made by the authorized enforcement agency under this article, is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $500.00 per day for each infraction and not more than $2,000.00 per day for each infraction, plus costs and other sanctions. 
(2)  Repeat offenses; increased fines. Increased fines may be imposed for repeat offenses. As used in this section, "repeat offense" means a second (or any subsequent) municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision of this article committed by a person within any 24-month period and for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. The increased fine for a repeat offense under this article shall be as follows: 
(a)  The fine for any offense that is a first repeat offense shall be not less than $2,500.00, plus costs. 
(b)  The fine for any offense that is a second repeat offense or any subsequent repeat offense shall be not less than $5,000.00, plus costs. 
(3)  Amount of fines. Subject to the minimum fine amounts specified in subsections (2)(a) and (b), the following factors shall be considered by a court in determining the amount of a municipal civil infraction fine following the issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation for a violation of this article: the type, nature, severity, frequency, duration, preventability, potential and actual effect, and economic benefit to the violator (such as delayed or avoided costs or competitive advantage) of a violation; the violator's recalcitrance or efforts to comply; the economic impacts of the fine on the violator; and such other matters as justice may require. A violator shall bear the burden of demonstrating the presence and degree of any mitigating factors to be considered in determining the amount of a fine; however, mitigating factors shall not be considered unless it is determined that the violator has made all "good faith" efforts to correct and terminate all violations. 
(4)  Authorized local official. Notwithstanding any other provision of the city's laws, ordinances, and regulations to the contrary, the following persons being the city code enforcement officer and the city public services director are designated as the authorized local officials to issue municipal civil infraction citations directing alleged violators to appear in district court for violations of this article in addition to any other persons so designated by the authorized enforcement agency and any city police officer. 
(5)  Other requirements and procedures. Except as otherwise provided by this section, the requirements and procedures for commencing municipal civil infraction actions; issuance and service of municipal civil infraction citations; determination and collection of court-ordered fines, costs and expenses; appearances and payment of fines and costs; failure to answer, appear or pay fines; disposition of fines, costs and expenses paid; and other matters regarding municipal civil infractions shall be as set forth in Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended. 
(6)  [Violators.] Any person who: 
(a)  At the time of a violation knew or should have known that a pollutant or substance was discharged contrary to any provision of this article, or contrary to any notice, order, permit, decision or determination promulgated, issued or made by the authorized enforcement agency under this article; or 
(b)  Intentionally makes a false statement, representation, or certification in an application for, or form pertaining to a permit, or in a notice, report, or record required by this article, or in any other correspondence or communication, written or oral, with the authorized enforcement agency regarding matters regulated by this article; or 
(c)  Intentionally falsifies, tampers with, or renders inaccurate any sampling or monitoring device or record required to be maintained by this article; or 
(d)  Commits any other act that is punishable under state law by imprisonment for more than 90 days; 
Shall upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of $500.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for up to 90 days, or both in the discretion of the court. 
(7)  [Aiding in a violation.] Any person who aids or abets another person in a violation of this article shall be subject to the sanctions provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2005.11/367, 11-14-05) 
Sec. 102-275. - Failure to comply; completion. 
    The authorized enforcement agency is authorized, after giving reasonable notice and opportunity for compliance, to correct any violation of this article or damage or impairment to the stormwater drainage system caused by a discharge and to bill the person causing the violation or discharge for the costs of the work to be reimbursed. The costs reimbursable under this section shall be in addition to fees, amounts or other costs and expenses required to be paid to the authorized enforcement agency under other sections of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005.11/367, 11-14-05) 
Sec. 102-276. - Emergency measures. 
    If emergency measures are necessary to respond to a nuisance; to protect public safety, health, and welfare; and/or to prevent loss of life, injury, or damage to property, the authorized enforcement agency is authorized to carry out or arrange for all such emergency measures. Property owners shall be responsible for the cost of such measures made necessary as a result of a violation of this article, and shall promptly reimburse the city, for all of such costs. 
(Ord. No. 2005.11/367, 11-14-05) 
Sec. 102-277. - Cost recovery for damage to stormwater drainage system. 
    Any person who discharges to a stormwater drainage system or a water body, including, but not limited to, any person who causes or creates a discharge that violates any provision of this article, produces a deposit or obstruction or otherwise damages or impairs a stormwater drainage system, or causes or contributes to a violation of any federal, state, or local law governing the City of Buchanan, shall be liable to and shall fully reimburse the City of Buchanan for all expenses, costs, losses or damages (direct or indirect) payable or incurred by the city as a result of any such discharge, deposit, obstruction, damage, impairment, violation, exceedence or noncompliance. The costs that must be reimbursed to the city, shall include, but shall not be limited to, all of the following: 
(1)  All costs incurred by the City of Buchanan in responding to the violation or discharge, including expenses for any cleaning, repair or replacement work, and the costs of sampling, monitoring and treatment, as a result of the discharge, violation, exceedence or noncompliance. 
(2)  All costs to the City of Buchanan of monitoring, surveillance, and enforcement in connection with investigating, verifying, and prosecuting any discharge, violation, exceedence, or noncompliance. 
(3)  The full amount of any fines, assessments, penalties and claims, including natural resource damages levied against the City of Buchanan or any city representative, by any governmental agency or third party as a result of a violation of applicable laws or regulations that is caused by or contributed to by any discharge, violation, exceedence, or noncompliance. 
(4)  The full value of any city staff time (including any required overtime), consultant and engineering fees, actual attorney fees, defense costs including the city legal counsel and any special legal counsel associated with responding to, investigating, verifying, and prosecuting any discharge, violation, exceedence or noncompliance, or otherwise enforcing the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005.11/367, 11-14-05) 
Sec. 102-278. - Collection of costs; lien. 
(1)  Costs incurred by the City of Buchanan pursuant to sections 102-275 through 102-277, and subsection 102-279(1), shall constitute a lien on the premises, which shall be enforceable in accordance with Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of 1933, as amended from time to time, or as otherwise authorized by law. Any such charges that are delinquent for six months or more may be certified annually to the city treasurer, who shall enter the lien on the next tax roll against the premises, the costs shall be collected, and the lien shall be enforced in the same manner as provided for in the collection of taxes assessed upon the roll and the enforcement of a lien for taxes. In addition to any other lawful enforcement methods, the city shall have all remedies authorized by Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of 1933, as amended, and by other applicable laws. 
(2)  The failure by any person to pay any amounts required to be reimbursed to the City of Buchanan as provided by this article shall constitute an additional violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005.11/367, 11-14-05) 
Sec. 102-279. - Suspension of access to the stormwater drainage system. 
(1)  Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The authorized enforcement agency may, without prior notice, suspend access to the stormwater drainage system to any person or premises when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge that presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the stormwater drainage system or a water body. If the person fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the stormwater drainage system or the environment, or to minimize danger to persons, and bill the person for the costs to the City of Buchanan in taking such steps. 
(2)  Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging to the stormwater drainage system in violation of this article may have their access to the system terminated, if the authorized enforcement agency determines that such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its access. It shall be unlawful for any person to reinstate access of the stormwater drainage system to a premises terminated pursuant to this section without the prior written approval of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 2005.11/367, 11-14-05) 
Sec. 102-280. - Appeals. 
    Any person to whom any provision of this article has been applied may appeal in writing to the city commission, not later than 30 days after the action or decision being appealed. Such appeal shall identify the matter being appealed and the basis for the appeal. The city commission shall consider the appeal and make a decision whereby it affirms, rejects, or modifies the action being appealed. In considering any such appeal, the city commission may consider the recommendations of the authorized enforcement agency and the comments of other persons having knowledge or expertise regarding the matter. In considering any such appeal, the city commission may grant a temporary variance from the terms of this article so as to provide relief, in whole or in part, from the action being appealed, but only upon finding that the following requirements are satisfied: 
(1)  The application of the article provisions being appealed will present or cause unnecessary hardship for the person appealing; provided, however, that unnecessary hardship shall not include the need for a property owner to incur additional reasonable expenses in order to comply with the article; and 
(2)  The granting of the relief requested will not prevent accomplishment of the goals and purposes of this article, nor result in less effective management of stormwater runoff. 
(Ord. No. 2005.11/367, 11-14-05) 
Sec. 102-281. - Judicial relief. 
    With the approval of the city commission, the authorized enforcement agency may institute legal proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to seek all appropriate relief for violations of this article or of any permit, order, notice or agreement issued or entered into under this article. The action may seek temporary or permanent injunctive relief, damages, penalties, costs, and any other relief, at law or equity, that a court may order. The authorized enforcement agency may also seek collection of fines, penalties and any other amounts due to the City of Buchanan that a person has not paid. 
(Ord. No. 2005.11/367, 11-14-05) 
Sec. 102-282. - Cumulative remedies. 
    The imposition of a single penalty, fine, order, damage, or surcharge upon any person for a violation of this article, or of any permit, order, notice or agreement issued, or entered into under this article, shall not preclude the imposition by the City of Buchanan the authorized enforcement agency, or a court of competent jurisdiction or a combination of any or all of those sanctions and remedies or additional sanctions and remedies with respect to the same violation, consistent with applicable limitations on penalty amounts under state or federal laws or regulations. A criminal citation and prosecution of a criminal action against a person shall not be dependent upon and need not be held in abeyance during any civil, judicial, or administrative proceeding, conference, or hearing regarding the person. 
(Ord. No. 2005.11/367, 11-14-05) 
DIVISION 5. - PERFORMANCE AND DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 102-283. - Responsibility to implement BMPs. 
    The owner or operator of a premises used for commercial or industrial purposes shall provide, at the owner or operator's own expense, reasonable protection from an accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the stormwater drainage system or water body through the use of structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a premises that is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge may be required to implement, at the person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the stormwater drainage system or water body. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2005.11/367, 11-14-05) 
DIVISION 6. - OTHER MATTERS 

Sec. 102-284. - Interpretation. 
    Words and phrases in this article shall be construed according to their common and accepted meanings, except those words and phrases defined in section 102-265 shall be construed according to the respective definitions given in that section. Technical words and technical phrases not defined in this article, but which have acquired particular meanings in law or in technical usage shall be construed according to such meanings. 
(Ord. No. 2005.11/367, 11-14-05) 
Sec. 102-285. - Catchline headings. 
    The catchline headings of the articles and sections of this article are intended for convenience only, and shall not be construed as affecting the meaning or interpretation of the text of the articles or sections to which they may refer. 
(Ord. No. 2005.11/367, 11-14-05) 
Sec. 102-286. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable, and if any part or provision of this article should be declared invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any other part or provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005.11/367, 11-14-05) 
Sec. 102-287. - Other ordinances. 
    This article [Ordinance No. 2005.11/367] shall be in addition to other ordinances of the City of Buchanan and shall not be deemed to repeal or replace other ordinances, or parts thereof; provided that in the event of any inconsistency or conflict between this article and any other provision of any other ordinance, the provisions of this article shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2005.11/367, 11-14-05) 
Chapter 106 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, ch. 62; planning, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 106-1-106-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 106-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Large trees means those attaining a height of 45 feet or more. 
    Medium trees means those attaining a height of 30 to 45 feet. 
    Municipal arborist means the superintendent of the department of parks and cemetery, or other qualified designated official of the city, assigned to carry out the enforcement of this article. 
    Park means all public parks having individual names. 
    Principal thoroughfare means any street upon which trucks are not prohibited. 
    Property line means the outer edge of a street or highway. 
    Property owner means the person owning such property as shown by the county auditor's plat of the county. 
    Public places means all other grounds owned by the city. 
    Public trees means all shade and ornamental trees now or hereafter growing on any street or any public areas where otherwise designated. 
    Small trees means those attaining a height of 20 to 30 feet. 
    Street or highway means the entire width of every public way or right-of-way when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
    Treelawn means that part of a street or highway, not covered by sidewalk or other paving, lying between the property line and that portion of the street or highway usually used for vehicular traffic. 
    Trees means trees, bushes and shrubs. 
    Vegetation means recognized ornamental perennials not exceeding 16 inches in height. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.212; Ord. No. 2017.06/403, 6-26-17) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 106-27. - Obstruction; pruning of trees. 
(a)  Duty of owner. It shall be the duty of any person owning or occupying real property bordering on any street upon which property there may be trees, to prune such trees in such a manner that they will not obstruct or shade the street lights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, obstruct vision of traffic signs, or obstruct view of any street or alley intersection. The minimum clearance of any overhanging portion thereof shall be ten feet over sidewalks, and 12 feet over all streets except truck thoroughfares which shall have a clearance of 16 feet. 
(b)  Notice to prune. Should any person owning real property bordering on any street fail to prune trees as provided in subsection (a) of this section, the city manager or his/her appointee shall provide a notice ordering such person, within ten days after receipt of written notice, to so prune such trees. 
(c)  Service of notice. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is: 
(1)  Delivered personally; 
(2)  Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known address; or 
(3)  If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. 
(d)  Failure to comply. When a person to whom a notice order is directed shall fail to comply within the specified time, it shall be lawful for the city to prune such trees, and the cost thereof shall be assessed to the owner as provided by law. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.216; Ord. No. 2016.01/398, 1-11-16) 
Sec. 106-28. - Abuse, mutilation of public trees. 
    Unless specifically authorized by the municipal arborist, no person shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any tree; attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters, or other contrivance to any tree; allow any gaseous liquid, or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to come in contact with them; or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.217) 
Sec. 106-29. - Protection of trees. 
    No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, trenches, or lay any drive within a radius of ten feet from any public tree without first obtaining a written permit from the municipal arborist. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.219) 
Sec. 106-30. - Placing materials on public property. 
    No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain upon any public place of the city any stone, brick, sand, concrete, or other materials which may impede the free passage of water, air, and fertilizer to the roots of any tree growing therein, except by written permit of the municipal arborist. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.220) 
Sec. 106-31. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined a sum as provided in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.221) 
Secs. 106-32-106-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MUNICIPAL ARBORIST 

Sec. 106-41. - Duties. 
    The municipal arborist shall have the authority to promulgate the rules and regulations of the arboricultural specifications and standards of practice governing the planting, maintenance, removal, fertilization, pruning and bracing of trees on the streets or other public sites in the city, and shall direct, regulation and control the planting, maintenance, and removal of all trees and vegetation growing now or hereafter in any public area of the city. He shall cause the provisions of this article to be enforced. In his absence these duties shall be the responsibility of a qualified alternate designated by the city. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.213; Ord. No. 2017.06/403, 6-26-17) 
Sec. 106-42. - Authority. 
(a)  The municipal arborist shall have the authority and jurisdiction of regulating the planting, maintenance and removal of trees on streets and other publicly owned property to insure safety or preserve the aesthetics of such public sites. 
(b)  The municipal arborist shall have the authority and it shall be his duty to supervise or inspect all work done under a permit issued in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(c)  The municipal arborist shall have the authority to affix reasonable conditions to the granting of a permit in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(d)  The municipal arborist shall have the authority to formulate a master street tree plan with the advice, a hearing, and approval of the city commission. The master street tree plan shall specify the species of tree to be planted on each of the streets or other public sites of the city. From and after the effective date of the master street tree plan, or any amendment thereof, all planting shall conform thereto. 
(1)  The municipal arborist shall consider all existing and future utility and environmental factors when recommending a specific species for each of the streets and other public sites of the municipality. 
(2)  The municipal arborist, with the approval of the city commission, shall have the authority to amend or add to the master street tree plan at any time that circumstances make it advisable. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.214) 
Sec. 106-43. - Interference with. 
    No person shall hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with the municipal arborist or any of his assistants while engaged in carrying out the execution or enforcement of this article; provided, however, that nothing in this article shall be construed as an attempt to prohibit the pursuit of any remedy, legal or equitable, in any court of competent jurisdiction for the protection of property rights by the owner of any property within the city. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.218) 
Sec. 106-44. - Promulgation of rules, regulations. 
    The municipal arborist shall have the authority to promulgate the rules and regulations of the arboricultural specifications and standards of practice governing the planting, maintenance, removal, fertilization, pruning, and bracing of trees on the streets or other public sites in the city. Copies of these rules and regulations shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.230) 
Secs. 106-45-106-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS 

Sec. 106-56. - Planting and maintenance. 
(a)  No person shall plan, spray, fertilize, preserve, prune, remove, cut above ground, or otherwise disturb any tree on any street or city-owned property or plant any form of vegetation on city-owned property or in the public right-of-way without first filing an application and procuring a permit from the municipal arborist or otherwise specified municipal authority. The person receiving the permit shall abide by the arboricultural specifications and standards of practice adopted by the municipal arborist. 
(b)  Application for permits must be made at the office of the municipal arborist not less than 48 hours in advance of the time the work is to be done. 
(c)  Standards of issuance. The municipal arborist shall issue the permit provided for in this section if, in his judgment, the proposed work is desirable and the proposed method and workmanship thereof are of a satisfactory nature. Any permit granted shall contain a definite date of expiration and the work shall be completed in the time allowed on the permit and in the manner as therein described. Any permit shall be void if its terms are violated. 
(d)  Notice of completion shall be given within five days to the municipal arborist for his inspection. 
(e)  The application required in this section shall state the number of trees to be set out; the location, grade, species, cultivar or variety of each tree; the method of planting; and such other information as the municipal arborist shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued. 
(f)  Whenever any tree shall be planted or set out in conflict with the provisions of this section, it shall be lawful for the municipal arborist to remove or cause removal of the same, and the exact cost thereof shall be assessed to the owner as provided by law. 
(g)  The application required in this section shall state the number and kinds of trees to be sprayed, fertilized, pruned, or otherwise preserved; the kind of treatment to be administered; the composition of the spray material to be applied; and such other information as the municipal arborist shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.215; Ord. No. 2017.06/403, 6-26-17) 
Sec. 106-57. - Removal, replanting and replacement. 
(a)  Wherever it is necessary to remove a tree from a treelawn in connection with the paving of a sidewalk, or the paving or widening of the portion of a street or highway used for vehicular traffic, the city shall replant such trees or replace them. Provided that conditions prevent planting on treelawns, this requirement will be satisfied if any equivalent number of trees of the same size and species as provided for in the arboricultural specifications are planted in an attractive manner on the adjoining property. 
(b)  No person or property owner shall remove a tree from the treelawn for the purpose of construction or for any other reason, without first filing an application and procuring a permit from the municipal arborist, and without replacing the removed tree or trees in accordance with the adopted arboricultural specifications. Such replacement shall meet the standards of size, species and placement as provided for in a permit issued by the municipal arborist. The person or property owner shall bear the cost of removal and replacement of all trees removed. 
(Comp. Ords. Rev. 1991,  35.215) 
Chapter 110 - WATERWAYS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 110-1-110-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATERCRAFT 

Sec. 110-26. - Prohibited in certain areas. 
(a)  No vessel shall operate upon the following waters of the St. Joseph River, within section 25, township 7 south, range 18 west, and further within the corporate limits of the city, described as follows: 
From the dam, belonging to the Indiana Michigan Power Company, downstream to a line described as: 
Beginning at a point on the south downstream landfall 300 feet northwesterly of the southern point of the crest of the spillway of the dam, belonging to the Indiana Michigan Power Company; thence in a generally northeasterly direction 270 feet; thence in a generally northwesterly direction parallel to the north shore to a point 412 feet downstream; thence in a generally northeasterly direction to the nearest landfall approximately 50 feet west of the southwest corner of the powerhouse. 
(b)  The boundaries of the line described in subsection (a) of this section shall be marked with signs and with buoys. All buoys must be placed as provided in a permit issued by the department of natural resources and be in conformance with the state uniform waterway marking system. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to police, fire and rescue vessels; nor to vessels belonging to the Indiana Michigan Power Company and utilized for inspection and repair of dam. 
(d)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine as prescribed in section 1-15 of this Code. Each day such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 320,  1, 2, 10-14-91) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE COMPILED ORDINANCES, REVISED 1991 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the Compiled Ordinances, Revised 1991, as updated through July 1991, which are included herein. Sections of the Compiled Ordinances, Revised 1991, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
Compiled 
Ordinances, 
Revised 1991 
Section Section  
this Code 12.001-12.006 2-36-2-41 12.021-12.037 82-1-82-17 12.061-12.064 2-116-2-119 12.081 34-27 12.083 34-28 12.084 34-26 12.086 34-29 12.101 34-1 12.121 50-26 12.182-12.194 2-91-2-103 12.221-12.247 30-26-30-52 12.271 30-76 12.275 30-77 12.302 54-1 12.311-12.313 54-26-54-28 12.321 54-29 12.322 54-31 12.323 54-30 12.324-12.331 54-32-54-39 12.361-12.372 62-26-62-37 12.401, 12.402 2-1 12.651-12.655 1-16 14.002 90-1 14.011, 14.012 90-26, 90-27 14.020-14.026 90-51-90-57 14.040-14.045 90-81-90-86 14.101-14.108 70-26-70-33 18.001-18.003 14-86-14-88 18.021-18.026 94-26-94-31 18.051-18.053 14-231-14-233 18.101 46-36 18.102, 18.103 46-38, 46-39 18.104 46-37 18.151-18.154 94-41-94-44 18.181-18.184 94-56-94-59 18.202, 18.203 14-112, 14-113 18.211-18.250 14-111 18.301-18.309 14-161-14-169 18.330-18.342 14-181-14-193 18.370-18.373 14-206-14-209 18.391 14-127 18.401-18.407 14-128-14-134 18.421 14-135 18.431, 18.432 14-136, 14-137 18.433-18.435 14-138 18.436 14-139 18.451 14-140 18.461-18.464 14-141-14-144 18.481 14-126 18.501-18.504 14-145-14-148 18.521, 18.522 14-149 20.011 58-1 20.022 58-113 20.024 58-112 20.027 58-111 20.028 58-61 20.029 58-59 20.030 58-58 20.041 58-149 20.042 58-148 20.051 58-90 20.053 58-88 20.054 58-87 20.061-20.064 6-5-6-8 20.073-20.075 58-30-58-32 20.082 58-33 20.083 58-28 20.121 58-171 20.131-20.135 38-28-38-32 20.181(P) 58-56 20.191 58-86 20.201-20.207 58-216-58-222 20.251 6-1 20.252 6-31 20.253 6-56-6-60 20.254 6-61 20.255 6-32 20.256 6-2 20.257 6-33 20.258, 20.259 6-3, 6-4 20.292 10-26 20.293 10-28-10-30 20.295 10-27 20.321 10-51 20.322, 20.323 10-68, 10-69 20.324, 20.325 10-53, 10-54 20.326 10-52 10-67 20.327 10-66 
10-70 20.328 10-71 20.351 66-1 20.352-20.356 66-31-66-35 20.357 66-3 20.358 66-36 20.359 66-4 20.360 66-37 20.361 66-39 20.362 66-38 20.363 66-2 20.381-20.393 74-46-74-58 20.395 74-59 20.451 74-26 20.471-20.473 98-26-98-28 20.476 98-29 20.492, 20.493 98-66, 98-67 20.501-20.505 98-68-98-72 20.511-20.516 98-73-98-78 20.521-20.524 98-79-98-82 20.551, 20.552 98-51, 98-52 20.553 98-54 20.561, 20.562 98-53, 98-54 20.571 98-106 20.572, 20.573 98-108, 98-109 20.574 98-107 20.591-20.595 98-162-98-166 20.596 98-161 20.651-20.654 50-46-50-49 20.671 98-131 20.672-20.676 98-133-98-137 20.678 98-132 20.701 14-256 20.702-20.706 14-258-14-262 20.708-20.711 14-263-14-266 20.712 14-257 20.751 86-121 20.752 86-123 20.754 86-122 20.801, 20.802 62-63, 62-64 20.803 62-62 20.804 62-61 20.805-20.813 62-65-62-73 22.081-22.086 14-61-14-66 25.001 102-157 25.002 102-156 25.003, 25.004 102-158, 102-159 25.005, 25.006 102-167, 102-168 25.007 102-168 25.014 102-174 25.015 102-164 25.016 102-160 25.017 102-175 25.018, 25.019 102-165, 102-166 25.020 102-176 25.022, 25.023 102-162-102-163 25.029 102-178 25.051, 25.052 102-27, 102-28 25.053 102-26 25.057 102-30 25.058 102-62 25.059 102-61 25.060, 25.061 102-63, 102-64 25.062 102-29 25.151 102-131 25.152-25.155 102-133-102-136 25.156 102-132 30.001-30.006 86-96-86-101 30.051-30.057 86-67-86-73 30.058 86-66 30.101-30.108 86-37-86-44 30.109 86-36 35.001, 35.002 78-26, 78-27 35.003(a)-35.003(d) 78-66-78-69 35.004-35.007 78-41-78-44 35.009, 35.010 78-29, 78-30 35.011 78-28 35.054-35.056 38-46 35.071-35.074 38-48-38-51 35.081, 35.082 38-52, 38-53 35.092, 35.093 38-54 35.094 38-54, 38-55 35.101 38-47 35.111 38-56 35.181 38-33 35.182 38-26 35.184 38-27 35.212 106-26 35.213, 35.214 106-41, 106-42 35.215 106-56, 106-57 35.216, 35.217 106-27, 106-28 35.218 106-43 35.219-35.221 106-29-106-31 35.230 106-44 35.251 22-26 35.252-35.255 22-29-22-32 35.256 22-26 35.257-35.266 22-33-22-42 35.267, 35.268 22-27, 22-28 40.001-40.005 42-2-42-6 40.006 42-1 40.121, 40.122 42-32, 42-33 40.124 42-31 40.158 58-253  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1991 Compilation, as updated through July 1991, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1991 Compilation, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede July 1991, but which were never included in the 1991 Compilation, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since July 1991, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 317  7- 8-91 38-46 38-54 318  7- 8-91 .01, .02 102-201, 102-202 .03-.30 102-204- 102-231 .31 102-203 319  7-22-91 1.2 38-76 2.1, 2.2 38-77, 38-78 3.1, 3.2 38-79, 38-80 4.1 38-81 320 10-14-91 1, 2 110-26 323  4-13-92 I(a) 102-101 I(b) 102-103 II 102-102 III-V 102-107- 102-109 VI-VIII 102-104- 102-106 324  7-10-92 1-4 14-36-14-39 6 14-30 327 12-29-92 20.621 18-26 20.622(1)- 20.622(8) 18-41-18-48 20.623(1)- 20.623(9) 18-61-18-69 20.624(1) 18-81 18-106 20.624(2) 18-82 18-107 20.624(3) 18-83 18-108 20.624(4) 18-84 18-109 20.624(5) 18-85 18-110 20.624(6) 18-86 18-111 20.624(7) 18-87 18-112 20.624(8) 18-88 18-113 20.624(9) 18-89 18-114 20.624(10) 18-90 18-115 20.624(11) 18-91 18-116 20.624(12) 18-92 18-117 20.624(13) 18-93 
18-118 20.624(14)- 20.624(25) 18-119-18-130 20.626 18-27 328  2- 8-93 1-6 98-29 330  7-26-93 1 14-291 2 14-292 5 14-292 331  9-22-93 1-17 20-1-20-17 333 11-22-93 1 34-1 313A  2-28-94 5       Rpld 98-66-98-82 1.1, 1,2       Added 98-66, 98-67 2.1-2.4       Added 98-68-98-71 3.1-3.10       Added 98-72-98-81 4.1, 4.2, 4.5       Added 98-82-98-84 335  8- 8-94 14-36, 14-38, 14-39 336  9-26-94 86-98(4) 338 10-23-95 1-7       Added Adopt. ord., p. ix 339 11-27-95 1-4       Added 14-1 341  1-22-96 1       Added 38-90-38-93 343  3-24-97       Rpld 66-32(7) 347  5-10-99 1-6       Rpld 14-36-14-40       Added 14-36-14-41 348 11-22-99 1 74-26 350  4-24-00 1-3 98-26-98-28 6       Rpld 98-29(5.15)-(5.15h), (5.62a) 352  3-12-01 1 14-291 2 14-292 355  9-23-02       Dltd 38-90-38-93       Added 38-90-38-99 356 10-28-02 21-1- 21-23       Added 96-21-96-43 357 12- 9-02 I       Added 2-61 358  4-28-03       Dltd 22-26-22-42       Added 22-26-22-37 360.12/03 12-22-03 22-37(a)       Added 22-38-22-46 361.07/04  7-26-04       Added 76-1-76-16 362.10/04 10-25-04       Rpld 86-66-86-73       Added 86-66-86-77 2004.12/36(Res.) 12-28-04 34-27 2005.1/364  1-24-05 1-4       Added 98-26-98-29 6       Rpld 98-26-98-29 2005.01/365  1-24-05 1-4       Added 98-30-98-33 2005.05/366  5- 9-05       Added 42-32(b), (c)       Rltd 42-32(b) as (d) 2005.11/367 11-14-05       Added 102-261- 
102-288 2006.01/368  1- 9-06 70-27 2006.02/369  2-27-06 86-66-86-77 2006.03/370  3-13-06 1-3       Added 14-51-14-53 371.04/06  4-24-06 3 14-53 2006.08/372  8-14-06 38-29 2007.01/373  1-22-07 30-76 2007.01/374  1-22-07 30-26, 30-77 2007.06/375  6-25-07 62-27, 62-29, 62-30, 62-37 2008.04/376  4-14-08 Ch. 34, Art. II(title) 34-26-34-30 2008.11/377 11-24-08       Added 98-55-98-61 2009.02/378  2-23-09 34-26-34-30 2009.05/380  5-26-09 14-292 2010.01/381  1-11-10 18-64       Rpld 18-107, 18-114 2011.04/383  4-11-11 1 14-291 2 14-292 2011.08/385  8-22-11       Added 12-1-12-4 2012.07/386  7-23-12       Added 38-101-38-112 2013.02/387  2-11-13       Added 102-62(3)c, 
102-62(4), 
102-65-102-67 2013.08/388  8-12-13 1 74-26 2014.08/389  8-11-14 102-211(a), 
102-222 2015.06/392  6- 8-15       Rpld 70-26-70-33       Added 70-26-70-38 2016.01/398  1-11-16 106-27 2016.01/399  1-11-16 38-26 38-54 38-79 2016.09/401  9-12-16 1 14-291 2 14-292 2016.10/402 10-10-16 12-1       Added 12-5 2017.06/403  6-26-17 106-26 106-41 106-56(a) 2017.07/404  7-17-17 1       Added 18-141 2       Added 18-142 3       Added 18-143 4       Added 18-144 5       Added 18-145 6       Added 18-146 7       Added 18-147 8       Added 18-148 9       Added 18-149 10       Added 18-150 11       Added 18-151 12       Added 18-152 13       Added 18-153 14       Added 18-154 15       Added 18-155 16       Added 18-156 17       Added 18-157 18       Added 18-158 2017.12/406 12-12-17 34-29 2015.03/390  3- 9-15 1       Rpld 58-65 2015.03/391  3- 9-15 86-67 2018.05/407  5-29-18 34-29 2018.10/409 10- 8-18 1 18-142 2 18-144 3       Added 18-145 4       Rnmb 18-145       as 18-146 5       Rnmb 18-146       as 18-147 6       Rnmb 18-147-18-158       as 18-148-18-159 2019.03/411  3-11-19 1 102-131 2 102-133 3 102-136  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE MICHIGAN COMPILED LAWS 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
MCL Section  
this Code 5.2102 Chtr. 8.3 et seq. 1-2 10.31 et seq. Ch. 26 15.231 et seq. Ch. 2 18-148 15.231-15.246 2-61 96-24 15.261 et seq. Ch. 2 15.261-15.275 2-61 15.341 et seq. Ch. 2 24.201-24.328 98-30 28.601 et seq. 50-26 29.1 et seq. Ch. 42 42-2 30.401 et seq. Ch. 26 26-26 26-27 30.402 26-26 30.409 26-29 30.411(1)(b) 26-33 30.414 26-30 35.441 Ch. 66 117.1 et seq. 102-261 117.4a Ch. 82 117.4b Ch. 82 117.4d Ch. 82 117.4i 1-15 117.5 Ch. 82 117.5b 1-1 123.51 et seq. Ch. 62 123.241 Ch. 78 123.361 et seq. Ch. 78 125.31 et seq. Ch. 70 125.71 et seq. Ch. 30 125.581 et seq. Ch. 70 125.601 et seq. Ch. 30 125.651 et seq. Ch. 30 125.901 et seq. Ch. 30 125.1401 et seq. 94-28 94-41 94-56 125.1501 et seq. Ch. 14 125.3101 et seq. 70-35 125.3801 et seq. 70-26 70-35 131.1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV 30-36 30-40 141.101 et seq. 30-37 102-26 102-27 102-62 102-261 168.1 et seq. Ch. 34 168.544(f) 34-30 168.644a et seq. 34-26 34-29 211.1 et seq. 2-119 Ch. 94 211.59 Chtr.  10.16 211.741 et seq. Ch. 82 82-8 211.761 et seq. Ch. 82 213.21 et seq. 30-34 213.321 et seq. 30-33 30-41 257.1 et seq. Ch. 98 257.1-257.923 98-26 257.605, 257.606 Ch. 98 257.610 Ch. 98 257.951 et seq. 98-26 280.1 et seq. 102-261 286.569 38-93 299.401 et seq. Ch. 78 299.501-299.551 38-91 299.831-299.850 38-91 311.1 et seq. 58-187 324.101 et seq. 102-261 324.30301 38-104 333.1101 et seq. 18-142 333.26421 et seq. 18-141 18-142 333.27101 et seq. 18-141 18-142 333.27901 et seq. 18-141 18-142 397.201 et seq. Ch. 54 397.202-397.204 54-26-54-28 399.201 et seq. 30-51 400.271 et seq. Ch. 66 436.1 et seq. Ch. 6 445.111 et seq. Ch. 66 445.371 et seq. Ch. 66 484.2102 96-23 484.2251 96-24 560.1 et seq. 102-261 560.101 et seq. Ch. 90 90-27 90-86 691.1201 et seq. Ch. 38 750.81 58-62 750.167 58-115 750.167(1)(c) 58-63 750.167(1)(e) 58-136 750.167(1)(l) 58-57 750.170 58-114 58-249, 58-250 750.200 et seq. Ch. 42 750.213 et seq. 58-251 750.226 58-188 750.227 58-190 750.233-750.235 58-183-58-185 750.237 58-186 750.240 58-29 750.240 et seq. Ch. 42 750.243a et seq. 58-171 750.302 58-139 750.303 58-142 750.304 58-140 750.306 58-137 750.377 et seq. 58-247 750.390 58-61 750.448 58-147 750.448 et seq. 58-143 750.449 58-145 750.449a 58-145 750.452 58-144 750.454 58-146 750.463 et seq. Ch. 10 750.479 58-26 58-27 750.546 et seq. 58-248 752.811 Ch. 10 752.851 et seq. 58-192 764.9f 1-16  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE MICHIGAN STATUTES ANNOTATED[1] 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Michigan Statutes Annotated. 
MSA Section  
this Code 2.212 et seq. 1-2 3.4(1) et seq. Ch. 26 3.240(1) et seq. Ch. 66 3.560(101) et seq.       98-29(5.82) 4.450(1) et seq. 50-26 4.559(1) et seq. Ch. 42 42-2 4.824(11) et seq. Ch. 26 26-26, 26-27 4.824(12) 26-26 4.824(19) 26-29 4.824(21)(1)(b) 26-33 4.824(24) 26-30 4.1241 Ch. 66 4.1700(71) et seq.       Ch. 2 4.1800(11) et seq.       Ch. 2 4.1801(1) et seq. Ch. 2 5.2074, 5.2075 Ch. 82 5.2077 Ch. 82 5.2082 1-15 5.2084 Ch. 82 5.2084(2) 1-1 5.2421 et seq. Ch. 62 5.2661 Ch. 78 5.2726(1) et seq. Ch. 78 5.2731 et seq. 30-37 102-26, 102-27 102-62 5.2932 et seq. Ch. 70 70-26 70-31 5.3011 et seq. Ch. 30 5.3057(1) et seq. Ch. 30 5.3058(1) et seq. Ch. 30 5.3188(1) et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV 30-36 30-40 5.3501 et seq. Ch. 30 5.3534(1) et seq. Ch. 82 82-8 5.3536(1) et seq. Ch. 82 6.1644(1) et seq. 34-26 34-29 7.1 et seq. 2-119 Ch. 94 8.11 et seq. 30-34 30-41 30-76 9.1801 et seq. Ch. 98 9.2305, 9.2306 Ch. 98 9.2310 Ch. 98 9.2651 et seq. 98-26 13.29(1) et seq. Ch. 78 13.1321 et seq. 58-187 14.528(201) et seq.       Ch. 38 15.1633 54-27 15.1661 et seq. Ch. 54 15.1662 54-26 15.1664 54-28 16.114(1) et seq. 94-28 94-41 94-56 16.691 et seq. Ch. 66 18.971 et seq. Ch. 6 19.416(201) et seq.       Ch. 66 26.430(101) et seq.       Ch. 90 90-27 27.3178(598.1) et seq.       98-29(1.007c) tit. 28 Ch. 58 28.195 98-29(5.82) 28.276 58-62 28.364 58-115 28.364(1)(c) 58-63 28.364(1)(e) 58-136 28.364(1)(h) 58-65 28.364(1)(l) 58-57 28.367 58-114 58-249, 58-250 28.397 et seq. Ch. 42 28.410 et seq. 58-251 28.423 58-188 28.424 58-190 28.430 58-183 28.430(101) et seq.       90-86 28.431, 28.432 58-184, 58-185 28.434 58-186 28.436(41) et seq.       58-192 28.437 58-29 28.437 et seq. Ch. 42 28.440(1) et seq. 58-171 28.534 58-139 28.535 58-142 28.536 58-140 28.538 58-137 28.609 et seq. 58-247 28.622 58-61 28.643(101) Ch. 10 28.703 58-147 28.703 et seq. 58-143 28.704 58-145 28.704(1) 58-145 28.707 58-144 28.709 58-146 28.718 et seq. Ch. 10 28.747 58-26, 58-27 28.814 et seq. 58-248 28.868(6) 1-16  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The Michigan Statutes Annotated are obsolete and will no longer be updated. References to MSA will be removed from the Code text as pages are supplemented. 

CITY OF BUCHANAN
MICHIGAN
COMPREHENSIVE ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENT
Ordinance Number 154 as amended by Ordinance Number 359.08/03
Adopted on September 8, 2003
ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF BUCHANAN
Berrien County, Michigan
Ordinance Number 159 as amended by Ordinance 359.08/03
Current as of Adoption of Ordinance Number 359.08/03
September 8, 2003
Prepared by the: With assistance from:
City of Buchanan Plan Commission Public Consulting Team
City Hall 115 Main St.
302 Red Bud Trail North Benton Harbor, Michigan 49022
Buchanan, Michigan 49107 (219) 879-1012
(269) 695-3845
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team -1-
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -1-
PREAMBLE AND ENACTMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -1-
ARTICLE II . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -2-
TITLE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -2-
Section 1.01 - Title. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -2-
ARTICLE III . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -3-
DEFINITIONS AND USE OF TERMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -3-
Section 3.01 - Definitions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -3-
Accessory Building or Structure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -3-
Accessory Use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -3-
Adult Entertainment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -3-
Adult Foster Care Facility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -3-
Adult Foster Care Resident . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -3-
Amusement Enterprise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -3-
Auxiliary Building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -4-
Bed and Breakfast Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -4-
Building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -4-
Building Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -4-
Building Coverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -4-
Building Height . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -4-
Building, Principal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -4-
Building Width . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -4-
Building Inspector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -4-
City . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -4-
City of Buchanan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -4-
City Clerk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -4-
City of Buchanan Compiled Ordinances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -4-
City Manager . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -4-
City Plan Commission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -4-
Certificate of Occupancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -4-
Child Care . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -5-
Commercial Vehicles and Commercial Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -5-
Bus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -5-
Commercial vehicle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -5-
Commercial equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -5-
Mobile structure trailer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -5-
Pole trailer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -5-
Semi-trailer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -5-
Trailer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -5-
Utility trailer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -5-
Truck . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -5-
Truck-tractor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -5-
Commission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -5-
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
-2- Public Consulting Team
Common Open Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -6-
Condominium Act . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -6-
Convalescent and Nursing Care . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -6-
Density - Planned Unit Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -6-
Development Plan - Planned Unit Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -6-
District . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -6-
Downtown Development Authority . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -6-
Dwelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -6-
Dwelling, Single-Family . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -6-
Dwelling, Two-Family . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -7-
Dwelling, Multiple-Family . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -8-
Dwelling, Senior Multiple Family . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -8-
Dwelling Unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -8-
Essential Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -8-
Event . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -8-
Family . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -8-
Fence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -8-
Festival, Event, Gatherings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -8-
Flooding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -8-
Flood Hazard Area, Boundary Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -8-
Floodplain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -8-
Floor Area, Off Street Parking and Loading Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -8-
Gross Acreage - Planned Unit Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -9-
Group Home . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -9-
Home Occupation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -9-
Household Pets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -9-
Junk Yard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -9-
Land Division . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -9-
Land Division Act . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -9-
Landowner or Applicant - Planned Unit Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -9-
Lodging House . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -9-
Lot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -9-
Lot (or Parcel) of Record . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -10-
MEDQ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -10-
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality(MDEQ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -10-
Michigan Construction Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -10-
Mobile Home . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -10-
Mobile Home Park . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -10-
Modular Unit or Prefabricated Dwelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -10-
Nonconforming Use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -10-
Nuisance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -10-
Nuisance - Private . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -10-
Ordinance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -10-
Plan Commission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -10-
Plat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -11-
Recreational Vehicle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -11-
Recycling Facility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -11-
Restaurant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -11-
Retail Commercial Establishment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -11-
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team -3-
School . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -11-
Signs and Billboards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -11-
Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -11-
Site Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -11-
Storage, Residential Out-door . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -11-
Subdivision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -11-
Unit, Condominium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -12-
Utility Transition Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -12-
Yard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -12-
Zoning Administrator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -12-
Zoning Compliance Permit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -12-
Zoning Ordinance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -12-
Section 3.2 - Terms Used in This Ordinance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -12-
ARTICLE IV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -13-
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -13-
Section 4.01 - Division of City Into Zoning Districts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -13-
Section 4.02 - Official Zoning Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -13-
Section 4.03 - Boundaries of Zoning Districts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -13-
Section 4.04 - Changes to the Zoning Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -13-
Section 4.05 - Official Map Final Authority . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -14-
Section 4.06 - Interpretation of District Boundaries. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -14-
Section 4.07 - Annexed Lands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -14-
ARTICLE V . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -15-
R-1A & R-1B SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -15-
Section 5.01 - Intent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -15-
Section 5.02 - Uses Permitted by Right . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -15-
Section 5.03 - Uses Permitted by Special Use Permit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -15-
Section 5.04 - Accessory Buildings and Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -15-
Section 5.05 - Signs Permitted . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -15-
Section 5.06 - Parking Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -15-
Section 5.07 - Visual Screening Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -15-
Section 5.08 - Building Height Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -15-
Section 5.09 - R-1A Yard, Setback and Lot Area Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -16-
Section 5.10 - R-1B Yard, Setback and Lot Area Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -16-
Section 5.11 - Area of Dwelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -16-
ARTICLE VI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -17-
R-2 TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -17-
Section 6.01 - Intent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -17-
Section 6.02 - Uses Permitted by Right . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -17-
Section 6.03 - Uses Permitted by Special Use Permit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -17-
Section 6.04 - Accessory Buildings and Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -17-
Section 6.05 - Signs Permitted . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -17-
Section 6.06 - Parking Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -17-
Section 6.07 - Visual Screening Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -17-
Section 6.08 - Building Height Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -17-
Section 6.09 - Yard, Setback and Lot Area Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -17-
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
-4- Public Consulting Team
Section 6.07 - Area of Dwelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -18-
ARTICLE VII . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -19-
R-3 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -19-
Section 7.01 - Intent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -19-
Section 7.02 - Uses Permitted by Right . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -19-
Section 7.03 - Uses Permitted by Special Use Permit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -19-
Section 7.04 - Accessory Buildings and Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -19-
Section 7.05 - Signs Permitted . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -19-
Section 7.06 - Parking Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -19-
Section 7.07 - Visual Screening Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -19-
Section 7.08 - Building Height Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -19-
Section 7.09 - Yard, Setback and Lot Area Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -20-
Section 7.10 - Area of Dwelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -20-
ARTICLE VIII . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -21-
R-4 MULTI-FAMILY SENIOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -21-
Section 8.01 - Intent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -21-
Section 8.02 - Uses Permitted by Right . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -21-
Section 8.03 - Uses Permitted by Special Use Permit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -21-
Section 8.04 - Accessory Buildings and Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -21-
Section 8.05 - Signs Permitted . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -21-
Section 8.06 - Parking Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -21-
Section 8.07 - Visual Screening Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -21-
Section 8.08 - Building Height Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -21-
Section 8.09 - Yard, Setback and Lot Area Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -22-
Section 8.10 - Area of Dwelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -22-
ARTICLE IX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -23-
C - 1 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -23-
Section 9.01 - Intent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -23-
Section 9.02 - Uses Permitted by Right . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -23-
Section 9.03 - Uses Permitted by Special Use Permit. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -23-
Section 9.04 - Uses Excluded . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -23-
Section 9.05 - Accessory Buildings and Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -23-
Section 9.06 - Signs Permitted . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -23-
Section 9.07 - Parking Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -23-
Section 9.08 - Visual Screening Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -23-
Section 9.09 - Building Height Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -24-
Section 9.10 - Yard, Setback and Lot Area Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -24-
ARTICLE X . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -25-
C - 2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -25-
Section 10.01 - Intent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -25-
Section 10.02 - Uses Permitted by Right . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -25-
Section 10.03 - Uses Permitted by Special Use Permit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -25-
Section 10.04 - Uses Excluded . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -25-
Section 10.05 - Accessory Buildings and Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -25-
Section 10.06 - Signs Permitted . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -26-
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team -5-
Section 10.07 - Parking Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -26-
Section 10.08 - Visual Screening Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -26-
Section 10.09 - Building Height Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -26-
Section 10.10 - Yard, Setback and Lot Area Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -26-
ARTICLE X I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -27-
C - 3 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -27-
Section 11.01 - Intent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -27-
Section 11.02 - Uses Permitted by Right . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -27-
Section 11.03 - Uses Permitted by Special Use Permit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -27-
Section 11.04 - Site and Facade Plan Required . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -27-
Section 11.05 - Uses Excluded . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -28-
Section 11.06 - Accessory Buildings and Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -28-
Section 11.07 - Signs Permitted . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -28-
Section 11.08 - Parking Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -28-
Section 11.09 - Building Height Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -28-
Section 11.10 - Yard, Setback and Lot Area Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -28-
ARTICLE XII . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -29-
I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -29-
Section 12.01 - Intent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -29-
Section 12.02 - Uses Permitted by Right . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -29-
Section 12.03 - Uses Permitted by Special Use Permit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -29-
Section 12.04 - Uses Excluded . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -29-
Section 12.05 - Accessory Buildings and Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -29-
Section 12.06 - Signs Permitted . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -29-
Section 12.07 - Parking Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -29-
Section 12.08 - Visual Screening Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -29-
Section 12.09 - Building Height Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -30-
Section 12.10 - Yard, Setback and Lot Area Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -30-
ARTICLE XIII . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -31-
I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -31-
Section 13.01 - Intent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -31-
Section 13.02 - Uses Permitted by Right . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -31-
Section 13.03 - Uses Permitted by Special Use Permit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -31-
Section 13.04 - Uses Excluded . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -31-
Section 13.05 - Accessory Buildings and Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -31-
Section 13.06 - Signs Permitted . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -31-
Section 13.07 - Parking Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -31-
Section 13.08 - Visual Screening Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -31-
Section 13.09 - Building Height Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -31-
Section 13.10 - Yard, Setback and Lot Area Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -31-
ARTICLE XIV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -33-
CD CLUSTER RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -33-
Section 14.01 - Intent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -33-
Section 14.02 - Open Space Defined . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -33-
Section 14.03 - Relationship to Underlying Zoning Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -33-
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
-6- Public Consulting Team
Uses Permitted by Right and Special Use Permit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -33-
Applicable Gross Density . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -33-
Setback, Lot Frontage and Building Height Provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -33-
Public Water and Wastewater Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -33-
Section 14.04 - Site Plan and Rezoning Approval Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -33-
Section 14.05 - Plat of Subdivision or Condo Subdivision Plan (Exhibit C) Requirement . . . . . . . . . Page -34-
Section 14.06 - Permanent Open Space Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -34-
Section 14.07- Incentive Bonus Density for Increased Open Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -34-
Section 14.08 - Variances Due to Unique Site Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -34-
Section 14.09 - Zoning Map Designation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -34-
ARTICLE XV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -35-
PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -35-
Section 15.01 - Purpose of Planned Unit Development. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -35-
Section 15.02 - Intent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -35-
Section 15.03 - Applicability to All Land Division and Condominium Plats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -35-
Section 15.04 - Procedures for Submission of PUD Plans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -35-
Section 15.05 - Pre-Application Conference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -35-
Section 15.06 - Contents and Submission of a Preliminary PUD Development Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -35-
Section 15.07 - Approval of Preliminary PUD Development Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -36-
Public Hearing for Rezoning to PUD Zoning District . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -36-
Approval of Rezoning to PUD Zoning District . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -36-
Tentative Approval of Preliminary PUD Development Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -36-
Form of PUD Development Plan Approval or Denial Action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -36-
Section 15.08 - Status of Preliminary PUD Development Plan After Approval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -37-
Notification of Applicant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -37-
Status of Preliminary PUD Development Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -37-
Abandonment of Preliminary PUD Development Plan by Applicant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -37-
Section 15.09 - Approval of Final PUD Development Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -37-
Submission Deadline and Extension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -37-
Optional Public Hearing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -38-
Approval or Denial of Final PUD Development Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -38-
Application of Conditions and Restrictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -38-
Status of Final Approval of PUD Development Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -38-
Minor Changes to Final PUD Development Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -38-
Major Changed to Final PUD Development Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -38-
Rescinding / Abandonment of Final PUD Development Plan Approval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -38-
Section 15.10 - Standards and Criteria For Planned Unit Developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -38-
Variety of Building Types and Layout Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -38-
Building Lot Coverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -38-
Height Restrictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -38-
Mixture of Uses Permitted . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -39-
Perimeter Setback Requirement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -39-
Conveyance of Open Spaces and/or Common Elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -39-
Off-Street Parking and Loading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -39-
Landscaping and Screening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -39-
Pedestrian Pathways and Sidewalks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -39-
Signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -39-
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team -7-
ARTICLE XVI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -40-
FLOODPLAIN (OVERLAY) DISTRICT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -40-
Section 16.01 - Intent. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -40-
Section 16.02 - Delineation of Flood Hazard (Overlay) Zoning District . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -40-
Boundary Designated on Zoning Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -40-
Final Determination of Flood Hazard Boundary Line . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -40-
Suspension of City Action Until Final Determination Is Made . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -40-
Application of Other Laws and Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -40-
Section 16.03 - MEDQ Permit Required Prior to Issuance of City Building Permit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -41-
Applicable Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -41-
Certificate of Compliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -41-
Construction Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -41-
Section 16.04 - Land Division Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -41-
Section 16.05 - Disclaimer of Liability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -41-
ARTICLE XVII . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -43-
GENERAL PROVISIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -43-
Section 17.01 - Scope of Regulations - Use of Land, Buildings and Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -43-
Section 17.02 - Property Division Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -43-
Section 17.03 - Prohibition of Private Roads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -43-
Section 17.04 - Height Exceptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -43-
Section 17.05 - Each Principal Building Must Conform to District Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -43-
Section 17.06 - Corner Lots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -43-
Section 17.07 - Though Lots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -43-
Section 17.08 - Side Yard Width may be Varied . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -44-
Section 17.09 - Width of One Side Yard may be Reduced . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -44-
Section 17.10 - Side Yard of Corner Lot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -44-
Section 17.11 - Front Yard Exception . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -44-
Section 17.12 - Minimum Public Street Access Required. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -45-
Section 17.13 - Projections Into Yards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -45-
Section 17.14 - Accessory Structure Regulations in Residential Districts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -45-
Unattached Accessory Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -45-
Maximum Height . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -45-
Rear Yard Coverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -45-
Side Yard and Rear Yard Setback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -45-
Side Yard Setback - Corner Lot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -45-
Distance from Principal Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -45-
Attached Accessory Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -45-
Section 17.15 - Travel Trailers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -45-
Section 17.16 - Storage of Recreation Vehicles. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -45-
Section 17.17 - Fences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -45-
Section 17.18 - Standards For All Exterior Lighting In all Districts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -46-
ARTICLE XVIII . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -47-
SPECIAL PROVISIONS INCLUDING HOME OCCUPATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -47-
Section 18.01 - Lots Without Municipal Utilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -47-
Section 18.02 - Bed & Breakfast Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -47-
Section 18.03 - Adult Entertainment Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -47-
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
-8- Public Consulting Team
Section 18.04 - Communication and Other Towers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -48-
Intent To Provide for Wireless Communication Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -48-
Policy of Collocation of Antenna and Antenna Arrays on Existing Structures . . . . . . . . . . . Page -48-
Restriction Upon the Location of New Towers Unless Standards Are Met . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -48-
Location Requirements, Construction Standards and Other Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -48-
Process for Obtaining Approval for Location of New Towers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -51-
Additional Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -51-
Section 18.05 - Commercial/Industrial Minimum Landscaping Regulations and Standards . . . . . . . . Page -51-
Section 18.06 - Storage and Screening Required In Commercial and Industrial Districts . . . . . . . . . . Page -51-
Section 18.07 - Display of Goods & Merchandise in C-1, C-2 and C-3 Commercial Districts . . . . . . Page -52-
Section 18.08 - Mobile Home Parks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -52-
Section 18.09 - Home Occupation Application and Approval/Denial Procedure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -52-
Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -53-
Required Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -53-
Public Hearing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -53-
Plan Commission Review and Approval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -53-
ARTICLE XIX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -55-
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -55-
Section 19.01 - Scope of Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -55-
Section 19.02 - Existing Parking and Loading Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -55-
Section 19.03 - Parking Requirements and Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -55-
Use of Parking Facilities in Residential Districts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -55-
Use of Parking Regulations - Commercial Vehicles and Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -55-
Joint Parking Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -57-
Calculation of Required Parking Spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -57-
Minimum Size of Parking Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -57-
Minimum Number of Parking Spaces for a Parking Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -57-
Location of Off-Site Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -57-
Access to Public Street or Roadway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -57-
Permit Required for Residential Rear Yard Parking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -57-
Parking in Street Parkways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -58-
Design and Maintenance Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -58-
Screening and Landscaping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -58-
Pavement and Surfacing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -58-
Lighting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -58-
Section 19.04 - Schedule of Parking Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -58-
Parking Spaces Required in the R-1 Residential District . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -58-
Single-Family Dwellings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -58-
Other Permitted Uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -58-
Parking Spaces Required in the R-2, R-3 and R-4 Residential Districts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -58-
Single-Family Dwellings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -58-
Multiple-Family Dwellings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -59-
Churches and Schools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -59-
Libraries and Other Public Buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -59-
Recreation and Other Religious and Similar Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -59-
Parking Spaces Required in the C-1 and C-2 Commercial Districts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -59-
Churches and Schools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -59-
Libraries and Other Public Buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -59-
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team -9-
Parks and Other Places of Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -59-
Religious Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -59-
Hospitals and Similar Uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -59-
Clinics, Medical Centers, and Similar Uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -59-
Retail Store Uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -59-
Wholesale Uses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -59-
Personal Service Uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -60-
Food Service Uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -60-
Office Space Uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -60-
Financial Institution Uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -60-
Miscellaneous Uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -60-
Building, Home Supply and Similar Uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -60-
Automotive Service and Similar Uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -60-
Drinking Establishments and Similar Uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -60-
Printing and Similar Job Shops. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -60-
Funeral Homes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -60-
Clubs and Similar Uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -61-
Miscellaneous and Uses Not Herein Defined . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -61-
Parking Spaces Required in the I-1 and I-2 Industrial Districts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -61-
Wholesale Sales and Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -61-
Parking Spaces Required for Planned Unit or Other Mixed Use Developments . . . . . . . . . . Page -62-
Parking Spaces Required for Other Uses Herein Not Defined . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -62-
Section 19.05 - Loading Requirements and Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -62-
Location of Loading Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -62-
Size of Loading Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -62-
Access to Public Street or Road . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -62-
Pavement and Surfacing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -62-
Use of Loading Space for Vehicle Repair and Servicing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -62-
Loading Space Cannot Serve as Off-Street Parking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -62-
Loading Space Requirement for Special Uses Not Herein Defined . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -62-
Requirements in the C-3 Commercial District and for Non conformities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -63-
Schedule of Required Loading Spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -63-
Retail Stores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -63-
Hospitals, Group Homes, Hotels, Clubs, and Similar Uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -63-
Eating and Drinking Establishments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -63-
Wholesale, Industrial and Manufacturing Establishments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -63-
Loading Spaces Required for Other Uses Herein Not Defined . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -63-
ARTICLE XX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -64-
SPECIAL USES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -64-
Section 20.01 - Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -64-
Section 20.02 - Application Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -64-
Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -64-
Required Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -64-
Public Hearings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -64-
Plan Commission Review and Approval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -65-
Section 20.03 - Basis of Determination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -65-
General Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -65-
Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -65-
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
-10- Public Consulting Team
Termination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -66-
ARTICLE XXI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -67-
GROUP HOMES AND ADULT FOSTER CARE FACILITIES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -67-
Section 21.01 - Applicability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -67-
Section 21.02 - R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 Residential Districts, Permitted Use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -67-
Section 21.03 - R-3 and R-4, Residential Districts, Uses Special Uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -67-
Section 21.04 - C-2 Commercial and C-3 Central Business Districts, Special Uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -67-
ARTICLE XXII . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -69-
SITE AND BUILDING FACADE PLAN REVIEW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -69-
Section 22.01 - Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -69-
Section 22.02 - When a Site Plan must be Approved by the Planning Commission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -69-
New Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -69-
Existing Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -69-
Section 22.04 - Application Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -69-
Section 22.05 - Preliminary Site and Building Facade Plan Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -69-
Section 22.06 - Plan Commission Review of Preliminary Site Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -70-
Section 22.07 - Planning Commission Review of Facade Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -71-
Section 22.08 - Final Site Plan Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -71-
Section 22.09 - Plan Commission Review of Final Site Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -72-
Section 22.10 - Right to Accept Reduced Site and Building Facade Information. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -72-
ARTICLE XXIII . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -73-
NONCONFORMING USES, BUILDINGS AND LOTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -73-
Section 23.01 - Continuation of Use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -73-
Section 23.02 - Repair and Alternation of Nonconforming Uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -73-
Section 23.03 - Nonconforming Residential Dwelling Alteration Permitted . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -73-
Section 23.04 - Change of Use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -73-
Section 23.05 - Enlargement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -73-
Section 23.06 - Restoration of Nonconforming Use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -73-
Section 23.07 - Time of Termination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -73-
Section 23.08 - Nonconforming Lots In Residential Districts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -73-
ARTICLE XXIV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -75-
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -75-
Section 24.01 - Creation and Rules of Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -75-
Section 24.02 - Membership . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -75-
Section 24.03 - Jurisdiction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -75-
Appeals From Administrative Decisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -75-
Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -75-
Issue Variances From the Strict Terms of the Ordinance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -75-
Issue Variances From the Strict Terms of Yard Setback Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -75-
Hear and Decide Appeals Concerning Issuance of Special Use Permits. The Board of Zoning Appeals
shall hear and decide any appeal from any decision made concerning issuance or denial of a
Special Use Permit made by the Planning Commission. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -75-
Section 24.04 - Public Notification and Public Hearing Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -75-
Section 24.05 - Standards for Approvals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -76-
General Standards for Approval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -76-
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team -11-
Standards for Zoning Boundary Interpretation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -76-
Standards for Approval of Variances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -77-
Section 24.06 - Abandonment Or Recision of A Zoning Board of Appeals Action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -77-
Section 24.07 - Procedure of Appeals, Meetings and Public Notice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -77-
Section 24.08 - Appeals From the Zoning Board of Appeals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -78-
ARTICLE XXV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -79-
AMENDMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -79-
Section 25.01 - Initiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -79-
Section 25.02 - Plan Commission Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -79-
Application for Amending the Zoning Ordinance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -79-
Plan Commission Public Hearing Required . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -79-
Plan Commission Review and Recommendation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -80-
Section 25.03 - City Commission Review and Approval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -80-
ARTICLE XXVI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -81-
ADMINISTRATION, FEES AND VIOLATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -81-
Section 26.01 - Zoning Administrator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -81-
Section 26.02 - Code Enforcement Officer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -81-
Section 26.03 - Duties and Powers - Zoning Administrator and Code Enforcement Officer. . . . . . . . Page -81-
Form of Application, Permits and Certificates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -81-
Receive Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -81-
Refer Applications to the Plan Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -81-
Issue or Refuse Permits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -81-
Issue Notice of Violation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -81-
Make Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -81-
Records . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -81-
Additional Duties and Powers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -82-
Section 26.04 - Fees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -82-
Section 26.05 - Violations and Penalties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -82-
ARTICLE XXVII . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -83-
SEVERABILITY, EFFECTIVE DATE AND ADOPTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -83-
Section 27.01 - Severability and Validity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -83-
Section 27.02 - Conflicting Ordinances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -83-
Section 27.03 - Effective Date . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -83-
Section 27.04 - Adoption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page -83-
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -1-
ORDINANCE NUMBER 159
as amended by Ordinance 359.08/03 adopted September 8, 2003
ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF BUCHANAN
An Ordinance to establish zoning districts and land use regulations governing the City of Buchanan, Berrien County,
Michigan; to provide for regulations governing nonconforming uses and structures; to provide for a Zoning Board of
Appeals and its duties and powers; to provide for the administration of this Ordinance including the official whose duty it
shall be to enforce the provisions thereof; to provide penalties for the violation of this Ordinance; and, to provide for
conflicts with other ordinances or regulations.
ARTICLE I
PREAMBLE AND ENACTMENT
WHEREAS, Act 207, P.A. 1921, P.A. of 1909, and Act 638, P.A. 1978, empowers this Municipality to enact, establish, administer
and enforce a Zoning Ordinance, and
WHEREAS, the legislative body of the City of Buchanan deems it necessary, for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety,
and general welfare of the City to enact such an Ordinance, and
WHEREAS, the legislative body pursuant to the provisions of Act 285, P.A, 1931 as amended, has appointed and created a City
Plan Commission by Ordinance Number 93 to recommend the boundaries of the various districts and appropriate regulations to be
enforced therein, and
WHEREAS, the City Plan Commission has divided the municipality into districts and has prepared regulations pertaining to such
districts in accordance with a comprehensive plan designed to lessen congestion in the streets, to secure safety from fire, panic and
other potential dangers; promote health, safety and the general welfare; provide adequate light and air; prevent overcrowding of land;
avoid undue concentrations of population; facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water, sewerage disposal, schools, parks
and other public improvements, and
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -2- Public Consulting Team
WHEREAS, the City Plan Commission has given full and reasonable consideration to the character of the districts and their peculiar
suitability for particular uses, with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land
throughout the municipality, and
WHEREAS, the City Plan Commission has given due public notice of hearing related to the comprehensive amendment and has
held such public hearings as required by law, and
WHEREAS, the City Plan Commission has submitted its report to City Commission, and
WHEREAS, all requirements of Act 207, P.A. 1921, as amended and Act 28, P.A. 1931, as amended, with regard to the preparation
of this Zoning Ordinance and subsequent action of the City Commission have been met
NOW THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COMMISSION OF
THE CITY OF BUCHANAN, BERRIEN COUNTY, MICHIGAN, AS
FOLLOWS:
ARTICLE II
TITLE
Section 1.01 - Title.
This Ordinance shall be known as the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Buchanan, and will be referred to herein as this
Ordinance.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -3-
ARTICLE III
DEFINITIONS AND USE OF TERMS
Section 3.01 - Definitions.
For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain terms, phrases and words shall, whenever used in this Ordinance, have the meaning
assigned in this Section. Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them.
Accessory Building or Structure. A supplemental building or structure on the same lot with, and where the use is of a
nature which is customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure; but not including residential or other living
quarters.
Accessory Use. A use naturally and normally incidental to, subordinate to, and devoted exclusively to, the main use of
the land or building.
Adult Entertainment. Adult entertainment shall mean any adult book store, adult motion picture theater, adult minimotion
picture theater, massage parlor or commercial establishment which for a fee (See Article XXVI, Section 26.04) or
incidentally to another service, presents material or exhibition distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as defined below for observation by patrons
occupying the premise.
Specified sexual activities 1) the human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal, 2) acts of human
masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy, and 3) fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttock or female breast.
Specified anatomical areas less than completely opaquely covered: 1) genital or pubic region, 2) buttock, 3)
female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, 4) human male genitals in a discernible
turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
Massage any commercial establishment which for a fee provides for the manipulation, or rubbing of body parts
excepting manipulation of body parts for remedial purposes performed by state licensed practitioners with the
minimal qualifications of a physical therapist.
Adult Foster Care Facility. A dwelling or establishment in which is provided supervision, assistance, protection,
or personal care, in addition to room and board, to an adult, not to include a licensed home for the aged, a licensed nursing home,
or a licensed mental hospital.
Adult Foster Care Resident. An adult who resides in a adult foster care facility and receives supervision assistance,
protection, or personal care, in addition to room and board.
Amusement Enterprise. Any building or structure used for one or more of the following uses; billiards, pool, bowling,
shooting gallery, roller rink, dance hall, and mechanical or electronic games, plus any similar uses as determined by the Plan
Commission.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -4- Public Consulting Team
Auxiliary Building. A building which is incidental to another use or structure on the same lot (See accessory
building or structure).
Bed and Breakfast Operation. A use which is subordinate to the principal use of the building as a single family
dwelling in which a separate room for sleeping and breakfast are provided in return for payment.
Building. A structure erected on-site, a mobile home or mobile
structure, a pre-manufactured or pre-cut structure, above or below ground, designed
primarily for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or property of
any kind.
Building Area. The maximum projected area of a building and
its accessory buildings, excluding steps, open porches, terraces and cornices.
Building Coverage. The area on a zoning lot that is
occupied by buildings and structures, including accessory buildings.
Building Height. The vertical distance measured from
the average level of the highest point and the lowest point of the building site
covered by the building to: (1) if the roof is flat, the highest point; (2) if a gable,
hip, gambrel or mansard roof, the average height measured between the eave and
the highest point of the roof; (3) where no roof beams exist, or there are structures
partly or wholly above the roof, the highest point of the building.
Building, Principal. The building which contains the
principal building use of the parcel of property on which it is situated. In a residential district a dwelling is the principal building
on a parcel of property.
Building Width. The minimum width of a building used for residential purposes shall be thirty (30) feet measured
perpendicular at the foundation line running not less than thirty-three (33) percent of the length of the longest wall.
Building Inspector. The person charged with the responsibility of administration of the Michigan Construction Code for
the City of Buchanan, including the issuance of a building permit for construction regulated by the Construction Code.
City. The City of Buchanan, Berrien City, Michigan
City of Buchanan. See definition City.
City Clerk. The Clerk of the City of Buchanan, Berrien County, Michigan.
City of Buchanan Compiled Ordinances. The compilation and/or codification of all Ordinances approved by the City
Commission as maintained by the City Clerk.
City Manager. The individual selected by the City Commission to fulfil the duties of City Manager as set forth in the
City of Buchanan City Charter.
City Plan Commission. The City Plan Commission of the City of Buchanan, Berrien County, Michigan.
Certificate of Occupancy. A certificate issued by the City Building Official or Inspector pursuant to the Michigan
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -5-
Building Code authorizing an occupancy and/or use of land and/or a building or structure pursuant to the Michigan Building Code
and the terms of this Ordinance.
Child Care. The provision of child care as regulated by the Michigan Department of Family Independence Services. The
licensed care of twelve or less, children shall be exempt for the terms of this ordinance and is allowable in any residential dwelling
unit as provided by current Michigan law or as hereafter amended. Where allowed by the terms of this ordinance, licensed care of
more than twelve children this ordinance shall require a special use permit pursuant to Article XX.
Code Enforcement Officer. The person charged with the enforcement of this Ordinance or his designee designated
by the City Manager a provided in Article XXVI, Section 26.02.
Commercial Vehicles and Commercial Equipment. For the terms of this ordinance and specifically, Section 19.03, the
following definitions shall apply:
Bus shall mean a motor vehicle with mode of power except a trailer designed to carry, more than twelve (12)
persons.
Commercial vehicle shall include buses, mobile structure trailers, pole trailers, semi-trailers, stepvans, trailers,
trucks and truck-tractors as defined herein.
Commercial equipment shall mean any construction equipment or large equipment used primarily in the course
of conducting a trade or business, including, but not limited to, bulldozers, front-end loaders, backhoes, power
shovels, and other heavy construction equipment, or trailers designed for the transportation of such equipment.
Mobile structure trailer shall mean a trailer that a roof and walls and is at least ten (10) feet wide and which may
be used off-road for commercial purposes.
Pole trailer shall mean a vehicle without mode of power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached
to towing vehicle by means of a reach-pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, for
transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as poles, pipes or structural members capable generally of
staying themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
Semi-trailer shall mean a trailer other than a pole trailer constructed that a substantial part of its weight rests upon
or is carried by another motor vehicle.
Trailer shall mean a vehicle other than a utility trailer with or without mode of power designed for carrying
persons or property and for being drawn by another motor vehicle.
Utility trailer shall mean a vehicle designed to be towed by a motor vehicle in order to carry property including,
but not limited to, snowmobiles, boats, motorcycles and other recreational equipment used periodically for travel,
recreational or vacation purposes.
Truck shall mean a motor vehicle in excess of one- ton capacity with mode of power except a trailer designed
primarily for the transportation of property or special purpose equipment.
Truck-tractor shall mean a truck designed primarily for drawing another motor vehicle and not so constructed
as to carry other than a part of the weight of vehicle and of the load so drawn.
Commission. The City Commission of the City of Buchanan, Berrien County, Michigan.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -6- Public Consulting Team
Common Open Space. A parcel or parcels of land (including areas designated as common or limited common elements
as recorded pursuant to the Michigan Condominium Act, P.A. 59 of 1978, as amended) or an area of water, or a combination of
land and water within an area for Planned Unit Development and designed and intended for the use and enjoyment of residents or
occupants of the Planned Unit Development. Common open space may contain such contemporary structures and improvements
as are necessary and appropriate for the benefit and enjoyment of all residents of the Planned Unit Development but shall not include
areas reserved for the exclusive use or benefit of any individual tenant or owner, including dedicated streets, public right-of-ways,
vehicle drives, parking areas, loading and storage areas, and areas reserved for non residential related uses.
Condominium Act. The Michigan Condominium Act, P.A. 58 of 1978, as amended.
Construction Code. See Michigan Construction Code.
Convalescent and Nursing Care. The provision of daily or 24-hour custodial care, either with or without the provision
of medical services for any persons, regardless of age in any State of Michigan licensed facility.
Density - Planned Unit Development. The relationship of the total number of dwelling units contained in the Planned
Unit Development to the Gross Acreage of the Planned Unit Development; dwelling units per gross acre.
Development Plan - Planned Unit Development. The application and any site, facade, or other engineering drawings
including a property survey map and drawing necessary for submission, review and approval of a Planned Unit Development in
accord with Article XV.
District. A portion of the territory of the City of Buchanan within which certain uniform regulations and requirements
apply under the provisions of this Ordinance.
Downtown Development Authority. The body appointed by the City Commission pursuant to The Downtown
Development Authority Act, P.A. 197 of 1975, as amended and assigned certain powers to review facade development and
redevelopment plans pursuant to the terms of this Ordinance.
Dwelling. Any building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for a residence or sleeping place or one or
more persons.
Dwelling, Single-Family. A building having accommodations for, and occupied exclusively by, one-family,
complying with the following standards:
1. It complies with the minimum square footage requirements of this Ordinance for the zoning district in which it is located.
2. It has minimum front building width dimension measured at the foundation line of thirty (30) feet, measured perpendicular
at the foundation line running not less than thirty-three (33) percent of the length of the longest wall, and complies in all
respects with the Michigan Construction Code, including minimum heights for habitable rooms. Where a dwelling is
required by law to comply with any federal or state standards or regulations for construction and where such standards or
regulations for construction are different than those imposed by the Michigan Construction Code adopted by the City, then
and in that event such federal or state standard or regulation shall apply.
3. It is firmly attached to a permanent foundation constructed on the site in accordance with the Michigan Construction Code
and shall have a wall of the same perimeter dimensions of the dwelling and constructed of such materials and type as
required in the applicable Michigan Construction Code for single-family dwellings. In the event that the dwelling is a
mobile home, defined herein, such dwellings shall be installed pursuant to the manufacturers setup instructions and shall
be secured to the premises by an anchoring system or device complying with the rules and regulations of the Michigan
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -7-
Mobile Home Commission and shall have a perimeter wall as required above.
4. In the event that a dwelling is a mobile home as defined herein, each mobile home shall be installed with the wheels
removed. Additionally, no dwelling shall have any exposed towing mechanism, undercarriage or chassis.
5. The dwelling is connected to a public sewer and water supply or to such private facilities approved by the Berrien County
Health Department.
6. The dwelling contains a storage capability area in a basement located under the dwelling, in an attic area, in closed areas,
or in a separate structure of standard construction similar to or of better quality than the principal dwelling, which storage
area shall be equal to 10% of the square footage or the dwellings or 120 square feet, whichever shall be less.
7. The dwelling unit shall contain a garage or covered parking as required by this Ordinance.
8. The dwelling is aesthetically compatible in design and appearance with other residences in the vicinity, with either a roof
overhang of not less than six inches on all sides, or alternatively with window sills or roof drainage systems concentrating
roof drainage at collection points along the sides of the dwelling; has not less than two exterior doors with the second one
being located on either the rear or side of the building, containing steps connected to said exterior door areas or to porches
connected to said door areas where a difference in elevation requires installation of steps. Compatibility of design and
appearance shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator based upon the review of the plans submitted for construction
a particular dwelling. This determination is subject to appeal by an aggrieved party to the Board of Appeals. Any
determination of compatibility shall be based upon the standards set forth in this definition of dwelling as well as the
character, design, and appearance of the majority of residential dwelling located outside of mobile home parks within 1,200
feet of the subject dwelling where such area is developed with dwellings to the extent of not less than 20% of the lots
situated within said area; or, where said area is not so developed, by the character, design and appearance of one or more
residential dwellings located outside of mobile home parks throughout the City. The foregoing shall not be construed to
prohibit innovative design concepts involving such matters as solar energy, view, unique land contour or relief from the
common or standard designed home.
9. The dwelling contains no additions or rooms or other areas which are not constructed with similar quality workmanship
as the original structure, including permanent attachment to the principal structure and construction of a foundation as
required herein.
10. The dwelling complies with all pertinent building and fire codes. In the case of a mobile home, all construction and all
plumbing, electrical apparatus and insulation within and connected to said mobile home shall be of a type and quality
conforming to the Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards as promulgated by the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development, being 24 CFR 3280, and as from time to time such standards may be amended.
Additionally, all dwellings shall meet or exceed all applicable roof snow load and strength requirements.
11. The foregoing standards shall not apply to a mobile home located in a licensed mobile home park except to the extent
required by state or federal law or otherwise specifically required in the ordinance of the City pertaining to such parks.
12. All construction required herein shall be commenced only after a building permit has been obtained in accordance with
the applicable Michigan Michigan Construction Code provisions and requirements.
13. All construction shall conform with health, safety, and welfare specifications of the adopted Michigan Construction Code
for emergency egress, rescue windows and smoke detectors.
Dwelling, Two-Family. A building containing not more than two separate dwelling units designed for residential use
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -8- Public Consulting Team
and conforming in all other respects to the standards set froth for single family dwellings.
Dwelling, Multiple-Family. A building containing three or more dwelling units designed for residential use and
are conforming in all other respects to the standards set forth for single family dwellings.
Dwelling, Senior Multiple Family. Multiple dwelling units, rental apartments and other forms of residential
dwelling units of not over three bedrooms per dwelling unit where all occupants of the units are 55 years or older and the
developer/owner of said development has elected to operate said development pursuant to Department of Housing and Development
Regulations designed for senior housing with age restrictions as provided by law.
Dwelling Unit. One or more rooms, including a kitchen or kitchenette and sanitary facilities, in a building, designed as
a unit for occupancy by not more that one family.
Essential Services. The construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or government agencies of gas,
electrical, steam, or water transmissions of distribution systems, and communications, collection, supply or disposal systems. These
include equipment such as poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic
signals (and signs) hydrants, and other similar equipment. Buildings and transmission facilities which do not provide direct service
to local distribution systems are not included.
Event. See Festival.
Family. An individual or two or more persons, that are related by blood, marriage or domestic partnership, or a group of
not more than five persons (excluding servants and care providers) who are not related by blood, marriage or domestic partnership,
living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit. This excludes individual persons or groups of persons living in
dormitories or religious homes.
Facade Plan. A sketch or other illustration showing the exterior surface of a building including all architectural
features, surface materials and color or colors of all surface materials submitted pursuant to the requirements of Article XXII, Section
22.07.
Fence. An artificially-constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas
of land for protection, confinement or providing a visual barrier.
Festival, Event, Gatherings. A festival, event or gathering is any fair, festival, or gathering of individuals or similar
organized or unorganized activity where patrons watch or participate in entertainment, including but not limited to, music, shows,
concerts, revivals, circuses, carnivals, art shows, antique fairs, street dances, and sporting events not related with a scheduled school
athletic event.
Flooding. A general and temporary condition causing partial or complete innundation of normal dry-land area from
either: 1) an overflow of inland waters or 2) unusual and rapid accumulation of run-off of surface waters from any source.
Flood Hazard Area, Boundary Map Land lying in the floodplain in any community that is subject to a one (1)
percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year as defined as an area of special flood hazard designated Zone A on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map issued for the City by the Federal Emergency Management Administration.
Floodplain. Any land area susceptible to being inundated from water from any source (See flooding).
Floor Area, Off Street Parking and Loading Requirements. For the purposes of applying the requirements for
off-street parking and loading. Floor Area means the gross floor area used by tenants or for the service to the public, including
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -9-
but not limited to, areas occupied by fixtures and indoor display equipment. It does not include areas used principally for non-public
purposes such as storage, incidental repair, processing or packaging of merchandise, shop windows, offices incidental to the
management or maintenance of stores or buildings, toilet or rest rooms, utilities, dressing rooms or fitting or alternation rooms.
A major fraction of additional floor area shall require one additional parking or loading spaces, except when otherwise stated.
Gross Acreage - Planned Unit Development. All land area occupied by the Planned Unit Development and except
any portion of land located within a public right-of-way.
Group Home. Is a dwelling unit or other structure designed to house a business intending to provide supervise care for
(1) or more children or adults on a 24-hour basis, except as exempted by current Michigan law or hereafter amended, that being adult
foster care facilities which provide services for less than six (6) total residents.
Home Occupation. Home Occupations are those uses of land in residential districts possessing essentially
incompatible characteristics with the uses normally attributable to residential zoning districts however, possessing characteristics
of use, location, and qualities which require individual review and discretion in order to grant reasonable use of said property while
avoiding incompatibility with the character of the surrounding area, public services and facilities, and adjacent use of land. A home
occupation may be approved in a residential district pursuant to the provisions of Article XVIII, Section 18.09 when such use is
conducted entirely within an enclosed dwelling, and where the use is clearly incidental and secondary to residential occupancy and
does not change the character of the principal residential use. Specifically excluded is the storage and display of merchandise not
produced by such home occupation, any activity involving any building alterations, window display, construction features,
equipment, machinery or outdoor storage and display, any item of which is visible from off the lot on which located. Also, excluded
are those occupations which generate offensive odors and excessive traffic on residential streets, as determined by the Plan
Commission.
Household Pets. Household pets include any pets not specifically prohibited by the terms of this Ordinance and any other
City ordinance. Household pets do not include horses, donkeys, pigs (of any type), rabbits, chickens, goats or other farm animals
or livestock, including miniature farm animals of any type. For the terms of this ordinance, more than four dogs, cats or other
household pets shall constitute a commercial kennel, or where such pets are boarded for compensation or offered for sale.
Junk Yard. See Recycling Facility.
Land Division. The act of creating a lot or parcel of land defined by a metes and bounds description pursuant to the
provisions of the Michigan Land Division Act, P.A. 87 of 1997, as amended (formerly the Michigan Subdivision Control Act) or
the act of creating a condominium plat pursuant to the provisions of the Condominium Act, P.A., 58 of 1978, as amended, for the
purpose of recording same with the Register of Deeds of Berrien County. (See: Land Division Act and Condominium Act.). For
the purpose of this Ordinance any and all Land Division and Condominium plats will be considered a Planned Unit Development
and submitted for approval according to the procedure of Article XV.
Land Division Act. The Michigan Land Division Act, P.A. 87 of 1997, as amended (formerly the Michigan
Subdivision Control Act) and any ordinance adopted by the City of Buchanan in furtherance of City duties required of said act.
Landowner or Applicant - Planned Unit Development. The legal or beneficiary owner or owners of the land
proposed to be included in a Planned Unit Development or the holder of an option or contract to purchase the land subject to the
proposed Planned Unit Development.
Lodging House. See Bed and Breakfast operation.
Lot. A parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet the minimum requirements hereof for use, coverage and area,
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -10- Public Consulting Team
and providing such yards and other open spaces as are herein required. Such parcel shall have frontage on an improved public street
and may consist of:
(1) A single lot of record;
(2) A portion of a lot of record; or
(3) Any combination of (1) or (2) above.
Lot (or Parcel) of Record. The recorded legal description of any lot or parcel of land in the office of the Register
of Deeds of Berrien County, State of Michigan, or as a part of an unrecorded plat, development plan, condominium, subdivision,
or by metes and bounds.
MEDQ. See Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality(MDEQ). The Department of the State of Michigan assigned to
implement environmental regulations approved by the Michigan legislature and signed into law by the Governor of the State of
Michigan. For the terms of this ordinance the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality shall refer to the current department
or successor thereto assigned current or amended regulatory responsibility.
Michigan Construction Code. The Michigan Construction Code, as administer by the City of Buchanan.
Mobile Home. A structure, transportable in one or more section, which is built on a chassis and designed to be used as
a dwelling without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air
conditioning, and electrical systems contained in the structure. Mobile home does not include a recreational vehicle.
Mobile Home Park. A parcel of land under the control of a person upon which contains three (3) or more mobile
homes developed in accord with the specification constrained in or promulgated pursuant to P.A. 96 of 1987, as amended and
approved by the Michigan Mobile Home Park Commission pursuant to procedures set forth in P.A. 96 of 1987, as amended; that
being the Mobile Home Commission Act.
Manufactured Housing Unit or Prefabricated Dwelling. A prefabricated structure designed for permanent occupancy
as a single or two-family dwelling and transported to the site on a flat bed or other type truck or trailer for erection on a permanent
foundation, either in sections or modular units that have been prefabricated at the factory, complete with the plumbing and electrical
facilities for connection to outside systems and meeting all requirements of Part 4 Building Code,being a part of the Michigan
Construction Code, promulgated pursuant to Act 230 of, Public Acts of 1972, as amended, and which is certified and identified in
accordance with Part 2, Premanufactured Units, also being part of said construction code.
Nonconforming Use. The use of a building, structure, lot or parcel of land conflicting with the provisions of this
Ordinance at the time of its enactment.
Nuisance - Public. An activity harmful to the public health, creates an interference in a way of travel, affects public
morals or prevents the public from the peaceful use of their land and public streets.
Nuisance - Private. An activity which either is harmful or interferes with to the property rights or health of persons
either owners or occupants of the land.
Ordinance. See Zoning Ordinance
Plan Commission. See City Plan Commission.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -11-
Plat. The required drawing required, and prepared in accordance with the specification of either the Land Division Act
or Condominium Act signed by a Michigan Registered Surveyor which is approved by the City Plan Commission and/or City
Commission to be filed with the Register of Deeds of Berrien County for the conveyance of real property.
Recreational Vehicle. A vehicle primarily designed and used as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping,
or travel purposes, including a vehicle having its own motor power or a vehicle mounted on to drawn by another vehicle.
Recycling Facility. An open area of land and any accessory buildings or structures thereon which are used primarily
for buying, selling, exchanging, storing, baling, packing, disassembling, or handling waste or scrap materials including vehicles,
machinery, and equipment not in operable conditions or parts thereof, and other metal, paper, rugs, rubber tires, bottles (plastic or
glass) and yard waste such as grass clipping, leaves, brush and tree limbs. See Junk Yard.
Restaurant. A business located in a building where, in consideration of the payment of money, meals are habitually
prepared, sold, and served to persons for consumption on or off the premises; having suitable kitchen facilities connected therewith
containing conveniences for cooking an assortment of foods which may be required for ordinary meals, and deriving the major
portion of is receipts form the sale of food.
Retail Commercial Establishment. A store, market or shop in which commodities are sold or offered for sale in
small or large quantities to the retail trade. Grocery and general stores, meat markets, public garages and automobile services
stations are included in this classification.
School. A principal use building or buildings and all ancillary buildings and structures either public, parochial or private
owned; either licensed, certified or designated by a state educational agency or other national school accrediting organization for
the purposes of providing education of children, or adults, principally, but not exclusively, through the kindergarten to 12th grade,
including elementary, middle and high schools. A day care center providing pre-school education programs, buildings or structures
used for non-licensed, non-certified or home-schooling purposes are specifically excluded form this definition. Buildings used for
higher educational purposes, technical training, career training or any other educational or other education assistance services,
regardless of the curricula, programs, training, counseling, personal assistance or other services provided are specifically excluded.
Signs and Billboards. Signs are regulated by the City of Buchanan Sign Ordinance, Article 9B of the City of Buchanan
Compiled Ordinances.
Structure. Any production or piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite
manner; any construction including dwellings, garages, buildings, signboards and fences, except public utility communication towers
and electrical transmission lines, underground gas distribution lines, and equipment and facilities supporting the same and/or
incidental thereto.
Site Plan. A sketch or other illustration containing information that is needed for the submission, review and
approval of a zoning matter where a site plan is required pursuant to the requirements of Article XXII, Section 22.02.
Storage, Residential Out-door. Any land used for, or occupied for, the purpose of storing recreational vehicles boats,
trailers, recreational equipment, material, trash receptacles and other personal property commonly used by homeowners but not
licensed vehicles used for daily transportation and parked in a clearly defined driveway or other parking area, accessory structures,
lawn furniture, child playground equipment, lawn ornaments and other similar personal property normal and typically used as part
of the daily occupancy of a residential dwelling unit.
Subdivision. For the purposes of this Ordinance the term subdivision included any act which is taken to record the
division of a lot or parcel of land pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Land Division Act or Condominium Act.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -12- Public Consulting Team
Unit, Condominium. The descriptor for a lot or specific unit for occupancy in a condominium plat designed to be
conveyed under single ownership and having a individual property tax code identification number (in a land division (subdivision)
plat a lot is equivalent to a condominium unit).
Utility Transition Facilities. For the terms of this Ordinance, any service that requires location of any facility,
transmission line or other building or structure within City of Buchanan right-of-way or other private property not otherwise
regulate by other ordinance or provided for by City Commission approval of a franchise agreement are declared hereby
declared to be nonessential services.
Yard. An open space lying between a building (or group of buildings) on the same lot and the nearest lot line. It is
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise permitted herein.
(1) Yard, Front. An open space between the front line of a building and the front lot line.
(2) Yard, Rear. An open space between the rear line of a building and the rear lot line.
(3) Yard, Side. An open space lying between the nearest line of the principal building and a side lot line,
extending from the required front yard setback line to the rear yard setback line.
Zoning Board of Appeals. The Board of Zoning Appeals as established by Article XXIV of this Ordinance.
Zoning Administrator. The person charged with administration of this Ordinance or designee as provided in Article
XXVI, Section 26.01.
Zoning Compliance Permit. A written statement issued by the Zoning Administer or designee addressing compliance
with the terms of this Ordinance whether issued as an individual permit or as part of the issuance of a building permit pursuant to
the Michigan Construction Code, as administered by the City.
Zoning Lot. One or more individual legally described and recorded lots
or parcels of property under single ownership that in combination, house the principal
permitted buildings and all other accessory use structures for the intended use of the
zoning lot.
Zoning Ordinance. The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Buchanan,
Berrien County, Michigan.
Section 3.2 - Terms Used in This Ordinance. F o r th e p u r p o s e s o f th i s
Ordinance, certain terms are used herein. The following rules shall govern the
interpretation of such words when not-inconsistent with their context:
(1) All words used in the present tense include the future tense, the singular
number includes the rural, and the plural number includes the singular;
(2) All words must and shall are mandatory, and the word may is permissive;
(3) All words used or occupied include the words intended, designed, or arranged to be used or occupied.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -13-
ARTICLE IV
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAPS
Section 4.01 - Division of City Into Zoning Districts. For the purpose of regulating and restricting the location of trades
and industries and the location of buildings, designated for specific uses, and also for the purpose of regulating and restricting the
volume, height and area of buildings hereafter erected or altered, the following classes of districts are hereby created within the City
of Buchanan, Berrien County, Michigan:
R-1A Single-Family Residential District
R-1B Single-Family Residential District
R-2 Two-Family Residential District
R-3 Multi-Family Residential District
R-4 Multi-Family Senior Residential District
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District
C-2 Commercial District
C-3 Central Business District
I-1 Light Industrial District
I-2 Heavy Industrial District
CD Cluster Residential (overlay) Development District
PUD Planned Unit Development District
FP Floodplain (overlay) District
Section 4.02 - Official Zoning Map. The location and boundaries of the districts established by this Ordinance are shown
on the Official Zoning Map which together with all explanatory material thereon, is hereby adopted by reference, and declared
to be part of this Ordinance.
The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor attested to by the City Clerk under the words: This
is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Section 4.02 of Ordinance ___, as amended, of the City of Buchanan,
Berrien County, Michigan.
Section 4.03 - Boundaries of Zoning Districts. Unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance, the boundaries of Zoning Districts
shall be interpreted as following along section lines, or lines of customary subdivision of such section; or the right-of-way line of
highways, streets, alleys or property lines on record at the office of the Register of Deeds of Berrien County as of the date of
enactment of this Ordinance.
Section 4.04 - Changes to the Zoning Map. If, in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, amendments are made
changing the district boundaries or other matter portrayed by the Official Zoning Map, such changes must be made in the Official
Zoning Map, together with an entry made thereon as follows: On this _____ day of _________ 2003, by official action of the City
Commission (Ordinance Number _____), the following changes were made in the Official Zoning Map: (a brief description of the
nature of the change must be inserted) which entry must be signed by the Mayor and attested to by the City Clerk and must be made
promptly after such amendment has been approved by the City Commission.
No changes of any nature may be made in the Official Zoning Map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedure
set forth in this Ordinance. Any unauthorized changes of whatever kind, by any person or persons, will be considered a violation
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -14- Public Consulting Team
of this Ordinance and punishable as provided in this Ordinance.
Section 4.05 - Official Map Final Authority. The Official Zoning Map is the final authority as the current status of the land
and water areas, buildings and other structures of the City, regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning
Map which may from time to time be published.
Section 4.06 - Interpretation of District Boundaries. If uncertainty as to the boundary of any districts shown on the Zoning
Map, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall determine the location of such boundaries according to the rules for interpretation of district
boundaries established in this Ordinance.
Section 4.07 - Annexed Lands. Any land annexed to or consolidated which the City will be classified as R-!A until reclassified
by an amendment to this Ordinance, unless annexed into the City pursuant to P.A. 171 of 1958, as amended, providing for the
transfer of the current zoning classification.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -15-
ARTICLE V
R-1A & R-1B SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Section 5.01 - Intent. The Single-Family Residential District is established as a district in which the principal use of the land
is for single family dwellings. The District includes the R-1A subdistrict representing a minimum six thousand six hundred (6,600)
square foot minimum lot size and the R-1B subdistrict a five-thousand (4,500) square foot minimum lot size. Lot size, setback and
coverage requirements are addressed in Section 5.09 and 5.10.
Section 5.02 - Uses Permitted by Right. Land, buildings or structures in this zoning district may be used for the following
purposes only:
A. Single-family dwellings and accessory uses including Adult Foster Care Facilities (see Article XXI, Section
21.03).
B. Any essential service as defined in this Ordinance.
Section 5.03 - Uses Permitted by Special Use Permit. The following uses are permitted in this district subject to obtaining
a special use permit as provided in Article XX.
A. Home occupations as a special use pursuant to Article XVIII, Section 18.09.
B. Child Care as part of a home occupation.
C. Bed and breakfast operations in compliance with Article XVIII, Section 18.02.
D. Parks, schools, Churches and City or other government agency building.
E. Utility transmission facilities not deemed essential services.
Section 5.04 - Accessory Buildings and Structures. Accessory buildings customarily incidental to uses herein permitted may not
be erected, altered or used in this district except in conformity with Article XVII, Section 17.14.
Section 5.05 - Signs Permitted. Signs permitted in accordance with the City Buchanan Sign Ordinance, Article 9B of the City
of Buchanan Compiled Ordinances.
Section 5.06 - Parking Requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided in conformance with Article XIX, Section 19.04.
Section 5.07 - Visual Screening Requirements. An adequate visual blockage screen between any outdoor storage area in the
side or rear yards shall be required. This visual blockage shall be no less than six (6) feet in height in compliance with the standards
set forth in Article XVIII, Section 18.06.
Section 5.08 - Building Height Regulations. No residential building or structure shall exceed two and one-half (2) stories
nor exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -16- Public Consulting Team
Section 5.09 - R-1A Yard, Setback and Lot Area Regulations. No principal building or structure, nor any enlargement
thereof, shall be hereafter erected except in conformance with the following yard, lot area, and frontage requirements:
A. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard of no less than twenty-five (25) feet.
B. Side Yard: There shall be one (1) side yard which shall be not less than six (6) feet with the setback dimension
of both side yards totaling not less than fifteen (15) feet.
Side Yard Street Frontage Setback: The side yard shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet.
C. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard of no less than twenty-five (25) feet for residential use.
D. Lot Area: The minimum lot area shall be six thousand six hundred (6,600) square feet.
E. Lot Frontage and Depth: The minimum frontage shall be sixty (60) feet and the minimum lot depth one hundred
ten (110) feet, respectively.
F. Maximum Building Lot Coverage: The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed forty-five (45) percent.
Section 5.10 - R-1B Yard, Setback and Lot Area Regulations. No principal building or structure, nor any enlargement
thereof, shall be hereafter erected except in conformance with the following yard, lot area, and frontage requirements:
A. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard of no less than twenty (20) feet. See Section 17.11 for reduction in the
set back to match setback of adjoining properties.
B. Side Yard: There shall be one (1) side yard which shall not be less than three (3) feet.
Side Yard Street Frontage Setback: The side yard shall be not less than ten (10) feet.
C. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard of no less than ten (10) feet for residential use.
C. Lot Area: The minimum lot area shall be four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet.
D. Lot Frontage and Depth: The minimum frontage shall be forty five (45) feet and the minimum lot depth one
hundred (100) feet, respectively
E. Maximum Building Lot Coverage: The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed fifty (50) percent.
Section 5.11 - Area of Dwelling. Every single-family dwelling shall have a floor area of not less than one thousand (1,000) square
feet. Each dwelling unit in this district shall have a minimum of two-thirds of the required minimum floor area on the ground level
(i.e., 750 sq. ft.). Each dwelling unit in this district shall also have a front building dimension of not less than thirty (30) feet
measured at the foundation. The minimum front building dimension shall be maintained not less than thirty-three (33) percent of
the length of the longest building side wall.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -17-
ARTICLE VI
R-2 TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Section 6.01 - Intent. The Two-Family Residential District is established as the district in which the principal use of land is
for single family dwellings but in which two-family dwellings are permitted.
Section 6.02 - Uses Permitted by Right. Land, buildings or structures in this zoning district may be used for the following
purposes only:
A. Single-family and two-family dwellings and accessory uses including Adult Foster Care Facilities (see Article
XXI, Section 21.02).
B. Any essential service as defined in this Ordinance.
Section 6.03 - Uses Permitted by Special Use Permit. The following uses are permitted in this district subject to obtaining
a special use permit as provided in Article XX.
A. Home occupations as a special use pursuant to Article XVIII, Section 18.09..
B. Bed and breakfast operations in compliance with Article XVIII, Section 18.02.
C. Child Care, Convalescent, nursing care as part of a home occupation.
D. Parks, schools, Churches and City or other government agency building.
E. Utility transmission facilities not deemed essential services.
Section 6.04 - Accessory Buildings and Structures. Accessory buildings customarily incidental to uses herein permitted may not
be erected, altered or used in this district except in conformity with Article XVII, Section 17.14.
Section 6.05 - Signs Permitted. Signs permitted in accordance with the City Buchanan Sign Ordinance, Article 9B of the City
of Buchanan Compiled Ordinances.
Section 6.06 - Parking Requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided in conformance with Article XIX, Section 19.04.
Section 6.07 - Visual Screening Requirements. An adequate visual blockage screen between any outdoor storage area in the
side or rear yards shall be required. This visual blockage shall be no less than six (6) feet in height in compliance with the standards
set forth in Article XVIII, Section 18.06.
Section 6.08 - Building Height Regulations. No residential building or structure shall exceed two and one-half (2) stories
nor exceed forty (40) feet in height.
Section 6.09 - Yard, Setback and Lot Area Regulations. No principal building or structure, nor any enlargement thereof, shall
be hereafter erected except in conformance with the following yard, lot area, and frontage requirements:
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -18- Public Consulting Team
A. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard of no less than twenty-five (25) feet.
B. Side Yard: There shall be one (1) side yard which shall not be less than six (6) feet with the setback dimension
of both side yards totaling not less than fifteen (15) feet.
Side Yard Street Frontage Setback: The side yard shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet.
C. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard of no less than twenty-five (25) feet for residential use.
D. Lot Area: The minimum lot area shall be six thousand six hundred (6,600) square feet. For a two-family dwelling
unit and three thousand three (3,300) square feet of land area.
E. Lot Frontage and Depth: The minimum frontage shall be sixty (60) feet and the minimum lot depth one hundred
ten (110) feet, respectively.
F. Maximum Building Lot Coverage: The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed forty-five (45) percent.
Section 6.07 - Area of Dwelling. Every single-family dwelling shall have a floor area of not less than one thousand (1,000) square
feet. Every single-family and two-family dwelling unit in this district shall have a minimum of two-thirds of the required minimum
floor area on the ground level (i.e., 750 sq. ft.). Each dwelling unit in this district shall also have a front building dimension of not
less than thirty (30) feet measured at the foundation. The minimum front building dimension shall be maintained not less than thirtythree
(33) percent of the length of the longest building side wall.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -19-
ARTICLE VII
R-3 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Section 7.01 - Intent. The Multi-Family Residential District is established as a district in which the principal use of the land
is for two-family and multi-family dwellings but which single-family dwellings are permitted.
Section 7.02 - Uses Permitted by Right. Land, buildings or structures in this Zoning District may be used for the following
purposes only:
A. Single-family, two-family and multi-family dwellings and accessory uses including Adult Foster Care Facilities
(see Article XXI, Section 21.03).
B. Any essential service as defined in this Ordinance.
Section 7.03 - Uses Permitted by Special Use Permit. The following uses are permitted in this district subject to obtaining
a special use permit as provided in Article XX.
A. Home occupations as a special use pursuant to Article XVIII, Section 18.09.
B. Bed and breakfast operations in compliance with Article XVIII, Section 18.02.
C. Child Care, Convalescent, nursing care as part of a home occupation.
D. Parks, schools, Churches and City or other government agency building.
E. Utility transmission facilities not deemed essential services.
Section 7.04 - Accessory Buildings and Structures . Accessory buildings customarily incidental to uses herein permitted may not
be erected, altered or used in this district except in conformity with Article XVIII, Section 17.14.
Section 7.05 - Signs Permitted. Signs permitted in accordance with the City Buchanan Sign Ordinance, Article 9B of the City
of Buchanan Compiled Ordinances.
Section 7.06 - Parking Requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided in conformance with Article XIX, Section 19.04.
Section 7.07 - Visual Screening Requirements. Every lot or parcel of land that abuts a lot or parcel of land zoned R-1A, R-1B
or R-2, must provide an adequate visual blockage screen between the R-1A, R-1B or R-2 residential lot or parcel of land. This visual
blockage shall be no less than six (6) feet in height, in accordance with Article XVIII. Section 18.05 in compliance with the standards
set forth in Article XVIII, Section 18.06.
Section 7.08 - Building Height Regulations. No residential building or structure shall exceed two and one-half (2) stories
or exceed forty (40) feet in height.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -20- Public Consulting Team
Section 7.09 - Yard, Setback and Lot Area Regulations. No principal building or structure, nor any enlargement thereof, shall
be hereafter erected except in conformance with the following yard, lot area, and frontage requirements:
A. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard of no less than twenty-five (25) feet.
B. Side Yard: There shall be one (1) side yard which shall not be less than six (6) feet with the setback dimension
of both side yards totaling not less than twenty (20) feet. In the event the yard abuts an R-1A, R-1B or R-2
residential zoning lot, a minimum side yard setback of twenty-five (25) feet are required.
Side Yard Street Frontage Setback: The side yard shall be not less than twenty (20) feet.
C. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard of no less than twenty (20) feet for residential use. In the event the yard
abuts an R-1A, R-1B or R-2 residential zoning lot, a minimum rear yard setback of twenty-five (25) feet is
required.
D. Lot Area: The minimum lot area shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet for a single-family or two-family
structure. The minimum lot size shall increase by one-thousand (1,000) square feet for each dwelling unit in
excess of two.
E. Lot Frontage and Depth: The minimum frontage shall be eighty (80) feet and the minimum lot depth one hundred
ten (110) feet, respectively
F. Maximum Building Lot Coverage: The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed forty-five (45) percent.
Section 7.10 - Area of Dwelling. Every single-family dwelling shall have a floor area of not less than one thousand (1,000) square
feet and every two-family or any multi-family dwelling unit located in the Multi-Family Residential District shall have a minimum
floor area of not less than seven hundred and fifty (750) square feet. Every single-family of two-family dwelling unit in this district
shall have a minimum of two-thirds of the required minimum floor area on the ground level (i.e., 750 sq. ft.). Each dwelling unit
in this district shall also have a front building dimension of not less than thirty (30) feet measured at the foundation. The minimum
front building dimension shall be maintained not less than thirty-three (33) percent of the length of the longest building side wall.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -21-
ARTICLE VIII
R-4 MULTI-FAMILY SENIOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Section 8.01 - Intent. The Multi-Family Residential District is established in recognition of the preferences of senior citizen housing
in the State of Michigan.
Section 8.02 - Uses Permitted by Right. Land, buildings or structures in this zoning district may be used for the following
purposes only:
A. Single-family, two-family and multi-family dwellings and accessory uses including Group Homes and Adult
Foster Care Facilities (see Article XXI, Section 21.03).
B. Any essential service as defined in this Ordinance.
Section 8.03 - Uses Permitted by Special Use Permit. The following uses are permitted in this district subject to obtaining
a special use permit as provided in Article XX.
A. Home occupations as a special use pursuant to Article XX, VIII< Section 18.09..
B. Bed and breakfast operations in compliance with Article XXIII, Section 18.02.
C. Child care, convalescent, nursing care as part of a home occupation.
D. Parks, schools, Churches and City or other government agency building.
E. Group homes and adult foster care facilities (having more than six (6) residents) pursuant to Article XXI, Section
21.03).
F. Utility transmission facilities not deemed essential services.
Section 8.04 - Accessory Buildings and Structures . Accessory buildings customarily incidental to uses herein permitted may not
be erected, altered or used in this district except in conformity with Article XVII, Section 17.14.
Section 8.05 - Signs Permitted. Signs permitted in accordance with the City Buchanan Sign Ordinance, Article 9B of the City
of Buchanan Compiled Ordinances.
Section 8.06 - Parking Requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided in conformance with Article XIX, Section 19.04.
Section 8.07 - Visual Screening Requirements. An adequate visual blockage screen between any outdoor storage area in the
side or rear yards shall be required. This visual blockage shall be no less than six (6) feet in height in compliance with the standards
set forth in Article XVIII, Section 18.06.
Section 8.08 - Building Height Regulations. No residential building or structure shall exceed two and one half (2) stories
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -22- Public Consulting Team
nor exceed forty (40) feet in height.
Section 8.09 - Yard, Setback and Lot Area Regulations. No principal building or structure, nor any enlargement thereof, shall
be hereafter erected except in conformance with the following yard, lot area, and frontage requirements:
A. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard of no less than twenty-five (25) feet.
B. Side Yard: There shall be one (1) side yard which shall not be less than five (5) feet with the setback dimension
of both side yards totaling not less than twenty (20) feet. In the event the yard abuts an R-1A, R-1B or R-2
residential zoning lot, a minimum side yard setback of twenty-five (25) feet is required.
Side Yard Street Frontage Setback: The side yard shall be not less than twenty (20) feet.
C. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard of no less than twenty (20) feet for residential use. In the event the yard
abuts an R-1A, R-1B or R-2 residential zoning lot, a minimum rear yard setback of twenty-five (25) feet is
required.
D. Lot Area: The minimum lot area shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet for a single-family or two-family
structure. The minimum lot size shall increase by one-thousand square feet for each dwelling unit in excess of
two.
E. Lot Frontage and Depth: The minimum frontage shall be eighty (80) feet and the minimum lot depth one hundred
ten (110) feet, respectively
F. Maximum Building Lot Coverage: The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed forty-five (45) percent.
Section 8.10 - Area of Dwelling. Every single-family dwelling shall have a floor area of not less than one thousand (1,000) square
feet and every two-family or multi-family dwelling unit in the Multi-Family Residential District shall have a minimum floor area
of not less than seven hundred and fifty (750) square feet. Every single-family of two-family dwelling unit in this district shall have
a minimum of two-thirds of the required minimum floor area on the ground level (i.e., 750 sq. ft.). Each dwelling unit in this district
shall also have a front building dimension of not less than thirty (30) feet measured at the foundation. The minimum front building
dimension shall be maintained not less than thirty-three (33) percent of the length of the longest building side wall.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -23-
ARTICLE IX
C - 1 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
Section 9.01 - Intent. The Neighborhood Commercial District is established as a district in which the principal use of land is
to provide for the retailing of commodities classed as convenience goods, such as groceries and drugs, and the furnishing of certain
personal services such as beauty shops, barber shops, and pickup stations for laundry and dry cleaning.
Section 9.02 - Uses Permitted by Right. Land, buildings or structures in this zoning district may be used for the following
purposes only:
A. Retail, personal service and related commercial establishments; restaurants; professional service and other offices;
assembly halls of schools, churches and other organizations; financial institutions, including automated teller
machines; group homes, including nursing, child and adult foster care facilities not elsewhere regulated; florist
and greenhouse commercial businesses; funeral homes; furniture stores; city and other government buildings;
lodging facilities - bed & breakfast operations; lodges, fraternal, labor and social organizations, and accessory uses
as regulated hereafter.
B. Residential dwelling units not located on the first floor.
C. Any essential service as defined by this Ordinance.
Section 9.03 - Uses Permitted by Special Use Permit. The following uses are permitted in this district subject to obtaining
a special use permit as provided in Article XVIII, Section 18.09.
A. Other uses when determined to be similar and compatible with the intent of the zoning district by the Plan
Commission.
B. Utility transmission facilities not deemed essential services.
Section 9.04 - Uses Excluded. No junk yard, recycling operation or business involving livestock, or business likely to create
detrimental noise, odors, fumes, radiation or vibration, as determined by the Plan Commission shall be located or operated in this
district.
Section 9.05 - Accessory Buildings and Structures . Accessory buildings customarily incidental to uses herein permitted may not
be erected, altered or used in this district.
Section 9.06 - Signs Permitted. Signs permitted in accordance with the City Buchanan Sign Ordinance, Article 9B of the City
of Buchanan Compiled Ordinances.
Section 9.07 - Parking Requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided in conformance with Article XIX, Section 19.04.
Section 9.08 - Visual Screening Requirements. Every commercial lot or parcel of land that abuts a lot or parcel of land zoned
for residential purposes must provide an adequate visual blockage screen between the commercial and residential lot or parcel of
land. This visual blockage shall be no less than six (6) feet in height, in compliance with the standards set forth in Article XVIII,
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -24- Public Consulting Team
Section 18.06.
Section 9.09 - Building Height Regulations. No commercial building or other buildings or structures shall exceed two and
one-half (2) stories nor exceed forty (40) feet in height.
Section 9.10 - Yard, Setback and Lot Area Requirements. No principal building or structure, nor any enlargement thereof, shall
be hereafter erected except in conformance with the following yard and setback requirements:
A. Front Yard: There is no requirement for a front yard. In the event the zoning lot abuts a residentially zoned lot,
a minimum twenty-five (25) a foot front yard setback is required.
B. Side Yard: There is no requirement for a side yard. In the event the zoning lot abuts a residentially zoned lot, a
minimum thirty (30) a foot side yard setback is required.
C. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard of no less than ten (10) feet in depth. In the event the zoning lot abuts a
residentially zoned lot, a minimum a twenty-five (25) a rear yard setback is required.
D. Lot Area: The minimum lot area shall be seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
E. Lot Frontage and Depth: The minimum frontage shall be seventy (70) feet wide and the minimum lot depth one
hundred (100) feet, respectively.
F. Maximum Building Lot Coverage: The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed sixty-five (65) percent.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -25-
ARTICLE X
C - 2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
Section 10.01 - Intent. The Commercial District is established as a district in which the principal use of land is to provide for
the retailing of commodities classed as convenience goods, such as handled in super markets and drug stores, limited types of
durable goods, such as household furnishings and hardware, variety stores, and the furnishing of services such as gasoline stations,
apparel shops and financial institutions. The district should be located on or near arterial streets and should be within convenient
driving distance of adjacent neighborhoods.
Section 10.02 - Uses Permitted by Right. Land, buildings or structures in this zoning district may be used for the following
purposes only:
A. Any and all retail, personal service and related commercial establishments; restaurants; professional service and
any and all office uses including research and laboratory and testing facilities; auto sales and repair, financial
institutions, including automated teller machines; florist and greenhouse commercial businesses; funeral homes;
furniture stores; city and other government buildings; lodging facilities, including hotels and motels; lodges,
fraternal, labor and social organizations; theaters and amusement enterprises as defined in this ordinance; and
accessory uses as regulated hereafter.
B. Any essential service as defined by this Ordinance.
Section 10.03 - Uses Permitted by Special Use Permit. The following uses are permitted in this district subject to obtaining
a special use permit as provided in Article XVIII, Section 18.09.
A. Any festivals and/or events including, fairs, outdoor dances, temporary displays, circuses and other similar
activities including the provision of food and beverages for consumption on premises provided such food
operations and facilities meet the requirements of the Berrien County Health Department that are conducted by
private businesses or not-for-profit organizations on private (or public property with permission granted by the
City Commission) designed to be temporary in nature, that being less than fourteen (14) days in duration.
B. Other uses when determined to be similar and compatible with the intent of the zoning district by the Plan
Commission.
C. Utility transmission facilities not deemed essential services.
Section 10.04 - Uses Excluded. No residential living units located on the first floor, or any type nor junk yard, recycling operation
or business involving livestock, or business likely to create detrimental noise, odors, fumes, radiation or vibration, as determined
by the Plan Commission shall be located or operated in this district.
Section 10.05 - Accessory Buildings and Structures. Accessory buildings customarily incidental to uses herein permitted may not
be erected, altered or used in this district except in conformity with the yard and lot requirements of this district.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -26- Public Consulting Team
Section 10.06 - Signs Permitted. Signs permitted in accordance with the City Buchanan Sign Ordinance, Article 9B of the City
of Buchanan Compiled Ordinances.
Section 10.07 - Parking Requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided in conformance with Article XVIII, Section 18.04.
Section 10.08 - Visual Screening Requirements. Every commercial lot or parcel of land that abuts a lot or parcel of land zoned
for residential purposes must provide an adequate visual blockage screen between the commercial and residential lot or parcel of
land. This visual blockage shall be no less than six (6) feet in height in compliance with the standards set forth in Article XVIII,
Section 18.06.
Section 10.09 - Building Height Regulations. No commercial building or other buildings or structure shall exceed three (3)
stories nor exceed forty (40) feet in height.
Section 10.10 - Yard, Setback and Lot Area Requirements. No principal building or structure, nor any enlargement thereof, shall
be hereafter erected except in conformance with the following yard and setback requirements:
A. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard of no less than twenty-five (25) feet in depth. In the event the Zoning lot
abuts a residentially zoned lot, a minimum thirty (30) foot front yard setback is required.
B. Side Yard: There is no requirement for a side yard. In the event the zoning lot abuts a residentially zoned lot, a
minimum thirty (30) foot side yard setback is required.
C. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard of no less than twenty-five (25) feet in depth. In the event the zoning lot
abuts a residentially zoned lot, a minimum thirty (30) foot rear yard setback is required.
D. Lot Area: The minimum lot area shall be ten thousand five hundred (10,000) square feet.
E. Lot Frontage and Depth: The minimum frontage shall be fifty (50) feet wide and the minimum depth one hundred
twenty-five (125) feet, respectively.
F. Maximum Building Lot Coverage: The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed sixty-five (65) percent.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -27-
ARTICLE X I
C - 3 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
Section 11.01 - Intent. The Central Business District is established as a district in which the principal use of land is to provide
retailing, parking, personal and business services of all kinds satisfying the needs of residents of the entire community and the
outlying trade area.
Section 11.02 - Uses Permitted by Right. Land, buildings or structures in this zoning district may be used for the following
purposes only:
A. Any and all retail, personal service and related commercial establishments; restaurants; professional service and
any and all office uses including research and laboratory and testing facilities; financial institutions, including
automated teller machines; group homes; florist and greenhouse commercial businesses; funeral homes; furniture
stores; city and other government buildings; lodging facilities including hotels and motels; lodges; fraternal, labor
and social organizations; theaters and amusement enterprises as defined in this ordinance (except new or uses
vehicle sales and/or repair); and accessory uses as regulated hereafter.
B. Residential dwelling units not located on the first floor.
C. Any essential service as defined by this Ordinance.
Section 11.03 - Uses Permitted by Special Use Permit. The following uses are permitted in this district subject to obtaining
a special use permit as provided in Article XVIII, Section 18.09.
A. Any festivals and/or events including, fairs, outdoor dances, temporary displays, circuses and other similar
activities including the provision of food and beverages for consumption on premises provided such food
operations and facilities meet the requirements of the Berrien County Health Department that are conducted by
private businesses or not-for-profit organizations on private (or public property with permission granted by the
City Commission) designed to be temporary in nature, that being less than fourteen (14) days in duration.
B. Other uses when determined to be similar and compatible with the intent of the zoning district by the Plan
Commission.
C. Utility transmission facilities not deemed essential services.
Section 11.04 - Site and Facade Plan Required. Prior to the issuance of a building permit in the C-3 Central Business District
for any new construction or for the remodeling of any existing building or structure which will involve the exterior facade or other
exterior surface in any way, the Zoning Administrator shall cause the application including a site and a facade plan prepared pursuant
to the provisions of Article XXII, Section 22.05 to be submitted to the Downtown Development Authority for review and
determination with compliance with the published design and color standards for the Central Business District. The Downtown
Development Authority shall notify the applicant concerning any features and colors inconsistent with the approved standards. Any
proposed new construction or remodeling of any existing buildings found to be inconsistent with the standards for the district by
the Downtown Development Authority shall be disqualified for any incentive offered by the City or Downtown Development
Authority.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -28- Public Consulting Team
Section 11.05 - Uses Excluded. No junk yard, recycling operation or business involving livestock, or business likely to create
detrimental noise, odors, fumes, radiation or vibration, including auto sales and repair establishments as determined by the Plan
Commission shall be located or operated in this district.
Section 11.06 - Accessory Buildings and Structures. Accessory buildings customarily incidental to uses herein permitted may not
be erected, altered or used in this district except in conformity with the yard and lot requirements of this district.
Section 11.07 - Signs Permitted. Signs permitted in accordance with the City Buchanan Sign Ordinance, Article 9B of the City
of Buchanan Compiled Ordinances.
Section 11.08 - Parking Requirements. Parking shall be provided in conformance with Article XIX, Section 19.04.
Section 11.09 - Building Height Regulations. No commercial building or other buildings or structure shall exceed three (3)
stories nor exceed forty (40) feet in height.
Section 11.10 - Yard, Setback and Lot Area Requirements. No principal building or structure, nor any enlargement thereof, shall
be hereafter erected except in conformance with the following yard and setback requirements:
A. Front Yard: There is no requirement for a front yard. In the event the zoning lot abuts a residentially zoned lot,
a minimum thirty (30) foot front yard setback is required.
B. Side Yard: There is no requirement for a side yard. In the event the zoning lot abuts a residentially zoned lot, a
minimum thirty (30) foot side yard setback is required.
C. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard of no less than fifteen (15) feet in depth. In the event the zoning lot abuts
a residentially zoned lot, a minimum thirty (30) foot rear yard setback is required.
D. Lot Area: There is no minimum lot size requirement.
E. Lot Frontage and Depth: There is no minimum lot frontage and depth requirement.
F. Maximum Building Lot Coverage: There is no maximum lot coverage requirement.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -29-
ARTICLE XII
I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Section 12.01 - Intent. The Light Industrial District is established as a district in which the principal use of land is for certain
industries which do not emit noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare, and other influences sufficient to constitute an adverse
influence and detract from adjacent residential areas and commercial uses near or abutting the Light Industrial District.
Section 12.02 - Uses Permitted by Right. Land, buildings or structures in this zoning district may be used for the following
purposes only:
A. Assembly of machine and other products from previously prepared parts, bottling of non-hazardous liquids,
manufacture and processing of food products, warehousing, dry cleaning processing plants, assembly of
automotive and any auto related equipment, commercial laundries, machine and fabrication shops, and and
storage of goods and materials; and accessory uses as regulated hereafter.
B. Any essential service as defined by this Ordinance.
Section 12.03 - Uses Permitted by Special Use Permit. The following uses are permitted in this district subject to obtaining
a special use permit as provided in Article XX.
A. The sale of any goods manufactured on premise, provided there shall be no outdoor display of goods and
merchandise.
B. Other uses when determined to be similar and compatible with the intent of the zoning district by the Plan
Commission.
C. Utility transmission facilities not deemed essential services.
Section 12.04 - Uses Excluded. No junk yard, recycling operation or business involving livestock, or business likely to create
detrimental noise, odors, fumes, radiation or vibration, as determined by the Plan Commission shall be located or operated in this
district.
Section 12.05 - Accessory Buildings and Structures. Accessory buildings customarily incidental to uses herein permitted may not
be erected, altered or used in this district except in conformity with the yard and lot requirements of this district.
Section 12.06 - Signs Permitted. Signs permitted in accordance with the City Buchanan Sign Ordinance, Article 9B of the City
of Buchanan Compiled Ordinances.
Section 12.07 - Parking Requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided in conformance with Article XIX, Section 19.04.
Section 12.08 - Visual Screening Requirements. Every lot or parcel of land that abuts a lot or parcel of land zoned for
residential purposes must provide an adequate visual blockage screen between that commercial and residential lot or parcel of land.
This visual blockage shall be no less than six (6) feet in height in compliance with the standards set forth in Article XVIII, Section
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -30- Public Consulting Team
18.06.
Section 12.09 - Building Height Regulations. No commercial building or other buildings or structure shall exceed two and
one-half (2) stories nor exceed forty (40) feet in height.
Section 12.10 - Yard, Setback and Lot Area Requirements. No principal building or structure, nor any enlargement thereof, shall
be hereafter erected except in conformance with the following yard and setback requirements:
A. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard of no less than ten (10) feet. In the event the zoning lot abuts a residentially
zoned lot, a minimum forty-five (45) foot front yard setback is required.
B. Side Yard: There is no requirement for a side yard. In the event the zoning lot abuts a residentially zoned lot, a
minimum forty-five (45) foot side yard setback is required.
C. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard of no less than twenty (20) feet in depth. In the event the zoning lot abuts
a residentially zoned lot, a minimum forty-five (45) a foot rear yard setback is required.
D. Lot Area: The minimum lot area shall be seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet.
E. Lot Frontage and Depth: The minimum frontage shall be sixty (60) feet wide and the minimum lot depth one
hundred twenty-five(125) feet, respectively.
F. Maximum Building Lot Coverage: The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed eighty (80) percent.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -31-
ARTICLE XIII
I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Section 13.01 - Intent. The Heavy Industrial District is established as a district in which the principal use of land is for heavy
commercial and industrial establishments, which may create noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare, and other influences
which are not properly associated with or compatible with residential, commercial or Light Industrial districts.
Section 13.02 - Uses Permitted by Right. Land, buildings or structures in this zoning district may be used for the following
purposes only:
A. Any use permitted by right in the I-1 Light Industrial District.
B. Any essential service as defined by this Ordinance.
Section 13.03 - Uses Permitted by Special Use Permit. The following uses are permitted in this district subject to obtaining
a special use permit as provided in Article XX.
A. Any use not permitted by right when permitted by the Plan Commission pursuant Article XX.
B. Utility transmission facilities not deemed essential services.
Section 13.04 - Uses Excluded. No junk yard, recycling operation or business involving livestock, or business likely to create
detrimental noise, odors, fumes, radiation or vibration, which can be detected by persons of normal auditory or olfactory capacity
at the closest dwelling unit located on a residential zoned lot abutting the zoning lot on which the I-1 Light Industrial business is
located, as determined by the Plan Commission shall be located or operated in this district.
Section 13.05 - Accessory Buildings and Structures. Accessory buildings customarily incidental to uses herein permitted may
not be erected, altered or used in this district except in conformity with the yard and lot requirements of this district.
Section 13.06 - Signs Permitted. Signs permitted in accordance with the City Buchanan Sign Ordinance, Article 9B of the City
of Buchanan Compiled Ordinances.
Section 13.07 - Parking Requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided in conformance with Article XI, Section 19.04.
Section 13.08 - Visual Screening Requirements. Every lot or parcel of land that abuts a lot or parcel of land zoned for
residential purposes must provide an adequate visual blockage screen between that commercial and residential lot or parcel of land.
This visual blockage shall be no less than six (6) feet in height, in compliance with the standards set forth in Article XVIII, Section
18.06.
Section 13.09 - Building Height Regulations. No commercial building or other buildings or structure shall exceed two and
one-half (2) stories or exceed forty (40) feet in height.
Section 13.10 - Yard, Setback and Lot Area Requirements. No principal building or structure, nor any enlargement thereof, shall
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -32- Public Consulting Team
be hereafter erected except in conformance with the following yard and setback requirements:
A. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard of no less than ten (10) feet. In the event the zoning lot abuts a residentially
zoned lot, a minimum forty-five (45) foot front yard setback is required.
B. Side Yard: There is no requirement for a side yard. In the event the zoning lot abuts a residentially zoned lot, a
minimum forty-five (45) foot side yard setback is required.
C. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard of no less than twenty (20) feet in depth. In the event the zoning lot abuts
a residentially zoned lot, a minimum forty-five (45) foot rear yard setback is required.
D. Lot Area: The minimum lot area shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
E. Lot Frontage and Depth: The minimum frontage shall be one hundred (100) feet wide and the minimum lot depth
two hundred (200) feet, respectively.
F. Maximum Building Lot Coverage: The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed eighty (80) percent.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -33-
ARTICLE XIV
CD CLUSTER RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
(OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION)
Section 14.01 - Intent. The Cluster Residential Development (overlay) District is the an alternative development process from the
traditional zoning regulations governing residential development as required by Section 4f of the City and Village Zoning Act, P.A.
207 of 1921, as amended. Specifically, the Article provides the option for a developer or land owner to develop the same number
of dwelling units as authorized by the underlying zoning district regulation on eighty (80) percent, or less (at the discretion of the
local municipality), of the property where such undeveloped portion of the property is dedicated as open space in perpetuity.
Section 14.02 - Open Space Defined. Open space for the terms of this Ordnance is defined as land other than streets, roads,
driveways, parking areas, building lots, landscaped yard areas immediately surrounding building and structures and any other
portion of the property not left in (or restored) with natural vegetative cover (or left for agricultural production uses) greater that
twenty five (25) feet wide and running continuous and contiguous throughout the proposed cluster development, except for the
crossing of streets, roads and walkways.
Section 14.03 - Relationship to Underlying Zoning Regulations. The Cluster Residential Development (overlay) District
option for land development is allowable for use on any vacant and undeveloped parcel of land located within a R-1A&B, R-2 R-3,
and R-4 Residential Zoning District having minimum of two (2) acres of land area.
A. Uses Permitted by Right and Special Use Permit. Any use permitted by right and any use permitted by special use
permit allowable by the terms of the underlying zoning district in which the property is located shall be permitted within
a cluster development provided any special use permit shall be issued in accordance with the terms of this Ordinance.
B. Applicable Gross Density. The gross density of development of the subject property shall be determined by dividing the
minimum lot size required by the underlying zoning district in which the property is located into the gross square feet of
the property to be developed; arithmetically rounded to a whole number.
C. Setback, Lot Frontage and Building Height Provisions. All cluster developments shall provide a front, rear and side
yard setbacks around the perimeter of the property line equal to the minimum requirements of the underlying zoning district
in which the property is located. The lot frontage of the cluster development shall (unless varied by the Zoning Board of
Appeals) conform to the minium lot frontage requirement of the underlying zoning district in which the property is located.
Building height requirements shall conform to the requirement of the underlying zoning district in which the property is
located.
D. Public Water and Wastewater Requirements. No cluster development shall be approved which does not provide onsite
public water and wastewater service to all habitable buildings and structures.
Section 14.04 - Site Plan and Rezoning Approval Requirements. An application for the approval of a cluster development
shall be accompanied with a site plan and any fee established by this Ordinance (See Article XXVI, Section 26.04) and shall be
processed in accordance with Articles XXII and XXV. Approval of a cluster development is a rezoning of the subject property
designating the property as an Cluster Development (overlay) District.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -34- Public Consulting Team
Section 14.05 - Plat of Subdivision or Condo Subdivision Plan (Exhibit C) Requirement. All cluster developments shall be
recorded as a Plat of Subdivision pursuant to the Michigan Land Division Act, P.A. 87 of 1997, as amended (formally the Michigan
Subdivision Control Act) or a Subdivision Plan (Exhibit C to the Master Deed) pursuant to the requirements of the Michigan
Condominium Act, P.A. 58 of 1978, as amended.
Section 14.06 - Permanent Open Space Requirements. Permanent open space, for the terms of this Ordinance, shall mean
permanently undeveloped by means of a conservation easement, plat dedication, restrictive covenant or other legal means that runs
with the land, in a form acceptable to the Plan Commission and City Commission. In acceptance of the plat/plan of subdivision,
pursuant to the Michigan Land Division or Condominium Act, the Plan Commission and City Commission shall consider the form
of management and maintenance of the open space and apply such conditions to the approval of the Plat of Subdivision or Plan of
Subdivision to assure that such open space shall be properly managed and maintained in perpetuity and that the conservation
easement, deed restrictions or condominium dedication shall be adequately monitored and enforced by the organization or entity
holding title to the easement or property rights of the designated open space.
Section 14.07- Incentive Bonus Density for Increased Open Space. The Planning Commission may approve upon request by
the developer and upon finding the proposed plan increases the amount of open space beyond twenty (20) percent of the total lot
area, an increase in the number of units allowable by the terms of the underlying zoning district. The increase in the number of units
shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the gross density; the total number of units allowable by the terms of the underlying zoning
district.
Section 14.08 - Variances Due to Unique Site Conditions. Upon finding by the Plan Commission that a particulate property
proposed for development as a cluster development has significant natural features; specifically topography, plant and/or animal
habitat, wetlands, or agricultural production uses, the Planning Commission may recommend the strict terms of this section of the
Ordinance be waved by the Zoning Board of Appeals for the purpose of protecting and preserving the unique and significant natural
features of the property.
Section 14.09 - Zoning Map Designation. Upon approval of a Cluster Development pursuant to this Article, the City Clerk shall
indicate the subject property on the Official Zoning Map as a Cluster Development (overlay) District by designating the property
CD and including the data of the rezoning approval in the record of Maps amendments.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -35-
ARTICLE XV
PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
Section 15.01 - Purpose of Planned Unit Development. The use, area, height, bulk and placements regulations of this
Ordinance are primarily applicable to the usual situation of one (1) principal building on one (1) lot. These requirements would in
certain developments have results that would less serve the public health, safety, and welfare than if a controlled degree of flexibility
were allowed. A development may be of such size as to justify permitting certain specifically defined departures from the regulations
of the zoning district. Permitting these uses can in certain cases increase convenience, be comparable with the overall character of
the district, and not be injurious to the adjoining properties, subject to limitations of the zoning district in which the property is
located as set fort in Articles V through XIII.
Section 15.02 - Intent. A Planned Unit Development is intended to permit the following:
1. Variety and flexibility of land development for residential, commercial and industrial purposes and auxiliary use
that are necessary to meet the changes in technology and demand and which will be consistent with the best
interests of the City as a whole and that will encourage a creative approach in the development of land;
2. Utilization of sites that are characterized by special features of geography, topography, size or shape for their best
potential.
Section 15.03 - Applicability to All Land Division and Condominium Plats. Any plat submitted for recording under
the terms of the State of Michigan Land Division Act, P.A. 87 of 1997, as amended (formally Subdivision Control Act) or the
Condominium Act. P.A. 58 of 1978, as amended shall be submitted and processed as a Planned Unit Development, pursuant to the
terms of this Article and other applicable sections of this Ordinance.
Section 15.04 - Procedures for Submission of PUD Plans. These procedures are intended to state the requirements at each stage
of the review process. However, each applicant shall have the opportunity to submit an application for approval of the Planned Unit
Development at either the Preliminary PUD Development Plan stage or the Final PUD Development Plan stage, if the requirements
are fulfilled according to this Ordinance.
Section 15.05 - Pre-Application Conference. Before submitting an application for a Planned Unit Development, an applicant
at his option may confer with the City Plan Commission to obtain information and guidance before entering into binding
commitments or incurring substantial expense in the preparation of plans, surveys and other data.
Section 15.06 - Contents and Submission of a Preliminary PUD Development Plan. P r o ce ed ings a r e c omme n c ed b y
application for approval of a Planned Unit Development, to the City of Buchanan with payment of the fee established by this
Ordinance (See Article XXVI, Section 26.04) and submission of a completed application with a Preliminary PUD Development Plan
prepared in accord with the following specifications:
1. A Preliminary PUD Development Plan should include maps and/or diagrams showing enough of the area
surrounding the proposed Planned Unit Development to demonstrate the relationship of the Planned Unit
Development to adjoining uses. The maps and/or diagrams which are part of the Preliminary Planned Unit
Development maybe in general schematic form containing the following information:
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -36- Public Consulting Team
(A) The existing topographic character of the land with contours shown at intervals of not greater than five
(5) foot intervals;
(B) Existing and proposed land uses and the approximate location of buildings and other accessory
structures;
(C) The character, type, and number of dwelling units or other principal and accessory buildings proposed;
(D) The approximate location of major arterial and collector streets and provision for parking vehicles;
(E) The locations of all public uses, including schools, parks, playgrounds, common open spaces, etc.;
(F) the approximate location of existing utility systems;
(G) Such other information, maps and plans as the Plan Commission may request.
2. A complete Application for Planned Unit Development on a form provided by the City.
3. A complete Petition for Rezoning form.
Section 15.07 - Approval of Preliminary PUD Development Plan. Procedures for the approval of a P reliminary PUD
Development Plan are as follows:
1. Public Hearing for Rezoning to PUD Zoning District. Upon submission of a complete application for
approval of a Preliminary PUD Development Plan, the Plan Commission shall, within a reasonable time period,
schedule a public hearing on said application with private property and public notice provided as required for
rezoning.
2. Approval of Rezoning to PUD Zoning District. Pursuant to the provision of this Ordinance concerning the
rezoning of land, the Plan Commission shall conduct the required public hearing and submit to the City
Commission a recommendation for the approval or denial of the rezoning of the property submitted by the
applicant.
3. Tentative Approval of Preliminary PUD Development Plan. The Plan Commission shall, upon the
completion of the public hearing and after rendering a decision concerning the rezoning of the property submitted
by the applicant, consider a motion that the Preliminary PUD Development Plan:
A. be granted approval as submitted;
B. be granted tentative approval subject to specific conditions not included in the PUD Development Plan
as submitted; or
C. be denied approval.
4. Form of PUD Development Plan Approval or Denial Action. The grant or denial of tentative approval
shall be in the form of a written statement and shall include findings of fact and other factual findings which set
forth the reasons for the approval or denial of the applicants request for approval of the PUD Development Plan.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -37-
Section 15.08 - Status of Preliminary PUD Development Plan After Approval. Procedures for the notification of the applicant
and status of the approval of a Preliminary PUD Development Plan are as follows:
1. Notification of Applicant. Within five days after the approval of the rezoning of the subject property and upon
approval of the Preliminary PUD Development Plan by the Plan Commission, notice of approval of rezoning
ordinance and approval of the Preliminary PUD Development Plan shall be mailed via first class postage to the
applicant by the City Clerk or Zoning Administrator.
2. Status of Preliminary PUD Development Plan. Approval (or approval with conditions or denial) of a
Preliminary PUD Development Plan shall not qualify as a Land Division Act plat or Condominium Act plat for
the purposes of recording with the Berrien County Register of Deeds. A PUD Development Plan which has been
given tentative approval as submitted or which has been given tentative approval subject to conditions that the
applicant has agreed, shall not be modified or revoked or otherwise impaired by action of the City pending an
application or applications for final approval without the express consent of the applicant; provided an application
for final approval is filed, or in the case of staged development, provided applications are filed within the time
or times specified in the action granting approval or tentative approval of the Preliminary PUD Development Plan
by the Plan Commission.
3. Abandonment of Preliminary PUD Development Plan by Applicant. In the event that a Preliminary PUD
Development Plan is given tentative approval and thereafter, but prior to final approval, the applicant shall choose
to abandon said Preliminary PUD Development Plan or shall fail to submit an application or applications for final
approval within the required time period, the approval or tentative approval shall be deemed revoked, and such
action shall be noted in the record of the City Clerk. Upon abandonment, the Plan Commission may consider
action recommending rezoning of the subject property from PUD Planned Unit Development to its prior zoning
district classification.
Section 15.09 - Approval of Final PUD Development Plan. Procedures for the approval of a Final PUD Development Plan are
as follows:
1. Submission Deadline and Extension. Within a reasonable time after the approval of the rezoning and
Preliminary PUD Development Plan, but not more than six (6) months thereafter, the applicant shall file with the
Plan Commission a Final PUD Development Plan containing in final detailed form the information required as
herein after provided. At its discretion and for good cause, the Plan Commission may extend for six (6) months
the period for filing the Final PUD Development Plan. Contents of the Final PUD Development Plan shall include
a plat prepared in conformance with the specification required for recording a plat under the terms of the State
of Michigan Land Division Act, P.A. 87 of 1997, as amended (formally Subdivision Control Act) or the
Condominium Act. P.A. 58 of 1978, as amended, signed and sealed by a State of Michigan Registered Surveyor.
Water and sewer system engineering drawings with accompanying State of Michigan Department of Public Health
or State of Michigan Department of Environmental Quality system extension permits signed and sealed by a State
of Michigan Licensed Professional Civil Engineer shall accompany the PUD Development Plan submission. Also
to be submitted by the applicant for approval by the City Engineer are a storm water drainage system management
plan and plans and specifications for all streets prepared in conformance with the City of Buchanan development
standards, which from time-to-time are adopted by the City Commission prepared, signed and sealed by a State
of Michigan Licensed Professional Civil Engineer. In addition, the Plan Commission may require such other maps
and/or drawings as deemed necessary to render a decision concerning the approval of a Final PUD Development
Plan.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -38- Public Consulting Team
2. Optional Public Hearing. The Plan Commission, at its discretion, many give notice and provide an
opportunity for the public to comment on the proposed Final PUD Development Plan.
3. Approval or Denial of Final PUD Development Plan. The Plan Commission shall review the proposed Final
PUD Development Plan, and shall approve the Final PUD Development Plan if it is in substantial compliance with
the Preliminary PUD Development Plan and contains in final detailed form the information herein set forth.
4. Application of Conditions and Restrictions. Prior to the approval of any Final PUD Development Plan, the
Plan Commission may recommend the adoption of such covenants, conditions, and restrictions upon the
establishment, location, constructions, maintenance, and operation of the Planned Unit Development as the Plan
Commission deems necessary for the purposes of the public interest and to secure compliance with the criteria
specified in this Ordinance.
5. Status of Final Approval of PUD Development Plan. After approval has been given, the use of land and the
construction, modification or alteration of any building or structures within the Planned Unit Development will
be governed by the approved Final PUD Development Plan rather than by any other provision of this Ordinance.
6. Minor Changes to Final PUD Development Plan. Any minor extensions, alternations, or modification of
existing buildings or structures may be authorized by the Plan Commission if they are consistent with the purposes
and intent of the Final PUD Development Plan.
7. Major Changed to Final PUD Development Plan. Any major change to a Final PUD Development Plan, as
determined by the Plan Commission, shall be made by the Plan Commission after processing an amendment to
the Final PUD Development Plan pursuant to the approval process for both the Preliminary and Final PUD
Development Plan approval.
8. Rescinding / Abandonment of Final PUD Development Plan Approval. In any case where construction has
not yet begun on an approved Planned Unit Development within one (1) year after the date of Final Approval of
a PUD Development Plan, or after a one (1) year extension thereof by the Plan Commission upon showing of
cause or upon written notification by the applicant that the proposed Planned Unit development will not be
constructed, the Plan Commission may rescind the Final PUD Development Plan approval and take such other
action to rezone the subject property back to its original zoning district classification.
Section 15.10 - Standards and Criteria For Planned Unit Developments. The PUD Development Plan of the Planned Unit
Development shall be consistent with the following standards for use of land, the use of, type and mass, design and location of
buildings, the density, common open space and public facilities servicing the site:
1. Variety of Building Types and Layout Design. The PUD Development Plan may increase the density of
the underlying zoning district classification by no more than twenty-five (25) percent where a variety of housing
or building types are provided including clustered housing, buildings sharing common walls, etc. are incorporated
in a unique design approved by the Plan Commission.
2. Building Lot Coverage. The building coverage ratio may be increased by twenty-five (25) percent by the
Planning Commission in combination with any approval granted in paragraph one (1) above.
3. Height Restrictions. The PUD Development Plan must conform to the height requirements of the zoning
district in which the subject property is located.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -39-
4. Mixture of Uses Permitted. A mixture of uses is permitted in any PUD Development Plan, amount and
location subject to approval by the Plan Commission
5. Perimeter Setback Requirement. Where ever possible, the applicant shall provide perimeter setbacks to
abutting properties at the same dimensions as required of the zoning district classification in which the property
is located subject to approval of the Plan Commission which may require greater setback distances when in the
opinion of the Plan Commission the proposed Planned Unit Development will have a detrimental effect on
abutting land uses.
6. Conveyance of Open Spaces and/or Common Elements. Any area designated as open space or
common elements (included limited common elements), shall be conveyed to an appropriate public body or
private owners association, as required by law.
7. Off-Street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking and loading shall be in conformance with the minimum
specifications of Article XIX for the land uses proposed within the Planned Unit Development.
8. Utilities. The proposed PUD Development Plan shall provide for installation of public water, sanitary
sewer and storm drainage meeting the standards of the City of Buchanan, as from time-to-time approved by the
City Commission.
9. Landscaping and Screening. Landscaping and screening shall be in conformance with the minimum
specifications of this ordinance as they pertain to the specific uses proposed within the Planned Unit Development.
The Plan Commission may require additional landscaping and screening when in the opinion of the Plan
Commission the proposed Planned Unit Development will have a detrimental effect on abutting land uses.
10. Pedestrian Pathways and Sidewalks. Pedestrian pathways and sidewalks shall be in conformance with the
minimum specifications and development standards of the City, as from time-to-time approved by the City
Commission, as they pertain to the specific uses proposed within the Planned Unit Development. The Plan
Commission may require additional pathways and sidewalks when in the opinion of the Plan Commission the
intensity of development requires additional pathways and sidewalks to safely move pedestrian traffic throughout
the Planned Unit Development.
11. Signs. Signs in the Planned Unit Development District shall comply with the City Buchanan Sign
Ordinance, Article 9B of the City of Buchanan Compiled Ordincances.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -40- Public Consulting Team
ARTICLE XVI
FLOODPLAIN (OVERLAY) DISTRICT
Section 16.01 - Intent. It is the intent of this Article to significantly reduce hazards to persons and damage to property as a result
of flood conditions in the City of Buchanan, and to comply with the provisions of the National Flood Insurance Program, as
constituted in accordance with the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, and subsequent enactments and the rules and regulations
promulgated in furtherance of the program by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The specific intent in establishing this
overlay district is:
1. The protection of human life, health and property from the dangerous and damaging effects of flood conditions;
2. The minimization of public expenditures for flood control projects, rescue and relief efforts in the aftermath of
flooding, repair of flood-damaged public facilities and utilities, and the redevelopment of flood-damaged homes,
neighborhoods, commercial and industrial areas;
3. The prevention of private and public economic loss and social disruption as a result of flood conditions;
4. The maintenance of stable development patterns not subject to the blighting influence of flood damage;
5. To ensure that the public has access to information indicating the location of land areas subject to periodic
flooding; and
6. To preserve the ability of floodplains to carry and discharge a 100-year (base) flood.
Section 16.02 - Delineation of Flood Hazard (Overlay) Zoning District.
1. Boundary Designated on Zoning Map. The flood hazard zone shall overlay existing zoning districts
delineated on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Buchanan. The boundaries of the flood hazard zone shall
coincide with the boundaries of the area of special flood hazard (Zone A), designated on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map and Flood Hazard Boundary Map for the City of Buchanan published by the Federal Emergency
Management Administration.
2. Final Determination of Flood Hazard Boundary Line. It shall be the responsibility of any property owner
or any other person with a dispute as to the exact location of the flood hazard area zone boundary on a specific
property to determine the exact location of the boundary through application for a determination of a flood hazard
boundary with the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.
3. Suspension of City Action Until Final Determination Is Made. The City shall suspend and hold in abeyance
the processing of any application for zoning or building permit until a final determination is made by the Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality and such documentation is filed with the Zoning Administrator.
4. Application of Other Laws and Requirements. In addition to other requirements of this Ordinance,
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -41-
applicable to development in the underlying zoning district, compliance with the requirements of this Article shall
be necessary for all developments occurring within the flood hazard area zone. Conflicts between the
requirements of this Article and other requirements of this Ordinance or any other State of Federal law or
regulation shall be resolved in favor of the most stringent requirements and the most stringent regulation shall
apply.
Section 16.03 - MEDQ Permit Required Prior to Issuance of City Building Permit. Development, including the erection of
structures of any type within a flood hazard area shall not occur except upon issuance of a building permit in accordance with the
requirements of this Ordinance and the Michigan Construction Code and only upon presentation of a permit issued by the Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ).
1. Applicable Standards. All construction shall meet the following standards:
A. The requirements of this Article;
B. The requirements of the underlying zoning districts and applicable general and special provision of this
Ordinance; and
C. All applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
2. Certificate of Compliance. Compliance with the standards of this Section shall be certified by a Michigan
Licensed Professional Civil Engineer. A copy said certification shall be furnished to the Zoning Administrator
prior to the issuance of a building permit.
3. Construction Standards. Any new construction and any alteration to existing building, structures and
infrastructure connections servicing any building and structure shall conform to the following standards:
A. Be designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure;
B. Be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;
C. Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
D. New and replacement water and sewer systems shall minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the system and on-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to the system
due to flooding;
E. The flood carrying capacity of any water course of floodway shall be maintained unless such
construction is permitted by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality subject to adequate
volume compensation as required by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.
F. The first habitable floor (including basements) is no less than one (1) foot higher than the based flood
elevation as determined by the Michigan Department of Environment Quality.
Section 16.04 - Land Division Requirements. Land shall not be divided in any manner by any means creating lot or parcel
which cannot be used in conformance with the requirements of this Article.
Section 16.05 - Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this Ordinance is considered reasonable
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -42- Public Consulting Team
for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study as administered by the Michigan Department
of Environmental Quality. Flood heights may increase by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jambs and bridge openings
restricted by debris. Approval of the use of land under this Article shall not be considered a guarantee or warranty of the safety from
flood damage.
This Ordinance does not imply that areas outside the flood hazard area will be free from flood damage. This Ordinance does not
create liability on the part of the City of Buchanan or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage which results from
reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -43-
ARTICLE XVII
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 17.01 - Scope of Regulations - Use of Land, Buildings and Structures. No building or land shall be used and no
building shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered, or relocated except for one or more of the uses herein permitted within the
district in which such building, structure, or land is located or for a use similar to and harmonious with such permitted uses, except
as provided in Article XXIV, Section 24.03 of this Ordinance.
Section 17.02 - Property Division Requirements. No lot or other parcel of land located in the City of Buchanan shall be further
partitioned or divided unless such partition or division is first approved, pursuant to provisions of the City of Buchanan Land
Division and/or Subdivision Ordinance and Development Standards.
Section 17.03 - Prohibition of Private Roads. There shall be no private roads permitted in the City of Buchanan.
Section 17.04 - Height Exceptions. The height requirements of all zones, except the Industrial Districts may be exceeded by
parapet walls not over four (4) feet in height, chimneys, roof mounted television and radio antennas (excluding cell towers and other
communications towers), cupolas, spires or other ornamental projections, or water towers. In the industrial districts, chimneys,
cooling and communication towers (when permitted pursuant to Section XVIII, Section 18.04) and other necessary appurtenances
are permitted above the height limitations provided they are located the same distance as their height from any adjoining property
line.
Section 17.05 - Each Principal Building Must Conform to District Requirements. Each principal building on a lot must
conform to the requirements of the Ordinance which would be applicable of each were located on a separate lot in the same district.
Section 17.06 - Corner Lots. No obstruction to vision (other than an existing building, post, column, grade, or tree) exceeding
thirty (30) inches in height shall be erected or maintained on any lot within the triangle formed by the street intersection and a line
drawn between points along two streets lines thirty (30) feet from the intersection.
Section 17.07 - Though Lots. Where a through lot under single individual ownership
extends from one street to another parallel or nearby parallel street or alley, the widest street shall be deemed the street upon which
the property fronts. No principal building may be erected on the rear lot.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -44- Public Consulting Team
Section 17.08 - Side Yard Width may be Varied. Where the side yard wall of a building is irregular or not parallel with
the side lot line, the side yard may be varied. Its average width may not be less than the required width, nor may it be narrower at
any point than five (50) feet.
Section 17.09 - Width of One Side Yard may be Reduced. The width of one
side yard may be reduced to not less than three (3) feet, provided that the combined side yards of the lot are not less than the
combined minimum required for the lot. Similarly, the distance between the proposed structure and another existing or proposed
structure on an adjacent lot, may not be less than the minimum sum of the two side yards. A reduction of width may only be
authorized by the Zoning Board of Appeals when warranted by the location of existing buildings, or when conducive to the desirable
development of two or more lots.
Section 17.10 - Side Yard of Corner Lot. Where the yard of a corner lot abuts a front yard of a lot in a Residential District, the
side yard of the corner lot shall be at least one-half the width of the front yard of the latter lot, but in no case less than fifteen (15)
feet.
Section 17.11 - Front Yard Exception. Where an unimproved lot (or a improved lot in the R-1B Single-Family residential
District) is situated between two improved lots, each having a principal building within twenty-five (25) feet of the side lot line of
the subject lot, the Zoning Administrator may approve a reduced front yard depth equal to that of the lessor front yard of the two
adjoining lots. However, a front yard may not be reduced below ten (10) feet.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -45-
Section 17.12 - Minimum Public Street Access Required. No dwelling may be erected on any lot which does not meet the
minimum frontage requirement of the zoning district on a public street. The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a variance where
a single lot has a minimum twenty (20) foot permanent unobstructed access easement or lot frontage connecting the lot with the
street, and where such access way is not more than three hundred (300) lineal feet from the edge of the public street to the closest
point of the building or structure.
Section 17.13 - Projections Into Yards. Unless otherwise specified below, projections into required yard are covered by the
provisions of the Michigan Construction Code.
1. Cornices, canopies, eves or other architectural features not required for structural support may project into a yard
not more than three (3) inches per foot of yard width required but may not exceed a total of three (3) feet.
2. Fire escapes and balconies to fire exists may not project into a front yard.
Section 17.14 - Accessory Structure Regulations in Residential Districts.
1. Unattached Accessory Structures. Accessory structures not attached to a principal structure
may be erected within one side yard or within the rear yard, in accordance with the following requirements:
A. Maximum Height. Not to exceed fifteen (15) feet.
B. Rear Yard Coverage. An unattached accessory structure may cover not more than forty (40) percent
of the rear yard.
C. Side Yard and Rear Yard Setback. An accessory structure must be located at least five (5) feet
from the side lot line and at least five (5) feet from the rear lot line.
D. Side Yard Setback - Corner Lot. Same as for principal buildings or structures as set forth in the
zoning district.
E. Distance from Principal Structure. An accessory structure must be located at least ten (10) feet
from every principal structure.
2. Attached Accessory Structures. An accessory structure attached to the principal building must comply with
the yard requirements for the principal building set forth in the zoning district.
Section 17.15 - Travel Trailers. The occupancy of travel trailers for more than seven (7) days as a temporary dwelling is limited
solely to areas designated as temporary camping areas by the City Manager.
Section 17.16 - Storage of Recreation Vehicles. An unoccupied recreational, travel trailer, boat, motor home, camping vehicle
(including trailers) or any similar vehicle; any boat trailer or other similar recreational vehicle not licensed to operate on the public
highways or trailer for such recreational vehicles, may be stored on a zoning lot so long as it is situated on the rear of such lots and
at least three (3) feet from any other structures, side or rear property line.
Section 17.17 - Fences. All fences hereinafter constructed in the City of Buchanan shall conform to the following standards:
1. Construction of a fence shall require issuance of a zoning compliance permit issued by the Zoning Administrator,
prior to construction or erection of the fence.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -46- Public Consulting Team
2. All fences shall be constructed to present a finished outside fence appearance to adjacent property and public
streets and alleys, by either:
F. Symmetrical construction having identical inside and outside face appearance including main anchor
posts and frame members.
G. Offset construction with main anchor posts and horizontal and vertical frame members visible on inside
face only and vertical and horizontal face members or materials mounted on an outside surface of a
frame and anchor post members.
4. Fences shall not exceed four (4) feet in height in the front yard, the area between the front property line and the
front building line, and fences located in the side or rear yard behind the front building line of the principal
structure shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.
5. Any form of electrified and/or barbed wire, or single strand wire fence or barrier is prohibited in all Residential
Districts.
6. Barbed wire, barbwire or any form of single strand wire fence or barrier is prohibited in any Commercial or
Industrial District except for the installation as cap wires on industrial grade cyclone type fence having a minimum
height from ground level to six (6) feet.
7. No fence shall inhibit corner vision requirements of Article XVII, Section 17.06.
8. Any fence maintained in violation of this section shall be deemed a hazard to public health and welfare and shall
constitute a violation of this Ordinance pursuant to Article XVI, Section 26.05.
Section 17.18 - Standards For All Exterior Lighting In all Districts. The construction or installation of all new lighting or the
replacement, refurbishment or repair of all existing lighting in all zoning districts shall conform to the City of Buchanan Compiled
Ordinances..
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -47-
ARTICLE XVIII
SPECIAL PROVISIONS INCLUDING HOME OCCUPATIONS
Section 18.01 - Lots Without Municipal Utilities. Not withstanding any other provision of this Ordinance, any lot not
serviced by a public water and/or sanitary sewer system may not be less than eighty (80) feet wide at the street line and not less than
twelve thousand (12,000) square feet in area per dwelling unit. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for construction of a
dwelling unit on any lot not served by a public water and/or sanitary sewer system, a permit for the installation of a well and/or onsite
sanitary sewer system issued by the Berrien County Health Department must be presented to the Zoning Administrator.
Section 18.02 - Bed & Breakfast Operations.
1. Bed and breakfast operation shall be subject to the following special provisions:
A. A residential structure shall not have or be converted to more rental rooms than the number of bedrooms which
exist at the time of enactment of this Ordinance and adequate living space must be preserved for manager or
owner's quarters. A common room for guest relaxation is required in these facilities. Unless owner occupied,
the manager must reside on and have more than a nominal equity interest in the premises.
B. Bathrooms must be furnished for guestrooms - One bathroom not to serve over four guestrooms.
C. No separate commercial cooking facilities as approved by the Michigan Department of Public Health other than
the residential kitchen are required for bed and breakfast operation if only a continental breakfast is served.
D. One sign, in residential areas shall be permitted. Size, location and design must comply with the City Buchanan
Sign Ordinance, Article 9B of the City of Buchanan Compiled Ordinances, and be authorized by Plan
Commission pursuant to Article XX.
E. Inspection and approval by the Zoning Administrator are required prior to occupancy of bed and breakfast
facilities. Berrien County Health Department approval is required if other than continental breakfast is planned
requireing the use of a commercial kitchen or commercial kitchen equipment.
F. The letting of bed and breakfast rooms shall be limited to short term occupancy not to exceed thirty (30)
continuous days.
2. A residence must contain a minimum of two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet of liveable floor space to be
converted into a bed and breakfast facility.
Section 18.03 - Adult Entertainment Facilities. Adult entertainment businesses, meeting the definition of adult entertainment
business as set forth in Article III or those similar in character, shall be subject to the following special provisions:
1. All businesses shall be the principal use of a building located in the I-1 or I-2 Industrial districts and subject to
the provisions of Article XXII, Site Plan Review and be approved as a Special Use in accordance with the
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -48- Public Consulting Team
provisions of Article XX, Special Uses.
2. No business shall be located within 1,000 feet, measured from the perimeter of the building to the lot line of
zoning lot containing a residential, commercial or public building.
. 3. All businesses shall be conducted in an enclosed building having an occupancy of less than 50 persons, as
determined by the Fire Chief or Zoning Administrator based on nationally recognized occupancy standards
established by the National Fire Insurance Board or Michigan Construction Code or other fire protection standard
organization.
4. Any building used may have not more than forty (40) per cent of the floor area devoted to storage purposes
incidental to such primary use.
Section 18.04 - Communication and Other Towers.
1. Intent To Provide for Wireless Communication Services
It is the intent of this ordinance to allow communication and other similar towers to serve the ever changing technology in the field
of personal and business communications for wireless communications as defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996 which
includes Federal Communications Commission (FCC) licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services including cellular,
personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging and
similar services that currently exist or that may in the future be developed. The term tower shall include all communication towers,
other antenna support structures, antennas, buildings/facilities and any similar structures necessary for the provision of wireless
communication services.
2. Policy of Collocation of Antenna and Antenna Arrays on Existing Structures
It is the policy of the City to encourage the collocation of antenna and antenna arrays on existing City owned structures including
existing water towers, communications towers and location of any new tower upon land owned by the City; specifically at the City
Hall or Public Works facilities. Location of an antenna /antenna array and related equipment shall be permitted as a special use
pursuant to the provisions of this ordnance. A proposal for the location of a new tower or communication structure for the purpose
of collocation of wireless communication antenna/antenna arrays and which meets the locational requirements and construction
standards set forth in paragraph 4, below, may be permitted as a special use issued by the Board of Zoning Appeals only on land
owned by the City as prescribed above or as prescribed in the following subsections.
3. Restriction Upon the Location of New Towers Unless Standards Are Met
It is a policy of the City to prohibit the location of any additional towers or other communication support structures within City limits
unless the applicant can demonstrate to the reasonable satisfaction of the Planning Commission and Board of Zoning Appeals and
the City Commission that the following conditions exists and the location of the proposed tower or other communication support
structure meets the locational requirements and construction standards as set forth in paragraph 4, below:
a. There is no existing tower or other communication support structure located within the City limits for which the
applicant's proposed antenna or antenna array can be attached which meets the applicant's engineering requirements.
b. There is no existing tower or other support structure located within the City having sufficient height to meet the
applicant's engineering requirements.
c. There is no existing tower or other support structure located within the City having sufficient structural strength to
support the applicant's proposed antenna or antenna array.
4. Location Requirements, Construction Standards and Other Conditions
All newly constructed towers, communication support structures and any related equipment shall conform to the following locational
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -49-
requirements, constructions standards and other conditions as follows:
a. Towers, not otherwise permitted in section 2 above, shall be allowed as a special use in industrial zoning districts.
b. The minimum lot size shall in be one (1.0) acre of land area. All lots shall have a minimum of one hundred twenty five
(125 feet) of road or street frontage.
c. The base of the tower or other communication structure shall be of the self-supporting pole type and not be of the
construction which require cable support of any type.
d. The tower must be setback from all property lines a distance equal to its height, unless engineering plans and
specifications have been verified by the City Engineer that the structural integrity of the tower will withstand the maximum
high wind velocity for the area, as reported by a nationally recognized weather service or City Building Code specifications,
and associated impacts, and the likelihood of a tower failure is minimal.
e. Accessory structures are limited to uses associated with the operation of the tower and may not be located any closer
to any property line than forty (40) feet.
f. Accessory structures shall not exceed six hundred (600) square feet of gross building area.
g. All other requirements of the zoning district in which the tower is located shall be enforced.
h. Security to prevent unauthorized access shall be provided for all fence and building enclosures. A written agreement
with the Fire Department concerning access for fire safety shall be provided to the City prior to approval of the special
use.
i. Engineering plans and specification for the tower, prepared by a State of Michigan Registered Engineer specializing in
structural engineering, shall be provided with the application for the special use.
j. Engineering plans and specifications for the tower mounting foundation and the foundation for any structure shall be
prepared by a State of Michigan Registered Engineer. These shall be accompanying the application for the special use.
Engineering plans shall include soil boring information for the site of the tower mounting foundation and any other
foundation in excess of four (4) feet in depth. The applicant shall provide a statement signed by a State of Michigan
Registered Professional Engineer that soils have been determined to be suitable for the tower mount foundation.
k. The applicant shall provide inspection and verification that the installation of the tower, mount and foundation have been
installed in compliance with the plans and specification and all applicable codes and standards. A statement, including the
date of the physical inspection, from a State of Michigan Registered Professional Engineer shall be provided to the City
Building Inspector prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for use of the tower indicating that the tower has been
installed in compliance with all applicable codes and standards.
1. All towers shall meet the standards of the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communications Commission and
any other applicable regulatory State of Michigan or Federal agency.
m. Communication towers in excess of one hundred(100)feet in height above grade level shall be prohibited within a
two(2) mile radius of a public or private airport or helipad.
n. No part of any tower shall be constructed, located or maintained at any time, permanently or temporarily, on or upon
any required setback area for the district in which the tower will be located. In no case shall a tower be located within forty
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -50- Public Consulting Team
(40) feet of a property line.
o. Metal towers shall be constructed of, or treated with, corrosive resistant material acceptable to the City.
p. Towers shall be grounded for protection against a direct strike by lighting and shall comply as to electrical wiring and
connections with all applicable local statutes, regulations and standards.
q. All attachments to any tower shall be designed to withstand a maximum uniform wind loading as prescribed in the City
Building Code. A statement signed by a State of Michigan Registered Professional Engineer shall be provided to the City
Building Inspector certifying the tower has been designed in conformance with applicable City Building Code wind loading
requirements.
r. All signals and remote control conductors extending substantially horizontally above the ground between the tower and
a structure, or between towers, shall be at least eight (8) feet above the ground at all points, unless buried underground.
s. Towers shall be located so there is room for vehicles doing maintenance to maneuver on the property owned or leased
by the applicant, including fire safety equipment.
t. The base of the tower shall occupy no more than five hundred (500) square feet of area.
u. Minimum spacing between tower locations shall be one-half () mile in order to prevent a concentration of towers in
one area.
v. Height of the tower shall not exceed three hundred (300) feet and no tower located within five hundred (500) feet of
any residential area shall exceed one hundred seventy five (175) feet in height from grade.
w. Towers shall not be artificially lighted unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration.
x. Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
y. There shall not be displayed advertising or identification of any kind intended to be visible from the ground mounted
on the tower or other structures, except for emergency purposes.
z. Any attachments to the tower shall be painted to match the exterior treatment of the tower. The chosen paint scheme
should be designed to minimize off-site visibility of the tower as determined by the City Building Inspector.
aa. All structures shall be subject to any state and federal regulations concerning nonionizing electromagnetic radiation.
If more restrictive state or federal standards are adopted in the future, the tower shall be made to conform to the extent
required by such standards or the special use approval will be subject to revocation by the City Commission. Costs for
testing and verification of compliance shall be born by the owner of the tower.
bb. There shall be no employees located on the site on a permanent basis to service or maintain the tower or attachments,
unless specifically approved as part of the special use approval. Occasional or temporary repair and service activities are
excluded from this restriction.
cc. All parking and drive areas must be paved with material meeting the standards of the City.
dd. A vegetative buffer shall be required where the property adjoins any residentially zoned property or land use. The
tower owner shall plant and maintain two (2) alternating rows of evergreen trees with a minimum height of five (5) feet
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -51-
on twenty (20) foot centers along the entire perimeter, and twenty (20) feet beyond but not further than the property line,
of the tower and structure, to provide a visual sight barrier from the adjoining residential zoned properties and the tower
and structures. In no case shall the evergreens be any closer than ten (10) feet to the tower or structure.
5. Process for Obtaining Approval for Location of New Towers
An applicant seeking approval for the location of a new tower shall prepare and present a complete application to the Planning
Commission who shall review the application, hold any required public hearings, issue findings and make recommendations
concerning the proposed location and compliance with the standards in paragraph 4. A copy of the Planning Commission report
shall be filed with the City Commission who shall review the report and formally attach any comments or issue a statement of
concurrence with the Planning Commission findings and recommendations. Both the Planning Commission and City Commission
reports shall be filed with the Zoning Board of Appeals and considered as part of the deliberations concerning the issuance of a
Special Land Use Permit.
6. Additional Requirements
a. The tower shall be removed by the property owner or property lessee within six months of being abandoned. Notice
of the abandonment of the tower shall be provided to the City ninety days prior to abandonment.
b. The applicant shall incur all cost associated with the City review of the application for the special use.
c. The applicant shall provide a performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit, in such form as approved by the City
Attorney, in an amount equal to the estimated cost to remove the tower, but in no case less than $50,000, to be used by the
City to remove the tower if said tower is abandoned and not removed in accordance with the terms of this ordinance, by
the applicant, successors and/or property owner.
d. Upon approval or upon meeting all of the standards and qualifications set forth above, the applicant shall provide to
the City or the owner of the proposed and approved site a lease agreement or other suitable legal document setting forth
the terms and conditions for the use of said site. If City-owned property is involved, said lease shall be reviewed by the
City Attorney. Applicant shall reimburse the City for its legal appraisal, not to exceed $1,500.00. The terms and conditions
of any agreement with respect to City-owned property shall be approved by the City Commission pursuant to its Charter
and Ordinances. In the case of privately-held property, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain an agreement
with the property owner with respect to the use of the proposed site. The applicant is required to file with the City Clerk
any such agreement.
Section 18.05 - Commercial/Industrial Minimum Landscaping Regulations and Standards.
In the C-2 Commercial and the I-1 and I-2 Industrial districts, a minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the total lot area shall be
landscaped containing two (2) shrubs for every 250 square feet of total lot area, plus two (2) trees for every 500 square feet of
landscaped area or portion thereof shall be required. (Plant materials existing on the site prior to the development may be included
as part of the requirement.) Mulch, stone, or other vegetive ground cover is required in all landscaped areas. A minimum of 33
percent of required landscape area shall be located between any building and the street. Trees shall be a minimum of one and onehalf
() inch caliper in size. Trees should be located so as to provide canopy over paved surfaces and so not to interfere with utilities
or other improvements.
Section 18.06 - Storage and Screening Required In Commercial and Industrial Districts. In addition to other provisions of
this Ordinance every application for a building permit in the C-1, C-2, C-3 - Commercial and I-1 and I-2 Industrial zoning districts
shall provide a plan for outdoor material storage and screening so as to eliminate unsightly open storage of material equipment and
supplies including garbage and trash disposal containers. Each application for a permit shall also provide for appropriate
landscaping and planting so as to improve and preserve the physical appearance of the district. Any landscaped area required shall
thereafter be preserved, as far as it is practicable to do so, and used maintained and reserved for grass, trees, shrubs and similar
ornamental landscaping.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -52- Public Consulting Team
All screening shall comply with the following standards:
3. Adequate screening shall consist of a six (6) high solid fence, wall, or visual screen of suitable shrubs, spaced at
intervals of nor more than four feet, maintained within fifteen (15) feet of the property line separating the uses.
4. All fences, hedges, walls, and shrubs must be maintained in good condition. No advertising shall be permitted
on fences adjoining residential districts.
5. Fences, walls, and hedges under six (6) feet may be located in any yard or court, except as regulated by Article
XVII, Section 17.06.
Section 18.07 - Display of Goods & Merchandise in C-1, C-2 and C-3 Commercial Districts. All merchants and businesses
located within the C-1, C-2 and C-3 Commercial districts shall maintain a continuous free and clear passage for safe pedestrian
traffic from the backside of the curb, and at no time shall any merchant or others be allowed to occupy more than fifty (50) percent
of the sidewalk for displaying goods, wares and merchandise. Utility poles, lighting street furniture and the like installed by the City
or any of its agencies are exempt from the terms of the setback requirements.
Section 18.08 - Mobile Home Parks. The Plan Commission and the City Commission recognize the need and desirability
to encourage alterative alternative housing choices in the City including the use of mobile homes constructed pursuant to the State
of Michigan and federal regulations as evidenced by proper certificates affixed to all mobile homes so constructed. Mobile homes
are expressly prohibited on single-family lots in the R-1, R-2 and R-3 residential districts but permitted in Mobile Home Parks
developed and approved in compliance with the provision of the Michigan Mobile Home Commission Act, P.A. 96 of 1987, as
amended, containing ten (10) acres of land and upon approval as a Planned Unit Development pursuant to the terms of this
Ordinance.
A mobile home park shall be approved as a Planned Unit Development within the City of Buchanan upon meeting the following
standards:
1. The proposed mobile home park contains no less than ten (10) acres of land area under a single ownership for
operation by one person or other business entity as a mobile home park.
2. The proposed development complies with the minimum specification for a mobile home park as set forth by the
Michigan Mobile Home Park Commission pursuant to P.A. 96 of 1987, as amended and any rules and regulations
promulgated thereto.
3. City water, sewer and other services are provided to the site and individual mobile home dwellings.
4. That a storm water management plan, meeting the standards of the City is approved by the City Engineer and
constructed prior to the installation of the first dwelling unit in the park.
5. Safe and adequate public street access is provided as deemed necessary by the Plan Commission.
Section 18.09 - Home Occupation Application and Approval/Denial Procedure. Home Occupations are those uses of land
in residential districts that meets the definition of home occupation as set forth in this ordinance. The purpose of this section is to
establish equitable procedures and criteria which shall be applied in the determination of requests to establish home occupations.
The criteria for decisions and requirements provided for under the provisions of this section shall be in addition to those required
elsewhere in the Ordinance which are applicable to the home occupation under consideration.
An Application for special use permit for permission to establish a home occupation shall be submitted and acted upon in accordance
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -53-
with the following procedures:
1. Application. An Application for a home occupation shall be submitted twenty (20) days prior to the next
scheduled Plan Commission meeting, through the Zoning Administrator, who will review the application for
completeness, then transmit the application to the Plan Commission. Each application shall be accompanied by
the payment of a fee as established by the terms of this Ordinance (See Article XXVI, Section 26.04).
2. Required Information. An Application for home occupation shall be accompanied by the following documents
and information:
A. Home Occupation Application form supplied by the Zoning Administrator, which has been competed
in full by the applicant.
B. A Site Plan, when required by Article XXV, Section 25.02(2).
C. Full payment of any applicable fees.
3. Public Hearing. A public Hearing shall be held, pursuant to the provisions of Article XXIV, Section 24.04.
4. Plan Commission Review and Approval. Within thirty (30) days following the public hearing, the Planning
Commission shall review the application for a home occupation, comments received by the public hearing, the
site plan and other material submitted in relation to the application, and deny the application, approve the
application or approve the application with conditions. The decision concerning the approval or denial of a home
occupation shall be based of the following standards, each of which must be considered by the Plan Commission:
A. No person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in such
occupation.
B. The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its
use for residential purposes by its occupants. The total floor area used for the home occupation shall be
specified in the application and shall not conflict with the principal intended use of the structure for
residential purposes nor occupy no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the first floor area..
C. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence
of the conduct of such home occupation other than one (1) sign not exceeding two (2) square feet against
the wall of the principal building.
D. No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building.
E. There shall be no sales of goods on the premises in connection with such home occupation, other than
products related to the services provided as approved as part of the application for a home occupation.
F. No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be
expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home
occupation shall be met, off the street, and other than in a required front yard. All parking facilities shall
be in conformity with Article XIX, Section 19.04 of this Ordinance.
G. No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare,
fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the average citizen having normal sight, hearing and
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -54- Public Consulting Team
nasal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in a single-family residence. No hazardous or
toxic materials shall be stored or used on the premises in quantities greater than those normally stored
or used in a residential district. In the case of electrical interfere, no equipment or process shall be used
which creates visual or audible interference in any radio to television receivers off the premises, or
causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -55-
ARTICLE XIX
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
Section 19.01 - Scope of Regulations. A Zoning Compliance Permit shall be required wherever a new building or structure
is constructed or the use of an existing building or structure changed hereafter to a new use, to assure that parking and loading
facilities shall be provided as required for such new use. However, if the said building or structure was erected prior to the effective
date of this Ordinance, additional parking or loading facilities are mandatory only in the amount by which the requirements for the
new use would exceed those for the existing use if the latter were subject to the parking and loading provisions of the Ordinance.
Section 19.02 - Existing Parking and Loading Facilities. Off-street parking or loading facilities which are located
on the same lot as the building or use served and which were in existence on the effective date of this Ordinance or were provided
voluntarily after the effective date shall not hereafter be reduced below or, if already less than, shall not further be reduced below
the requirements of this Ordinance for a similar new building or use.
Section 19.03 - Parking Requirements and Standards. Off-street parking facilities must be provided and permanently
maintained by the owners and/or occupants, except in the C-3 Central Business District, in accordance with the following provisions:
1. Use of Parking Facilities in Residential Districts. Off-street parking facilities accessory to residential uses
shall be used solely for the parking of noncommercial passenger vehicles owned by occupants of the dwelling
structures to which such facilities are accessory or by guests of said occupants. Under no circumstances shall any
required parking facilities, accessory to residential structures, be used for the storage of commercials or for the
parking of automobiles belonging to the employees, owners, tenants, visitors, or customers of business or
industrial establishments, except as provided in the following section.
2. Use of Parking Regulations - Commercial Vehicles and Equipment. Except as provided in below, no person
shall park any commercial vehicle or commercial equipment on private property in a residentially- or
commercially zoned district other than in an enclosed building.
Allowable exceptions to this prohibition are:
a). Commercial vehicles or commercial equipment may be parked on commercially-zoned property if that
commercial vehicle or commercial equipment is owned, leased or otherwise contracted for the use of a
commercial enterprise located on that property.
b). Commercial vehicles or commercial equipment may be parked on commercially or residentially zoned
property for the purpose of:
(1) Picking up or delivering persons or materials at the property, but only for the period of time
necessary for completing the pickup or delivery of such persons or materials.
(2) To perform a service to that property or the improvements located thereon, but only for the
period of time necessary to complete such service. Examples of such property service
activities shall include, by way of example, but not limitation, plumbing, electrical, painting,
carpentry, landscaping or home cleaning services.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -56- Public Consulting Team
c) Persons who have parked a commercial vehicle on an identified parcel, in a residentially or commercially
zoned district, on a regular basis prior to and continuing to the effective date of the adoption of this
Zoning Ordinance provision (that being July 1, 1993) , shall be authorized to continue parking a
commercial vehicle on said parcel, provided that:
(1) They register such parking as an existing, nonconforming use, on forms available from the
Code Enforcement Officer, not later than September 30, 1993.
(2) Only one vehicle per household may be subject to such authorization.
(3) The person seeking such authorization must own or reside on the question.
(4) In the case of tractor-trailers only the tractor unit may be parked on the parcel.
(5) Such authorization shall be granted to the applicant only, and shall not be transferable to other,
future owners or residents of the parcel.
(6) Such authorization shall be for a specific parcel, and shall not be transferable to any other
location.
(7) Such authorized continued parking shall be in compliance with the following general
conditions:
(7.1) Only one truck at any given time may at any permitted address.
(7.2) Truck parking shall not be permitted in the front yard area. In the case of corner lots,
parking shall not be permitted in the side yard abutting the street. This condition may
be waived by the Code Enforcement Officer if compliance is not possible due to the
physical characteristics of the parcel as of the date of registration of said parking. as
an existing non-conforming use.
(7.3) Truck parking shall not be permitted within the side yard setback applicable to
buildings or structures at that location under the Zoning Ordinance. This condition
may be waived by the Code Enforcement Officer if compliance is not possible due
to the physical characteristics of the parcel as of the date of registration of said
parking as an existing, non-conforming use.
(7.4) All permitted truck parking locations must have a surface of hard, packed earth
and/or gravel, slag, or paving material.
(7.5) All permitted truck parking locations under this section will allow an engine idle time
maximum of 10 continuous minutes, after which no additional period of 10
continuous minutes of idle time shall be allowed less than one hour from the
immediately prior 10-minute idle time period.
(8) Such registration must be renewed annually by the original applicant, during the month of
January of each year, in order to remain in effect. Failure to do so shall result in termination of
such authorization. Forms for such re-registration shall be available from the Code Enforcement
Officer.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -57-
(8.1) There shall be no charge by the City for the initial registration or subsequent annual
renewals.
(8.2) The City shall have the right to terminate such authorization if the authorized party is
determined to have violated any of the general conditions ( above on three or more
occasions within any twelve- month period.
(8.3) All aspects of the scope of the non-conforming usage shall not be expanded from that
usage that existed prior to and continuing to the effective date of this Zoning
Ordinance amendment, that being July 1, 1993.
d. Church-owned busses may be parked on church-owned property without restriction.
e. Commercial Motor vehicles may be parked on commercially-zoned property as necessary for the
operator or vehicle passenger to transact business at a commercial establishment located on such
property.
3. Joint Parking Facilities. Off-street parking facilities for different buildings, structures or uses, or for mixed uses,
may be provided collectively in any zoning district in which separate parking facilities for each constituted use
would be permitted, provided that the total number of spaces so located together shall not be less than the sum
of the separate requirements for each use.
4. Calculation of Required Parking Spaces. When determination of the number of off-street parking spaces
required by this Ordinance that result in a requirement for a factional space, any fraction of one-half or less may
be disregarded, while a fraction in excess of one-half shall be counted as one parking space.
5. Minimum Size of Parking Space. A required off-street parking space shall be at least nine (9) feet in width and
at least twenty (20) feet in length, exclusive of access drives or aisles. All parking spaces shall have a vertical
clearance of at least seven (7) feet. Aisle widths shall be not less than the following: perpendicular parking,
twenty (20) feet; angle parking two-way traffic, sixteen (16) feet; angle parking one-way traffic, twelve (12) feet.
6. Minimum Number of Parking Spaces for a Parking Area. Except in the case of parking required for single
family dwellings, no parking areas may contain less than three (3) parking spaces.
7. Location of Off-Site Facilities. Off-site facilities must be located within four hundred (400) feet of the use
to which they are accessory; measured from the nearest point to the nearest point, provided that they conform to
all district regulations.
8. Access to Public Street or Roadway. Each required off-street parking area or space shall open directly
upon an aisle or driveway of such width and design as to provide such parking space. All off-street parking
facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of ingress and egress which least interferes with traffic
movements. No driveway across public property nor curb cut shall exceed a width of forty (40) feet.
9. Permit Required for Residential Rear Yard Parking. Off-street parking required for uses
permitted in residential districts may be located on driveways or an approved area within the rear yard, upon
issuance of a permit by the Zoning Administrator. Driveways may be located no closer than four (4) feet to the
side yard property line unless the driveway abuts the driveway located on the adjoining property. All access ways
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -58- Public Consulting Team
(curb cuts) to city streets shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator or City Engineer. Off-street parking of
permitted uses in industrial or commercial districts may be located in a required front, rear or side yard, except
the ten (10) feet adjacent to the rear or side lot line adjacent to a residential district.
10. Parking in Street Parkways. No person, firm or corporation shall park, deposit, leave or store any
motor vehicle, vehicle or tangible personal property of any type or description at any time between the sidewalk
line and curb line at any place within the City.
11. Design and Maintenance Standards. All parking spaces and areas herein after constructed in conformance
with ordinance shall comply with the following standards:
A. Screening and Landscaping. All open vehicle parking areas containing more than three (3) parking
spaces shall be effectively screened on each side adjoining or fronting on any property situated in a
residence district by a wall, fence or densely planted compact hedge no less than four (4) feet nor more
than six (6) feet in height. Such required screening shall conform with the front yard requirements of
the district in which the parking is located.
B. Pavement and Surfacing. All open off-street parking areas shall be of concrete, asphalt other
paving material according to standards established by the City Engineer.
C. Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be directed away from
residential properties in such a way as not to create a nuisance (see Section 16.28).
Section 19.04 - Schedule of Parking Requirements. Whenever a building, the use of which requires the provision of offstreet
parking, the owner of such building shall provide off-street parking in the minimum number as required by the following
standards:
A. Parking Spaces Required in the R-1 Residential District.
1. Single-Family Dwellings. A minimum of two (2) parking spaces shall be provided per
dwelling, with one car parking enclosure, covered parking space or garage, location of which shall be
limited to the side or rear yard, if not incorporated as part of the principal permitted use structure, with
adequate on-site access and street ingress as approved by the Zoning Administrator City Engineer.
2. Bed & Breakfast Operations. Parking shall be provided according to the following formula; 2
spaces, plus 1 space for each guest room, plus 1 space for each employee on duty at one time.
3. Other Permitted Uses. Parking shall be provided in the amount and in accordance with the
specifications found in subparagraphs B, C and D for the uses which are permitted within applicable
residential District.
B. Parking Spaces Required in the R-2, R-3 and R-4 Residential Districts.
1. Single-Family Dwellings. In the R-2 Zoning District where single-family dwellings as
permitted, a minimum of two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit meeting the
requirements of Section 19.04 A 1.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -59-
2. Multiple-Family Dwellings. One and one-half (1) spaces per dwelling unit shall be provided
for each efficiency and one (1) bedroom unit. Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit shall be provided for
each dwelling unit containing two (2) or more bedrooms.
3. Bed & Breakfast Operations. Parking shall be provided according to the following formula; 2
spaces, plus 1 space for each guest room, plus 1 space for each employee on duty at any one time.
4. Churches and Schools. One (1) parking space shall be provided for each three (3) auditorium seats.
Adequate space shall also be provided for buses used in connection with the activities of the institution,
and all loading and unloading of passengers shall take place upon the premises.
5. Libraries and Other Public Buildings. One (1) parking space shall be provided for each five
hundred (500) square feet of gross floor area.
6. Recreation and Other Religious and Similar Facilities. Parking space shall be provided for each
four hundred (400) square feet of floor space.
C. Parking Spaces Required in the C-1 and C-2 Commercial Districts.
1. Churches and Schools. One (1) parking space shall be provided for each three (3) auditorium seats.
Adequate space shall also be provided for buses used in connection with the activities of the institution,
and all loading and unloading of passengers shall take place upon the premises.
2. Libraries and Other Public Buildings. One (1) parking space shall be provided for each five
hundred (500) square feet of gross floor area.
3. Parks and Other Places of Assembly. Parks, recreation and assembly facilities including
stadiums, arenas, auditoriums (other than church, college or institutional schools), convention halls
exhibition halls and other similar places of assembly shall provide parking spaces equal in number to
fifty (50%) percent of the capacity in persons shall be provided.
4. Religious Facilities. One (1) parking space shall be provided for each employee, plus one (1)
space for each four hundred (400) square feet of floor space.
5. Hospitals and Similar Uses One (1) parking space shall be provided for each two (2) hospital
beds, plus one (1) parking space for each two (2) employees, other than the staff doctors, plus one (1)
parking space for each doctor assigned to the staff.
6. Clinics, Medical Centers, and Similar Uses. One (1) parking space shall be provided for each
employee and doctor, plus one (1) space for each four hundred (400) square feet of floor space.
7. Retail Store Uses. Retail stores including fabrication of merchandise for sale on
premises shall provide one (1) parking space for each four hundred (400) square feet of floor area as
defined in this Ordinance (See definition of floor area, off-street parking and loading).
8. Wholesale Uses. Wholesale establishment including open air and farmers markets (but not including
warehouses and storage buildings other than accessory buildings) shall provide one (1) parking space
shall provide for each six hundred (600) square feet of floor area.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -60- Public Consulting Team
9. Personal Service Uses. Personal service establishments such as barber shops, beauty parlors, shoe
repair shops, laundry and dry-cleaning shops. And similar uses shall provide one (1) parking space shall
for each four hundred (400) square feet of floor area.
10. Food Service Uses. Restaurants, delicatessens, and other dispensaries of food at retail shall
provide one (1) parking space for each four hundred (400) square feet of floor area.
11. Office Space Uses. Professional and business offices shall provide one (1) parking space for each
four hundred (400) square feet of floor area.
12. Financial Institution Uses. Banks, savings and loan associations shall provide one (1) parking
space for each four hundred (400) square feet of floor area. Drive-in banks or other similar drive-in
establishments shall provide three stacking spaces per teller or customer service window.
13. Miscellaneous Uses. Theaters, amusements and recreational buildings, showrooms and workshops
of plumbers, electricians, painters, decorators and similar trade, photograph supply shops, workrooms
and studios, laboratories, and public utility buildings and structures:
a. Theaters (indoor). One (1) parking space shall be provided for each three (3) seats.
b. Showrooms, Workshops and Studios. One (1) parking space shall be provided for each
four hundred (400) square feet of floor area.
c. Public Utility Buildings and Structures. One (1) parking space shall be provided for each
employee, plus one (1) space for each vehicle used in the conduct of the enterprise.
14. Building, Home Supply and Similar Uses. Building supply stores, ice storage and sales, plumbing and
heating supplies, farmers exchange or co-op shall supply one (1) parking space shall be provided for
each six (600) hundred square feet of floor area.
15. Automotive Service and Similar Uses. Garages and filing stations, provided that all gasoline
storage tanks must be underground, tire sale and repair shops, automobile sales and service, automotive
parts and supply stores, and bicycle sales and repair establishments. One (1) parking space shall be
provided for each six (600) hundred square feet of floor area, plus one (1) parking space shall be
provided for each employee.
16. Drinking Establishments and Similar Uses. Taverns, cocktail lounges and night clubs. One
(1) parking space shall be provided for each four hundred (400) square feet of floor area.
17. Printing and Similar Job Shops. Printing and other similar job shops shall provide one (1) parking
space for each employee, based upon greatest number of employees on any-one shift, plus one (1)
parking space shall be provided for each four hundred (400) square feet of floor area.
18. Funeral Homes. Twenty (20) parking spaces shall be provided for each chapel or parlor, plus one (1)
parking space for each funeral vehicle kept on the premises; in addition there shall be provided stacking
space for not less than ten (10) automobiles for funeral procession assembly.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -61-
19. Clubs and Similar Uses. Private clubs operated not for profit and for the benefit of members only shall
provide one (1) parking space for each four hundred (400) square feet of floor area.
20. Miscellaneous and Uses Not Herein Defined. Any commercial use or establishment parking not herein
specifically permitted shall first be approved as a special use by the Plan Commission pursuant to Article
XXI. The following shall serve as general guidelines for Plan Commission consideration:
a. Tourist courts, bed and breakfast operations, tourist homes, motels, and hotels. One (1) parking
space shall be provided for the manager and each employee, plus parking as required herein for
other ancillary uses such as restaurants and meeting rooms.
b. Hotels, transient. One (1) parking space shall be provided for each dwelling unit and one (1)
parking space for each two (2) lodging rooms shall be provided.
c. Automobile laundry. Ten (10) spaces shall be provided to queue automobiles waiting for
access into each wash rack, plus one (1) parking space for each employee working on the site.
d. Furniture and appliance stores, household equipment or furniture repair shops. One off-street
(1) parking space shall be provided for each six hundred (600) square feet of floor area.
e. Motor vehicle sales and machinery sales. One (1) parking space shall be provided for each four
hundred (400) square feet of floor area.
f. Establishments engaged in production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing or repair of
materials, goods or products. One (1) parking space shall be provided for each employee,
based upon greatest number of employees on any single shift, plus one (1) parking space shall
be provided for each vehicle used in the conduct of the enterprise.
g. Colleges, universities and business, professional and trade schools. One (1) parking space shall
be provided for each three employees and one (1) parking space for each four (4) students
based on the maximum number of students attending classes on the premises at any one time
during any twenty-four-hour (24) period.
h. Sanitariums, convalescent homes or institutions for aged or for children, including rest homes,
nursing homes and other group homes. One (1) parking space shall be provided for each four
beds, plus one (1) parking space shall be provided for each two (2) employees (other than staff
doctors) plus one (1) parking space for each doctor assigned to the staff.
D. Parking Spaces Required in the I-1 and I-2 Industrial Districts.
1. Wholesale Sales and Storage.
a. Wholesale Establishments (but not including warehouses and storage buildings other than
accessory). One (1) parking space shall be provided for each six hundred (600) square feet of
floor area.
b. Warehouses and Storage Buildings. One (1) parking space shall be provided for each
employee, based upon greatest number of employees on any one shift, plus one shift, plus one
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -62- Public Consulting Team
(1) parking space for each vehicle used in the conduct of the enterprise.
c. Industrial or Manufacturing Use. One (1) parking space shall be provided for each employee,
based upon greatest number of employees on any one shift, plus one (1) parking space shall be
provided for each vehicle used in the conduct of the enterprise.
E. Parking Spaces Required for Planned Unit or Other Mixed Use Developments.
When two (2) or more uses are located on the same zoning lot within the same buildings, parking spaces equal
in number to the sum of the separate requirements for each use shall be provided. No parking space or portion
thereof shall serve as a required space for more than one use unless otherwise authorized by the Plan Commission.
F. Parking Spaces Required for Other Uses Herein Not Defined. For uses not listed heretofore in this
schedule of parking requirements, parking spaces shall be provided on the same basis as required for the most
similar listed use, or as determined by the Zoning Administrator and approved by the Plan Commission..
Section 19.05 - Loading Requirements and Standards. Off-street loading facilities must be provided and permanently
maintained by the owners and/or occupants, in C-1 and C-2 Commercial and I-1 and I-2 Industrial districts the accordance with the
following provisions:
1. Location of Loading Space. All required loading berths shall be located on the same zoning lot
as the use served. No loading berth for vehicles over two tons capacity shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to any
property located in a residential district unless completely enclosed by building walls, or a uniformly painted solid
fence or wall, or any combination thereof, no less than six (6) feet in height. No permitted or required loading
berth shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of the nearest point of intersection of any two streets.
2. Size of Loading Space. Unless otherwise specified, a required loading berth shall be at least ten (10) feet in
width and at least twenty-five (25) feet in length, exclusive of aisles and maneuvering space, and shall have a
vertical clearance of the least fourteen (14) feet. The length of the berth shall be increased to a minimum of fiftyfive
(55) feet, if intended to serve semi-tractors and trailers.
3. Access to Public Street or Road. Each required off-street loading berth shall be designed with appropriate
means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movements.
4. Pavement and Surfacing. All open off-street loading berths shall be concrete or asphalt according to
standards established by the City Engineer.
5. Use of Loading Space for Vehicle Repair and Servicing. No motor vehicle repair work or service
of any kind shall be permitted in conjunction with loading facilities provided in any C-1 or C-2 Commercial or
I-1 or I-2 Industrial district.
6. Loading Space Cannot Serve as Off-Street Parking. Space allocated to any off-street loading area shall
not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking facilities or portions
thereof.
7. Loading Space Requirement for Special Uses Not Herein Defined. For special uses other than prescribed
hereinafter, loading berths adequate in number and size to serve such uses, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator and approved by the Plan Commission shall be provided.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -63-
8. Requirements in the C-3 Commercial District and for Non conformities. Nonconforming uses for which
off-street loading facilities are required, shall be provided with adequate receiving facilities located off an adjacent
alley, service drive or open space on the same lot which is accessible by motor vehicle as recommended by the
Zoning Administrator and approved by the Plan Commission.
9. Schedule of Required Loading Spaces. For the uses listed herein, loading berths shall be provided on the
basis of gross floor area of buildings or portions thereof devoted to such uses in the minimum amounts shown
herein:
A. Retail Stores. One (1) berth for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of store area and fraction
thereof of additional floor space.
B. Hospitals, Group Homes, Hotels, Clubs, and Similar Uses. One (1) berth for the first twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet of floor area, one additional berth for the next one hundred thirty thousand
(130,000) square feet of floor area and an additional berth for each one hundred fifty thousand (150,000)
square feet of floor area or fraction thereof additional floor space.
C. Eating and Drinking Establishments. One (1) berth for the first twenty-five thousand (25,000)
square feet of floor area and an additional berth for each twenty-fifty thousand (25,000) square feet of
floor area or fraction thereof of additional floor space.
D. Wholesale, Industrial and Manufacturing Establishments. One (1) berth for the first twenty
thousand (20,000 ) square feet of floor area, one additional berth for the next one hundred thirty
thousand (130,000) square feet of floor area and an additional berth for each one hundred fifty thousand
(150,000) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof of additional floor space.
E. Loading Spaces Required for Other Uses Herein Not Defined. For uses not listed heretofore
in this schedule of loading requirements, loading berths spaces shall be provided on the same basis as
required for the most similar listed use, or as determined by the Zoning Administrator and approved by
the Plan Commission.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -64- Public Consulting Team
ARTICLE XX
SPECIAL USES
Section 20.01 - Purpose. Special uses are those uses of land which are not essentially incompatible with the uses permitted in a
zoning district, but has characteristics or locational qualities which require individual review and discretion in order to avoid
incompatibility with the character of the surrounding area, public services and facilities, and adjacent uses of land. The purpose of
this chapter is to establish equitable procedures and criteria which shall be applied in the determination of request to establish special
uses. The criteria for decision and requirements provided for under the provision of the chapter shall be in addition to those required
elsewhere in this Ordinance which are applicable to the special use under consideration.
Section 20.02 - Application Procedures. An application for permission to establish a special use shall be submitted and acted
upon in accordance with the following procedures:
1. Application. An application for a special use permit, including any fee established pursuant to this Ordinance
(See Article XXVI, Section 26.04), is requested to be submitted twenty days prior to the next schedule Plan
Commission meeting through the Zoning Administrator who will review the application for completeness, then
transmit the application to the Plan Commission.
2. Required Information. An application for a Special Use Permit shall be accompanied by the following
documents and information:
A. An application, supplied by the Zoning Administrator, which has been completed in full by applicant.
B. A site plan, when required by Article XXII, Section 22.02.
2. Public Hearings. Upon receipt of an application for a special land use which requires a decision of the
Plan Commission a notice that a request for special land use approval has been received and that a public hearing
will be held shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City and shall be sent by mail or
personal general delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being considered, to all persons whom
real property is assessed within three hundred (300) feet of the boundary of the property in question, and to the
occupants of all structures within three hundred (300) feet, except that the notice shall be given not less than five
(5) and not more than fifteen (15) days before the application will be considered. If the name of the occupant is
not known, the term occupant may be used in making notification. Notification need not be given to more than
one (1) occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one (1) dwelling unit or spatial area
owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, one (1) occupant of each unit
or spatial area shall receive notice. In the case of a single structure containing more than four (4) dwelling units
or other distinct spatial area owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations,
notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the
primary entrance to the structure. The notice shall:
A. Describe the nature of the special land use requested.
B. Indicate the property which is the subject of the special land use request.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -65-
C. State when and where the public hearings on the special land use request will be held.
D. Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request.
3. Plan Commission Review and Approval. Within thirty (30) days following the public hearing, the Plan
Commission shall review the application for a special use, comments received at the public hearing, the site plan,
and other materials submitted in relation to the application, and deny application, approve the application, or
approve the application with conditions. The decision on a special land use shall be incorporated in a statement
of conclusions relative to the special land use under consideration. The decision shall specify the basis for the
decision, and any conditions imposed. The decision of the Plan Commission on the special use application shall
be made in accordance with the criteria for approval stated in Section 20.03 and such standards contained in this
Ordinance which relate to the special use under consideration. Upon the approval or approval with conditions
by the Plan Commission, the applicant may apply for a building permit.
Section 20.03 - Basis of Determination Prior to approval of a special use application, the Plan Commission shall insure that
standards specified in this Article, as well as applicable standards established elsewhere in this ordinance, shall be satisfied by the
completion and operation of the special use under consideration.
1. General Standards. The Plan Commission shall review the particular circumstances of the special use
application under consideration in terms of the special use standards, and shall approve a special use only upon
a finding in consideration of each of the following standards, as well as applicable standards established elsewhere
in this ordinance.
A. The special use shall be designed, constructed, operated and maintained in a manner harmonious with
the character of adjacent property and the surrounding area.
B. The special use shall not change the essential use of the surrounding area.
C. The special use shall not be hazardous to adjacent property, or involve uses, activities, materials, or
equipment which will be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare or persons or property through the
excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes or glare.
D. The special use shall not place demands on public services and facilities in excess of current capacity.
E. The special use is in compliance with the City of Buchanan Comprehensive Plan.
2. Conditions. The Plan Commission may require reasonable conditions in conjunction with approval of any
special land use. The conditions may include conditions necessary to insure that public services and facilities
affected by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads
caused by the land use or activity, to protect the natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy,
to insure the compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and to promote the use of land in a socially acceptable and
economically desired manner. Conditions imposed shall consider all of the following:
A. Be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety and welfare, as well as the social and
economic well-being of those who will use the land use or activity under consideration, residents and
landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed land use or activity, and the community as a whole.
B. Be related to the valid exercise of the police power and purposes which are affected by the purposed use
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -66- Public Consulting Team
or activity.
C. Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of the zoning regulations: be related to the standards
established in the Ordinance for the land use or activity under consideration; and be necessary to insure
compliance with those standards.
D. The conditions imposed with respect to the approval of a land use or activity shall be recorded in the
public record of the approval action and remain unchanged except upon the mutual consent of the Plan
Commission and the landowners.
3. Termination. If any special use is not put into effect within six (6) months of the date of approval by the Plan
Commission, is discontinued through vacancy of the premises, lack of operation or otherwise for a continuous
period of six (6) months, then the special use shall lapse and be null and void. Future use of said property shall
conform in its entirety to the provisions of this Ordinance; however, the Plan Commission, for good cause, may
grant an extension of time to comply, or to continue such special use if, in its judgement, such extension is
necessary in order to avoid injustice or undue hardship to the owners of the property.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -67-
ARTICLE XXI
GROUP HOMES AND ADULT FOSTER CARE FACILITIES
Section 21.01 - Applicability. The following regulations shall apply to group homes and adult foster care facilities:
1. Group homes and adult foster care facilities shall be allowed in the various zoning districts hereafter shown as
permitted uses for facilities for not more than six (6) adult foster care residents, and for facilities for more than
six (6) residents as a special use approval to be granted in writing by the Plan Commission. Operators of any
facility shall provide to the Zoning Administrator, the license when applicable from the Michigan Department
of Independent Family Living and/or Michigan Department of Public Health or any other regulating agency and
any such facility shall not operate until the Zoning Administrator, the Fire Chief, and the Berrien County Health
Department have inspected the premises and given their written approval.
2. The Plan Commission may grant special approval for a group home or adult foster care facilities only if that
facility contains the minimum square footage per building or structure for the zoning district in which it is located
and, in addition thereto, if the building or structure has, or will provide services to a total of six (6) or more
residents a total of 150 square feet for recreational, dining areas, or usable floor space as a bedroom. Usable floor
space is defined as that floor space under a ceiling which is at least seven (7) feet six (6) inches in height.
3. The Plan Commission may grant special approval for a group home or adult foster care facility only if the lot area
of real estate upon which the facility is to be located meets the requirements for minimum lot frontage and area
for the zoning district within which the facility is located and, in addition thereto, has minimum of three thousand
(3,000) square feet for each resident over the number of six (6) residents.
Section 21.02 - R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 Residential Districts, Permitted Use. For an adult foster care facility providing
care for one (1) to six (6) adult foster case residents, no more than one (1) adult foster care facility may be housed in any one
structure or building or on any one parcel of land, or joined parcels of land, nor can any adult foster care facility location be
approved which is within a 1,500 foot radius of another previously approved or existing foster care facility having six (6) or more
inhabitants.
Section 21.03 - R-3 and R-4, Residential Districts, Uses Special Uses. The following regulations shall apply to group
homes and adult foster care facilities in the R-3 and R-4 Residential Districts:
1. Group homes providing care for one (1) to twelve (12) residents and adult foster care facility providing care for
seven (7) to twelve (12) adult foster care residents. No more than one (1) care facility in any one structure or
building or on any one parcel land, or joined parcels of land, is allowed, nor is any facility which is within a two
thousand (2,000) foot radius of another previously approved or existing facility.
2. For a facility providing care for thirteen (13) to twenty (20) residents, No more than one (1) facility is permitted
in any one structure or building or on any one parcel of land, or joined parcels of land, is allowed, nor is any
facility which is within a three thousand (3,000) foot radius of another previously approved or existing facility.
Section 21.04 - C-2 Commercial and C-3 Central Business Districts, Special Uses. The following regulations shall apply to
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -68- Public Consulting Team
group homes and adult foster care facilities in the C-2 and C-3 Districts:
1. A group home having one (1) or up to (12) residents or adult foster care facility providing care for seven (7) to
twelve (12) residents. No more than one (1) facility in any on structure or building or on any one parcel of land,
or joined parcels of land, is allowed, nor is any facility which is within a one thousand five hundred (1,500) foot
radius of another previously approved or existing facility.
2. A facility providing care for thirteen (13) to twenty (20) residents. No more than one (1) facility in any one
structure or building or on any one parcel of land, or joined parcels of land, is allowed, nor is any facility which
is within a two thousand (2,000) foot radius of another previously approved or existing facility.
3. A facility known as congregate facility providing care for more than twenty (20) residents, with the condition
that each living unit shall not exceed twenty (20) individuals, and requiring functional grouping of residents. No
more than one (1) facility in any single structures or building or on any one parcel of land, or joined parcel or land,
is allowed nor is any facility which is within a three thousand (3,000) foot radius of another previously approved
or existing foster facility.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -69-
ARTICLE XXII
SITE AND BUILDING FACADE PLAN REVIEW
Section 22.01 - Purpose. The intent of this Section is to provide for consultation and cooperation between the applicant and the
Plan Commission in order that the applicant may accomplish his objectives in the utilization of land within the regulations of this
Ordinance and with minimum adverse effect on the use of adjacent streets and highways, and on existing and future uses in the
immediate area and vicinity.
Section 22.02 - When a Site Plan must be Approved by the Planning Commission.
New Development. The Zoning Administrator shall not issue a zoning compliance permit or the Building Inspector
issue a building permit for any proposed development in the R-3 and R-4 Residential, C-1 Neighborhood Commercial, C-2
Commercial C-3 Central Business I-1 Light Industrial and I-2 Heavy Industrial districts and any use requiring more than four (4)
parking spaces in the R-1 or R-2 Residential districts except a single-family dwelling proposed for construction as an allowable use
in these districts or as otherwise required in this Ordinance until a site plan has been reviewed and approved by the Plan Commission.
Existing Development. The Zoning Administrator, upon review of a building permit application for the addition to,
modification of a building or structure that does not increase the total gross floor area by fifteen (15) percent of the current total gross
square footage, or the demolition of any part of a legally conforming existing building or structure and upon finding the modification,
addition to, modification of, or the demolition thereof conforms with the specifications of the district in which the property is located,
shall issue a zoning compliance permit, or the Building Inspector a building permit, provided the proposed action is in compliance
with all other applicable laws and ordinances. All other applications shall first be reviewed by the Planning Commission prior to
any action of the Zoning Administrator.
Section 22.03 - When a Building Facade Plan Is Required. The Zoning Administrator shall not issue a zoning compliance permit
nor the Building Inspector issue a building permit for any proposed development in the C-3 Central Business Districts until a
building facade plan has been reviewed by the Planning Commission based on facade design and aesthetic standards established
by the Downtown Development Authority and approved by resolution of the City Commission.
Section 22.04 - Application Procedures. All applications for site plan review (and a building facade plan, when required) shall
be submitted with any fee established by the terms of this Ordinance (See Article XXVI, Section 26.04) thirty (30) days prior to the
next scheduled Plan Commission meeting through the Zoning Administrator, who will review the application and plans for
completeness, then transmit the application and site plan to the Plan Commission and when applicable under the terms of Article
XI, Section 11.04, the Downtown Development Authority.
Section 22.05 - Preliminary Site and Building Facade Plan Review. Preliminary sketches of proposed site and other development
plans, including building facade plans, when required, may be submitted for review to the Plan Commission with any fee established
by the terms of this Ordinance (See Article XXVI, Section 26.04) prior to final site plan submission. The purpose of such procedure
is to allow discussion between the applicant and the Plan Commission and when applicable the Downtown Development Authority
to better inform the applicant of the acceptability of his proposed plans prior to incurring extensive engineering and other costs which
might be necessary for a final site plan.
Such plans shall include, as a minimum, the following:
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -70- Public Consulting Team
1. Legal description of the property,
2. Small scale sketch of properties, streets, and uses of land of all properties abutting or across the street from the
subject property,
3. A generalized map, schematic plans and building illustrations showing any existing or proposed arrangement of:
A. Streets and lots;
B. Access points and other transportation arrangements;
C. Buffer strips, fences, wall and screening;
D. Natural characteristics including, but not limited to, open space, stands of trees, brooks, ponds,
floodplain, hills, and similar natural assets;
E. Signs - location and lighting;
F. Buildings and other structures; and
G. Architectural style, exterior surface materials and exterior surface color of all building facades viewable
from a public street.
4. Hazardous Materials Property form for site plan review and state/county environmental permits, as required by
the City of Buchanan Ground Water Protection Ordinance.
5. A narrative declaration including:
A. The overall objectives of the proposed development;
B. Number of acres (or square feet) allocated to each proposed use and gross area in building, structures,
parking, public and/or private streets and drives, and open space;
C. Dwelling unit densities by type;
D. Proposed method of providing sewer and water service as well as other public and private utilities; and
E. Proposed method of providing storm drainage.
Section 22.06 - Plan Commission Review of Preliminary Site Plan. The Plan Commission shall review the preliminary site plan
and make recommendations in either writing or in person by representative, to the applicant at the regular Plan Commission meeting
based on the purposes, objectives, and requirements of this Ordinance and specifically the following considerations, when applicable:
1. Ingress and egress to property and proposed structures thereon, with particular reference to motor vehicle and
pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in cases of fire, catastrophe or emergency.
2. Off-street parking and loading areas, when required, with particular attention to noise, glare and odor effects of
each use in the plan on adjoining properties and properties in the proposed development.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -71-
3. Sewer, water, and storm drainage, with reference to location, availability and capacity.
4. Screening and buffering with reference to type, dimensions, and character.
5. Signs, if any, and their proposed lighting relative to glare, traffic safety, economic effect, and compatibility and
harmony with adjoining properties.
6. Required yards.
7. General compatibility with adjacent properties.
8. The purpose and intent of this Ordinance and the goals, objectives and policies of the City of Buchanan
Comprehensive Plan.
Section 22.07 - Planning Commission Review of Facade Plan. The Planning Commission shall review the building facade
plan and make recommendations to the applicant based on facade design and aesthetic standards established by the Downtown
Development Authority and approved by resolution of the City Commission.
Section 22.08 - Final Site Plan Review. The site final plan shall include the following information and any other information as
may be required by the Plan Commission from its review of the preliminary site plan.
1. Legal description of the property.
2. Small scale illustration of properties, streets, and use of land of all abutting properties area abutting or across the
street (or alley) of the subject property.
3. A map, at a scale not to exceed one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet (1" = 100'). The following items shall
be shown on the map:
A. Date site plan was prepared;
B. Name and address of preparer (including any participating licensed architects and/or engineers) ;
C. Topography of the site and its relationship to adjoining land;
D. Existing man-made features;
E. Dimensions of setbacks, locations, heights, and size of buildings and structures;
F. Street right-of-ways, indicating proposed access routes, internal circulation; and relationship to existing
right-of-ways;
G. Proposed grading;
H. Location and type of drainage, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and other utilities;
I. Location and type of fences, landscaping, buffer strips, and screening;
J. Location and type of signs and on-site lighting;
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -72- Public Consulting Team
K. Proposed parking facilities and drives. Parking lots (public and private) shall be designed with lines
showing individual spaces and shall conform with the provisions of Article XIX;
L. Easements, if any;
M. Dimensions and number of proposed lots;
N. A narrative describing the items indicated in Section 21.05.
Section 22.09 - Plan Commission Review of Final Site Plan. The Plan Commission shall review the final site plan and either
approve, deny or approve with conditions the final site plan based on the purposes, objectives and requirements of this Ordinance,
and specifically the considerations listed in Section 22.06.
1. To insure compliance with the final site plan and any conditions imposed under the ordinance, the Plan
Commission may require that a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit or surety bond
acceptable to the Plan Commission covering the estimated cost of improvements associated with a project for
which zoning approval is sought, be deposited with the City Clerk to insure faithful completion of the
improvements. The performance guarantee shall be filed with the City Clerk prior to the issuance of a building
permit by the Building Inspector for any portion of the project.
2. Each development shall be under construction within one (1) year after the date of final approval by the Plan
Commission. If said applicant does not fulfill this provision, the Plan Commission may grant a sixty (60) day
extension provided the applicant presents reasonable evidence to the effect that said development has encountered
unforeseen difficulties but is ready to proceed. Should neither of the aforementioned provisions be fulfilled or
a sixty (60) day extension has expired, without commencement of construction, the site development plan shall
be null and void.
3. The Plan Commission shall undertake and complete all site plan reviews within sixty (60) days of submission of
all required information by the applicant. Upon approval of said plan, the Chairman of the Plan Commission shall
sign three (3) copies thereof. One (1) signed copy shall be made a part of the Plan Commissions files and one
(1) shall be forwarded to the Zoning Administrator for issuance of a building permit. The third copy shall be
returned to the applicant.
4. This review process and site plan requirement shall apply to all Planned Unit Development applications including
plats submitted for consideration pursuant to the Land Division Act or Condominium Act of the State of
Michigan.
Section 22.10 - Right to Accept Reduced Site and Building Facade Information. The Plan Commission recognizes that
not all applications to be submitted for consideration under the terms of this Article will require full compliance with the submission
requirements. An applicant may propose or the Zoning Administrator may accept an application not fulfilling all of the submission
requirements when in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator that the submission materials are sufficient for the Plan Commission
to render a decision on the applicants request. Upon submission of a such an application, the Plan Commission may request and
the applicant shall provide such additional information as deemed necessary to fulfill the review and approval responsibilities of
this Article.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -73-
ARTICLE XXIII
NONCONFORMING USES, BUILDINGS AND LOTS
Section 23.01 - Continuation of Use. A lawful use of land, structure or a lawful use of land and structure exactly as such
existed before the date of adoption of this amendment may be continued, as hereinafter provided, as a nonconforming use or a
nonconforming structure, although the use of the land or structure of the structure itself does not conform with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
Section 23.02 - Repair and Alternation of Nonconforming Uses. Maintenance and repairs of a building or other structure
continuing a nonconforming use are permitted provided that such repairs do not extend the area or volume of space occupied by the
nonconforming use, except as provided in Section 23.05.
Section 23.03 - Nonconforming Residential Dwelling Alteration Permitted. A building or other structure containing residential
nonconforming uses may be altered in any way to improve its livability provided that no such alternation may be made which will
increase the number of dwelling units or the volume of the building, as provided in Section 23.05.
Section 23.04 - Change of Use. A nonconforming use may be changed only to a conforming use. A nonconforming use may
not be extended to displace a conforming use, nor may a building or structure regardless of the conformity or ownership, be
combined with another building or structure, for the purpose of extending an existing nonconforming use or creating a different
nonconforming use, except as permitted in Section 23,05..
Section 23.05 - Enlargement. A nonconforming use, building or structure may be enlarged up to but no more than twenty-five
(25) percent of its floor area as it existed at the date of adoption of the Ordinance amendment. Any such enlargement(s) must
conform to all other ordinance and/or regulations governing the district in which it is situated. This provision may be used any
number of times provided that the total enlargement(s) of the building or structure does not exceed the twenty-five (25) percent
limitation as herein set forth.
Section 23.06 - Restoration of Nonconforming Use. A nonconforming use, building or structure damaged by fire, casualty,
or act of God may be restored, reconstructed and use as before provided that the volume of such use, building or structure may not
exceed, subject to the provision of Section 23.02, 23.03, 23.04 and 23.05 above, the volume which existed prior to such damage
and that any such restoration or reconstruction be substantially completed within one year of the occurrence of the damage.
Section 23.07 - Time of Termination. A nonconforming use shall be deemed to be permanently discontinued when such use
has been discontinued or such building has been vacant for a period of one (1) year.
Section 23.08 - Nonconforming Lots In Residential Districts. A single-family dwelling may be erected on a vacant lot
located in a residentially zoned district allowing the construction of a single-family dwelling, provided such lot was nonconforming
on March 2, 1966, provided the dwelling conforms to the following yard setback requirements:
A Front Yard: The front yard shall conform to front yard setback requirement of the district in which the lot is
located.
B. Side Yard: There shall be a side yard of no less than five (5) feet.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -74- Public Consulting Team
Side Yard Street Frontage: The side yard shall be not less than ten (10) feet.
C. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard no less than ten (10) feet.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -75-
ARTICLE XXIV
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
Section 24.01 - Creation and Rules of Procedure. There is hereby created a five-member Zoning Board, hereinafter referred to
as the Zoning Board of Appeals or BZA, which shall perform its duties and exercise its powers and jurisdiction according to the
provisions of this Ordinance to the end that the objectives of this Ordinance are observed, public safety and general welfare secured,
and substantial justice done. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix rules and regulations to govern its procedures.
Section 24.02 - M embership. Members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City of Buchanan
subject to confirmation by the City Commission. The membership shall serve at the pleasure of the City Commission for three year
terms. The City Commission may appoint two alternate members who shall serve in the absence of any member(s) or serve in the
instance that a member must be recused from any matter before the Board.
Section 24.03 - Jurisdiction. In addition to the duties and powers prescribed in other sections of this Ordinance, the Zoning Board
of Appeals shall hear and decide on all matters relating to the following:
1. Appeals From Administrative Decisions. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals from,
and review any order, requirement, decision or determination made by Zoning Administrator and shall act upon
all questions as they may arise in the administration of this Ordinance.
2. Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall interpret the boundary
of any zoning ordinance district as depicted on the Official Zoning Map should a question of interpretation arise.
3. Issue Variances From the Strict Terms of the Ordinance. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall upon written
application in specific cases may issue a variance from the terms of this Ordinance or vary the strict interpretation
of the terms of this Ordinance as shall not be contrary to the public interest owing to special conditions where a
literal enforcement of the provision of this Ordinance would result in hardship to the applicant.
4. Issue Variances From the Strict Terms of Yard Setback Requirements. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall
upon written application in specific cases vary from the strict interpretation issue a variance from the terms of this
Ordinance as shall not be contrary to the public interest owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provision of lot and yard setback requirements .
5. Hear and Decide Appeals Concerning Issuance of Special Use Permits. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall
hear and decide any appeal from any decision made concerning issuance or denial of a Special Use Permit made
by the Planning Commission.
Section 24.04 - Public Notification and Public Hearing Requirements. Whenever the approval of an application is required
by the Zoning Board of Appeals under the provisions of this Ordinance, the Zoning Board of Appeals will set a date for public
hearing on such application and give public notice thereof not less than seven (7) nor more than fifteen (15) days prior to the date
of such meeting by publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the City and shall be sent by mail or personal general
delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being considered, to all persons whom real property is assessed within three
hundred (300) feet of the boundary of the property in question, and to the occupants of all structures within three hundred (300) feet,
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -76- Public Consulting Team
except that the notice shall be given not less than five (5) and not more than fifteen (15) days before the application will be
considered. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term occupant may be used in making notification. Notification need
not be given to more than one (1) occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one (1) dwelling unit or spatial
area owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, one (1) occupant of each unit or spatial area
shall receive notice. In the case of a single structure containing more than four (4) dwelling units or other distinct spatial area owned
or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the
structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure. The notice shall:
A. Describe the nature of the proposed amendment requested;
B. Indicate the property which is the subject of the rezoning or nature of the change on the zoning ordinance
text, as applicable;
C. State when and where the public hearing will be held;
D. Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request.
Any person who is interested in such application or the determination thereof may appear before the Zoning Board of Appeals in
person or by attorney and shall be permitted to state the reasons for approval or disapproval of such application.
Section 24.05 - Standards for Approvals
The Zoning Board of Appeals, in rendering a decision, shall base their decisions on the general and when applicable the specific
standards for interpretation or variance, as set forth below:
1. General Standards for Approval. In reaching its determination on an application or appeal, the Zoning Board
of Appeals shall consider the following:
A. Whether the location, use, nature, intensity of operation, and congestion and density of population will
be in conflict with the principal permitted uses of the district or with the purposes of this Ordinance.
B. Whether the available sewage disposal and water supply facilities will be adequate and safe.
C. Whether the lot size and yard area will be in harmony with the orderly and proper development of the
district.
D. Whether adequate access to the building or use will be provided by either existing roadsOor other roads
to be constructed.
E. Whether the building or use will be objectionable to nearby properties and their owners by reason of
traffic, noise, vibration, dust, blowing sand and erosion, disposal of waste or sewage, fumes, smoke, air
pollution, fire hazard, or bright flashing lights.
F. Whether the building or use will discourage or hinder the appropriate development and use of lands and
buildings in the general vicinity.
2. Standards for Zoning Boundary Interpretation. When the exact boundary of a district is uncertain and
upon the filling of an application for an interpretation is filed, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall first consider
the boundary location based on the scale of the zoning map and secondly the intended purpose of the Plan
Commission in placing the boundary in a location not within a property line, geographic feature or other easily
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -77-
identifiable geographic identifier.
3. Standards for Approval of Variances. In approving a variance the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider
the following standards with respect to the application:
A. That the application demonstrated special conditions and circumstances which exist that are particular
to the land, structure or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures or
buildings in the same district;
B. That under the terms of this Ordinance, the literal interpretation of the provisions of this Ordinance
would deprive the applicant of right commonly enjoyed by other proprieties in the same district;
C. That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant;
D. An existing nonconforming use of land, structures or buildings, shall not be considered grounds for the
issuance of a variance;
E. That the variance requested is the minimum variance which would make possible reasonable use of the
land, buildings or structures.;
F. That the Zoning Board of Appeals may issues a statement of positive findings that the variance will be
in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this ordinance and will not be injurious to the
neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare; and
G. The Zoning Board of Appeals has established such appropriate conditions and safeguards to assure
conformity with the terms of this Ordinance which shall be attached as conditions of the variance.
Section 24.06 - Abandonment Or Recision of A Zoning Board of Appeals Action. If any appeal or variance is not put into
effect within six (6) months of the date of approval by the Zoning Board of Appeals is discontinued through vacancy of the premises,
lack of operation or otherwise for a continuous period of six (6) months, the variance shall lapse and be null and void. Future use
of said property shall conform in its entirety to the provisions of this Ordinance; however, the Zoning Board of Appeals, for good
cause, may grant an extension of time, not to exceed six (6) months, to comply with or to continue the variance, if in its judgment,
such extension is necessary in order to avoid injustice or undue hardship to the owners of the property.
Section 24.07 - Procedure of Appeals, Meetings and Public Notice. The following rules of procedure will govern the operation
and decision making of the Zoning Board of Appeals:
1. Upon receiving an application with any fee established by the terms of this Ordinance (See Article XXVI, Section
26.04) for an appeal from any order, requirement, determination or decision of the Zoning Administrator, such
appeal shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the Zoning Board of Appeals by general rule by
the filing with the City Clerk and with the Zoning Board of Appeals, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds
thereof. The Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Zoning Board of Appeals, all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
2. A concurring vote of a simple majority of the entire Zoning Board of Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any
order, decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter
upon which they are required to pass under this Ordinance or to affect any variation of the Ordinance.
3. Upon receiving an application for an appeal, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -78- Public Consulting Team
and give notice as required by law as set forth in Article XIV, Section 24.04.
4. The Zoning Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement,
decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator. Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary
hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this Ordinance, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have
the power in passing upon appeals to vary or modify any of the rules, regulations or provisions relating to the
construction, erection or alteration of buildings or structures so that the spirit of this Ordinance shall be observed,
public health and safety secured, and substantial justice is accomplished.
Section 24.08 - Appeals From the Zoning Board of Appeals. In the event the Zoning Board of Appeals fails to reach a
decision on any matter within thirty (30) days after the hearing thereon, the person affected shall have the right to first appeal to the
Board of Zoning Appeals and then thereafter the appropriate Berrien County Trial Court on question of law and fact.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -79-
ARTICLE XXV
AMENDMENTS
Section 25.01 - Initiation. Amendments to this Ordinance may be initiated by the City Commission upon its own motion, by the
Plan Commission, or may be proposed for consideration by the petition of the owners of property which would be involved or
affected by such change or amendment. All proposed amendments not originating with the Plan Commission shall first be referred
to the Plan Commission for study, review and recommendation.
Section 25.02 - Plan Commission Procedures. Amendments to this Ordinance, after the review and recommendation of the Plan
Commission, may be adopted and enacted by the City Commission. The procedures to be followed in the enactment of an
amendment to this Ordinance are those prescribed by the City Charter of the City of Buchanan for the enactment of any other kind
of ordinance and Public Act 207 of 1921 as amended.
1. Application for Amending the Zoning Ordinance. An applicant, the City Commission or Plan Commission,
upon its own action, may initiate an application for amending the zoning ordinance text or map. An application
(on a form provide by the City with any established by this Ordinance (See Article XXVI, Section 26.04) shall
be filed with the Zoning Administrator who shall immediately transmit the application to the Plan Commission,
if the application did not originate from the Plan Commission.
2. Plan Commission Public Hearing Required. Upon receipt of an application for a zoning amendment,
a notice that a request for zoning amendment has been received and that a public hearing will be held shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City and shall be sent by mail or personal general delivery
to the owners of property for which approval is being considered, to all persons whom real property is assessed
within three hundred (300) feet of the boundary of the property in question, and to the occupants of all structures
within three hundred (300) feet, except that the notice shall be given not less than five (5) and not more than
fifteen (15) days before the application will be considered. If the name of the occupant is not known, Ae tem
occupant may be used in making notification. Notification need not be given to more than one (1) occupant
of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one (1) dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased
by different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, one (1) occupant of each unit or spatial area
shall receive notice. In the case of a single structure containing more than four (4) dwelling units or other distinct
spatial areas owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, notice may be
given to the manager or owner of the structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance
to the structure. The notice shall:
A. Describe the nature of the proposed amendment requested;
B. Indicate the property which is the subject of the rezoning or nature of the change on the zoning ordinance
text, as applicable;
C. State when and where the public hearing will be held;
D. Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request;
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -80- Public Consulting Team
3. Plan Commission Review and Recommendation.. Within thirty (30) days following the public hearing, the
Plan Commission shall review the application for the amendment and comments received at the public hearing,
the site plan, and other materials submitted in relation to the application, and take action to recommend approval
or denial of the application to the City Commission. The decision shall be incorporated in a statement of
conclusions relative to the amendment under consideration. The decision shall specify the basis for the decision,
and any special circumstances utilized in arriving at the recommendation. The recommendation of the Plan
Commission on application shall be made in accordance with conformance with the City of Buchanan
Comprehensive Plan, as from time to time is amended, and such standards contained in this Ordinance which
relate to the matters under consideration. Immediately upon action by the Plan Commission, the application, and
all supporting documentation including the written report of the Plan Commission shall be transmitted to the City
Clerk for inclusion on the City Commission agenda.
Section 25.03 - City Commission Review and Approval. Upon receipt of an application and recommendation to amend the
Ordinance, the City Commission shall cause the action to be scheduled for Commission consideration and action. Prior to
consideration of an action to approve or deny a request to amend the Ordinance, the City Commission shall consider the report and
recommendation of the Plan Commission. The City Commission may provide for an additional public hearing. The City
Commission may approve the amendment by a simple majority vote unless a protest petition is presented meeting the provisions
of Section 4 of Public Act 207 of 1921 as amended is presented to the City Commission. A minimum two-thirds (b) majority vote
by the City Commission is required to approve an amendment upon the filing of a valid protest petition.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -81-
ARTICLE XXVI
ADMINISTRATION, FEES AND VIOLATIONS
Section 26.01 - Zoning Administrator. The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered by the Zoning Administrator
appointed by the City Manager. Said Zoning Administrators duties shall the administration of this Ordinance as prescribed by this
Ordinance, including issuance of all zoning compliance permits whether as an individual permit or as part of the issuance of a
building permit pursuant to the Michigan Construction Code, acceptance of any and all applications required in the administration
of the Ordinance any other duties assigned or delegated to the Zoning Administrator by the City Manager or any other law regulation
or Ordinance of the State of Michigan or the City of Buchanan.
Section 26.02 - Code Enforcement Officer. The enforcement of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the
City Manager or by the Code Enforcement Officer designated by and responsible to the City Manager.
Section 26.03 - Duties and Powers - Zoning Administrator and Code Enforcement Officer. The Zoning Administrator and
Code Enforcement Officer shall have the following powers in addition to those set forth in Section 26.01 above:
1. Form of Application, Permits and Certificates. The Zoning Administrator may prescribe the form of all
applications, permits, and certificates required under the terms of the ordinance. If no form is prescribed, a written
document in the form of a letter requesting permission, in the case of an application stating precisely what
permission is requested, or granting permission, in the case of a permit, stating precisely what permission is
granted will suffice.
2. Receive Applications. The Zoning Administrator will receive and examine and certify completeness of all
applications for permits, certificates, variances, and all other applications required under the terms of this
ordinance.
3. Refer Applications to the Plan Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning Administrator shall
upon a finding that an application is complete must refer all applications for permits, certificates, variances,
special use permits and any other applications to the appropriate body within twenty (20) days upon making
determination that the submission is complete.
4. Issue or Refuse Permits. The Zoning Administrator must issue permits for constructions, alternation, and
occupancy of those uses which comply with the requirements of this Ordinance, within thirty (30) days after the
receipt of the application. The refusal of a permit must be in writing and shall state the reasons for the denial.
5. Issue Notice of Violation. The Zoning Administrator or Code Enforcement Officer must issue a written
notice of violation to each violator of this Ordinance, stating the nature of the violations. Duplicate copies of the
notice must be sent to the Plan Commission and City Manager.
6. Make Recommendations. The Zoning Administrator or Code Enforcement Officer may make
recommendations to the Plan Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals and City Manager for any action deemed
necessary.
7. Records. The Zoning Administrator must keep records of applications, permits, or certificated issued,
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Page -82- Public Consulting Team
of variances and special use permits granted, inspections made, any reports, notices or orders issued.
8. Additional Duties and Powers. The Zoning Administrator or Code Enforcement Officer must preform all
other duties, and may exercise all other powers and privileges, as may be provided or made necessary by the terms
of this Ordinance.
Section 26.04 - Fees. A schedule of fees necessary to cover the cost of processing an application and administration of this
Ordinance is required at the time of application for a Cluster Development, (Section 15.06), Planned Unit Development (Section
10.04), a Special Use Permit (Section 20.02), Home Occupation Special Use Permit (Section 20.05), Site Plan Approval (Section
22.03), action of the Zoning Board of Appeals (Section 24.07(1), or Amendment (Section 25.02(1) shall, from time-to-time, be
established by resolution of the City Commission. No part of any fee shall be refundable.
Section 26.05 - Violations and Penalties. Buildings erected, altered, razed or converted for use carried on in violation of any
provision of this Ordinance are hereby declared to be a nuisance per se. The court having jurisdiction shall order such nuisances
to be abated and the person in charge of such building or land shall be adjudged guilty of maintaining a nuisance per se. Any person
that commits a violation, takes part ion or assists in any violation of any provisions of the Ordinance shall be guilty of misdemeanor.
Upon conviction thereof before any court of competent jurisdiction the person shall be punished by a fine of not less that twenty-five
($25.00) and no dollars nor more than one hundred ($100.00) and no dollars for each offence, or shall be punished by imprisonment
in the Berrien County Jail for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both, such fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the
court, each day that a violation is permitted to exist after conviction shall constitute a separate offence.
City of Buchanan, Michigan Comprehensive Zoning Amendment - 2003
Public Consulting Team Page -83-
ARTICLE XXVII
SEVERABILITY, EFFECTIVE DATE AND ADOPTION
Section 27.01 - Severability and Validity. This Ordinance and the various parts, sections, subsections and clauses thereof,
are (hereby) declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, subsection, section or clause is adjudged unconstitutional
or invalid, (it is hereby proposed that) the remainder of the ordinance shall not be affected thereby. If any part, sentence, paragraph,
subsection, or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid as applied to a particular property, building or other structure, (it is
hereby provided that) the application of such portion of the Ordinance to the property, building or structures shall not be affected
thereby. Whenever any condition or limitation is included in an order authorizing a Planned Unit Development or any variance,
special use, nonconforming use, zoning compliance permit, occupancy permit, site plan approval, or certificate of nonconformance,
it shall be conclusively presumed that the authorizing officer or body considered such condition of limitation necessary to carry out
the spirit and purpose of this Ordinance or the requirement of some provision hereof, to protect the public health, safety and welfare
and that the officer or board would not have granted the authorization to which the condition or limitation pertains except in the
belief that the condition or limitation was lawful.
Section 27.02 - Conflicting Ordinances. Ordinance No. 154, entitled Zoning Ordinance of the City of Buchanan is expressly
amended in its entirety and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the
extent they conflict with this Ordinance.
Section 27.03 - Effective Date. This ordinance shall become effective on the 11 day of th September 2003 following the
publication thereof.
Section 27.04 - Adoption. Public Hearing having been duly held on May 28, 2003, by the Plan Commission this
Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance Amendment was duly adopted at a regular meeting of the City Commission of the City of
Buchanan, Berrien County, Michigan on September 8, 2003,
_____________________________ _______________________________
David P. Hagey Gladys ByBee
Mayor Clerk
