CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF CLARE, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Published in 2004 by Order of the City Commission 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
CLARE, MICHIGAN 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Pat Humphrey 
Mayor 
____________ 
Jim Allen 
Rene Crawford 
Bill Horwood 
Steve Kingsbury 
City Commission 
____________ 
Ken Hibl 
City Manager 
____________ 
Jaynie Smith Hoerauf 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Christine Burns 
City Clerk 
CURRENT 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
CLARE, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Pat Humphrey 
Mayor 
____________ 
Jennifer Dancer 
Bill Horwood 
Tom Koch 
Jean McConnell 
City Commission 
____________ 
Ken Hibl 
City Manager 
____________ 
Jaynie Smith Hoerauf 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Diane Lyon 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Clare, Michigan. 
    Source material used in the preparation of the Code was the 1985 Code, as supplemented. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1985 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Bill Carroll, Senior Code Attorney, and Leesa Hampton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Ken Hibl, City Manager, Christine Burns, City Clerk, and Jaynie Smith Hoerauf, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Clare, Michigan. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; charter references; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Clare, Michigan. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Clare, Michigan. 2004. 
ORDINANCE 2004-004 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF CLARE, MICHIGAN; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
THE CITY OF CLARE ORDAINS: 
Section 1. This ordinance shall be known as the "Code of Ordinance adopting ordinance" and may be so cited. 
Section 2. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Clare, Michigan" published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 52, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 3. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before August 18, 2003, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
Section 4. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 5. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 and/or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days in the discretion of the court. However, unless otherwise provided by law, a person convicted of a violation of this Code which substantially corresponds to a violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of imprisonment is 93 days shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, and costs of prosecution or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 93 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 6. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Commission to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 7. Ordinances adopted after August 18, 2003, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
MADE, PASSED, AND ADOPTED THIS 20TH DAY OF SEPTEMBER 2004. 
IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 7.5 OF THE CITY CHARTER, THIS ORDINANCE IS DECLARED NOT TO BE AN EMERGENCY IN NATURE AND WILL BECOME EFFECTIVE 15 DAYS AFTER ADOPTION BY THE CITY COMMISSION. 
WE HEREBY CERTIFY THAT THE ABOVE ORDINANCE WAS DULY ADOPTED BY THE CITY COMMISSION AND SIGNED BY THE MAYOR AND CLERK ON THE 20TH DAY OF SEPTEMBER 2004. 
___________ ___________ Pat Humphrey, Mayor Christine M. Burns, City Clerk  
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
  
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    Adding to this table with each supplement helps users of this Code of Ordinances gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 2010-002  7-19-2010 Included 8 2010-003  9- 7-2010 Included 8 2010-004  9- 7-2010 Included 8 2010-005  9- 7-2010 Omitted 8 2010-006  9-20-2010 Included 8 2010-010 12- 1-2010 Included 8 2011-001  1-17-2011 Included 9 2011-002  2- 7-2011 Included 9 2011-003  2- 7-2011 Included 9 2011-004  3- 7-2011 Included 9 2011-005  3-21-2011 Included 9 2011-006  4- 4-2011 Included 9 2011-007  7-18-2011 Included 9 2011-010  9- 6-2011 Included 9 2011-011  8- 1-2011 Omitted 9 2011-012  9-19-2011 Included 9 2012-001  1- 3-2012 Included 10 2012-002  2- 6-2012 Included 10 2012-003  6-18-2012 Included 10 2012-004  6-18-2012 Included 10 2012-006 11- 5-2012 Included 11 2012-007 11- 5-2012 Included 11 2012-008 11- 5-2012 Included 11 2013-001  7-15-2013 Included 12 2013-002  6-17-2013 Omitted 12 2013-003 12-16-2013 Included 13 2013-004 12-16-2013 Omitted 13 2014-001  3-17-2014 Included 14 2014-002  6- 2-2014 Included 14 2014-003  8- 4-2014 Included 15 2014-004  8-18-2014 Omitted 15 2014-005  8-18-2014 Omitted 15 2014-006  9-15-2014 Included 15 2014-007  9-15-2014 Included 15 2014-008 10- 6-2014 Included 15 2014-009 10- 6-2014 Included 15 2014-010 11-17-2014 Included 15 2015-002  4-20-2015 Omitted 16 2015-003  4-20-2015 Included 16 2015-004  8- 4-2015 Included 16 2015-001  3-22-2015 Omitted 17 2015-005  9- 8-2015 Included 17 2016-001  6- 6-2016 Included 18 2016-002 12- 5-2016 Included 19 2016-003 12-19-2016 Omitted 19 2016-136(Res.) 12- 5-2016 Omitted 19 2017-001  5-15-2017 Included 20 2017-002  5-15-2017 Included 20 2017-003  9-18-2017 Included 21 2017-004 11- 6-2017 Omitted 21 2017-005 11- 6-2017 Included 21 2017-006 11- 6-2017 Included 21 2017-007 12- 4-2017 Included 21 2017-009 12- 4-2017 Included 21 2017-149 (Res.) 11- 6-2017 Included 21 2018-001  1- 2-2018 Included 22 2018-002  3- 5-2018 Included 22 2018-003  4- 7-2018 Included 22 2018-004  5- 7-2018 Included 22 2018-005  9- 4-2018 Included 23 2018-006 10- 1-2018 Included 23 2018-007 10- 1-2018 Omitted 23 2018-008 11- 5-2018 Included 23 2019-001  2- 4-2019 Omitted 23  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed in this part is the Home Rule Charter of the city, which was approved at an election held on March 12, 1948, and made effective on April 12, 1948. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Provisions which are obsolete are indicated by editor's notes. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to frame adopt and amend charter, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 22; home rule cities act, MCL 117.1 et seq. 

PREAMBLE 
    In order to establish a more perfect city government and to better provide for, promote and maintain the essential interests of our people, including the maintenance of public peace, health and morals and the efficient achievement of public activities, the electors of the City of Clare, the County of Clare and State of Michigan, pursuant to the authority granted them by the constitution and general laws of said state, hereby establish the Charter of the City of Clare, to read as follows: 
CHAPTER 1. - CONTINUATION OF EXISTING CORPORATION; BOUNDARIES 

Section 1.1. - Continuation of existing corporation. 
    The municipal corporation now existing and known as the City of Clare, County of Clare, State of Michigan, shall continue as a body politic and corporate under the same name; shall include the present territory of the city, as hereinafter described; with power and authority to hereafter change its boundaries in the manner prescribed by law. 
Section 1.2. - Boundaries. 
    The territory within the boundaries of said City of Clare shall be as follows: 
    All that tract of country situated in the County of Clare, viz: The southwest quarter of the southeast quarter, and the south half of the southwest quarter of Section 26; the south half of the southeast quarter and the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 27; the east three-fourths of Section 34 and the west three-fourths of Section 35; all in town 17N of range 4W. 
Editor's note- Annexations are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Section 1.3. - Alteration of boundaries. 
    Territory may be added to or detached from the city in the manner provided in Public Act No. 279 of 1909 (MCL 117.1 et seq.), as amended. In addition to the procedures for the annexation and detachment of territory provided by said act and under the authority granted by the provisions of section 18 thereof, as amended by Public Act No. 86 of 1941 (MCL 117.18), permitting any city which revises its charter to include in such revised charter any power, limitation, or provision granted or passed by the legislature for the government of such city and contained in the charter to be revised, and providing further, that when any such power, limitation, or provision is contained in any such revised charter, the same shall continue with the same force and effect as when granted or passed by the legislature in the first instance; the charter commission of the City of Clare which was elected to frame this charter, and the people of said city in adopting the same as the Charter of the City of Clare, do expressly include and continue in said charter section 1 of chapter II of Public Act No. 215 of 1895 (MCL 82.1), which constitutes a part of the charter of Clare which was granted or passed by the legislature for the government of said city by Act No. 457 of the Local Acts of 1901, which retained section reads as follows: 
    "Whenever the council of any city shall determine by resolution to alter the boundaries of such city, either by taking in lands and premises adjoining thereto, or by taking out any lands and premises included in such city, or both, they shall petition the board of supervisors of the county in which such lands and premises affected thereby are situated to make such change. Such petition shall contain a description by metes and bounds of the lands and premises proposed to be added to or taken out of such city and be accompanied by a map of said lands, and set forth the reasons for the proposed change, and shall contain a copy of the resolution of the council in relation thereto, and shall be certified to by the clerk under the official seal of such city. Before such petition shall be presented to the board of supervisors, notice shall be given by the city clerk of the time and place when the same will be presented for consideration, by publishing the same in one or more newspapers published in such city for at least three weeks immediately preceding the presentation of the same. Such notice shall also contain a description of the premises proposed to be taken in or out of the boundaries of such city. At the time of presenting such petition, all parties interested may appear before such board of supervisors and be heard touching the proposed boundaries of such city, and after such hearing and due consideration of such petition, it shall be the duty of the board of supervisors to order and determine as to whether the prayer contained in the petition or any part thereof shall be granted, and they shall make an order of such determination, which order shall be entered upon their records, and thereupon, if a change of boundaries shall be ordered, then such boundaries of the city shall be fixed and shall exist as provided in such order, and a certified copy thereof shall be transmitted to the clerk of such city and to the secretary of state, and such order shall be prima facie evidence of such change of boundaries of such city and of the regularity of such proceedings in all courts and places, provided that the board of supervisors shall not change the boundaries of any city in such a manner as to affect the boundaries of a representative district at a time when changes in the boundaries of representative districts are prohibited." 
State Law reference- Alteration of boundaries, MCL 117.6 et seq. 
CHAPTER 2. - MUNICIPAL POWERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for preservation of public peace, health and safety, MCL 117.3(j); charter provisions relative to ordinances, MCL 117.3(k). 

Section 2.1. - Powers of the city. 
    All powers, privileges, and immunities, not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter, possessed by the City of Clare by virtue of its incorporation as such and enumerated in the charter of said city granted by the state legislature by Act No. 457 of the Michigan Local Acts of 1901, and as subsequently amended, which charter is hereby superseded, are expressly retained by the City of Clare under this charter. Further, unless otherwise provided or limited in this chapter, the City of Clare and its officers shall be vested with any and all powers, privileges, and immunities, expressed and implied, which cities and their officers and, or hereafter may be, permitted to exercise or to provide for in their charters under the constitution and laws of the State of Michigan, including all the powers, privileges, and immunities granted to cities and officers of cities of the fourth class by Public Act No. 215 of 1895 (MCL 81.1 et seq.), as amended, and all the powers, privileges, and immunities which cities are permitted to or may provide in their charters by Public Act No. 279 of 1909 (MCL 117.1 et seq.), as amended, as fully and completely as though those powers, privileges, and immunities were specifically enumerated in and provided for in this charter, and in no case shall any enumeration of particular powers, privileges, or immunities in this charter be held to be exclusive. 
Section 2.2. - Additional powers of city. 
    The city and its officers shall have power to exercise all municipal powers in the management and control of municipal property and in the administration of the municipal government, whether such powers be expressly enumerated or not; to do any act to advance the interests of the city, the good government and prosperity of the municipality and its inhabitants; and through its regularly constituted authority, to pass and enforce all laws, ordinances, and resolutions relating to its municipal concerns, subject to the constitution and general laws of the state and the provisions of this charter. 
Section 2.3. - Additional powers of city. 
    This charter specifically adopts as an integral part every power of section 4-a, 4-b, 4-c, 4-d, 4-e, 4-f, 4-g, 4-h, 4-i, and 4-j of Public Act No. 279 of 1909 (MCL 117.4a et seq.), as amended, which subsections permit this charter to provide. 
Section 2.4. - Intergovernmental contracts. 
    The city shall have power to join with any governmental unit or agency, or with any number or combination thereof by contract, or otherwise as may be permitted by law, to perform jointly, or by one or more, for or on behalf of the other or others, any power or duty which is permitted to be so performed by law or which is possessed or imposed upon each such governmental unit or agency. 
State Law reference- Intergovernmental contracts between municipal corporations, MCL 124.1 et seq.; intergovernmental transfers of functions and responsibilities, MCL 124.531 et seq. 
Section 2.5. - Outside fire protection. 
    In exercise of the powers contained in section 2.2 herein, the city commission shall have the right to contract with individuals or governing bodies to furnish fire protection to property outside the corporate limits of the City of Clare for a fair consideration, if the commission shall find that the financial interests of the city are advanced by obtaining payments therefor; and/or that the prosperity of the municipality and its inhabitants are advanced through preventing a conflagration which might spread within the city limits or through protecting from fire industrial or commercial properties which employ residents of the City of Clare. 
Section 2.6. - Issuance of mortgage revenue bonds. 
    The city shall have power to issue mortgage bonds beyond the general limits of bonded indebtedness prescribed by law for the acquiring, owning, purchasing, constructing, improving or operating of any public utility, provided, such mortgage bonds issued beyond the general limit of bonded indebtedness prescribed by law shall not impose any liability upon such city, but shall be secured only upon the property and revenues of such public utility, including a franchise, stating the terms upon which, in case of foreclosure, the purchaser may operate the same, which franchise shall in no case extend for a longer period than twenty years from the date of the sale of such utility and franchise on foreclosure. Such mortgage bonds shall be sold to yield not to exceed six percentum, per annum. A sinking fund shall be created in the event of the issuance of such bonds, by setting aside such percentage of the gross or net earnings of the public utility as may be deemed sufficient for the payment of the mortgage bonds at maturity; provided, however, that no such need be created if serial bonds are issued of such a nature that they are paid annually and no sinking fund is required. 
Section 2.7. - Power to support library. 
    In accordance with the authority of Public Act No. 86 of 1941 (MCL 117.18), previously cited in section 1.3 of this charter, there is expressly included and continued in this charter the power contained in section 1 of chapter XI of Public Act No. 215 of 1895 (MCL 91.1), which constitutes a part of the charter of Clare granted or passed by the legislature for said city, to establish and maintain a public library, and to provide a suitable building therefor, and to aid in maintaining such other public libraries as may be established within the city by private beneficence as the council may deem to be for the public good. 
Section 2.8. - Exercise of power. 
    Where no procedure is set forth in this charter for the exercise of any power granted to or possessed by the city and its officers, resort may be had to any procedure set forth in any statute of the State of Michigan, which was passed for the government of cities or townships, or in any other statute of the State of Michigan. If alternate procedures are to be found in different statutes, then the commission shall select that procedure which it deems to be most expeditious and to the best advantage of the city and its inhabitants. Where no procedure for the exercise of any power of the city is set forth, either in this charter or in any statute of the State of Michigan, the commission may prescribe by ordinance a reasonable procedure for the exercise thereof. 
State Law reference- Permissible that charter provide that the city may exercise all municipal powers in the management and control of municipal property and in the administration of municipal government, MCL 117.4j(3). 
Section 2.9. - Succession to properties of present city. 
    The city shall succeed to, own and possess, and control all the records and documents; all the property of whatever name or nature and whatever situated within or without the boundaries of said city; and all privileges, grants, franchises, powers and immunities now possessed by the existing City of Clare. 
Section 2.10. - Liability of obligations of present city. 
    It shall be subject to and liable for all debts, liabilities, and obligations of the present city now in existence or which may hereafter be incurred and shall make suitable provisions for the liquidation and payment of the same. 
CHAPTER 3. - PLAN OF GOVERNMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for necessary officers, MCL 117.3(a); charter to provide for qualifications and duties of its officers, MCL 117.3(d). 

Section 3.1. - Commission-manager government. 
    The purpose of this charter is to provide for the commission-manager form of government. 
Section 3.2. - The City commission. 
    The electors of the city shall elect a city commission of five members, one of whom shall serve as mayor, which commission shall constitute the legislative and governing body of the city and which shall have power and authority, except as in this charter otherwise provided, to exercise all powers conferred upon or possessed by the city, and shall have the power and authority to adopt such laws, ordinances and resolutions as it shall deem proper in the exercise thereof. In all cases where the word "commission" is used in this charter, the same shall be synonymous with the word "council" or any other term used in any state or federal law in referring to municipal legislative or governing bodies. 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for election of city council, MCL 117.3(a). 
Section 3.3. - Qualifications of commissioners. 
    Members of the city commission shall be duly qualified electors of the city who have been residents thereof at least two years immediately prior to the date of their election. The commission shall be sole judge of the election and qualification of its own members, subject only to review by the court. 
Section 3.4. - Compensation of commissioners. 
    Members of the commission, including the mayor, shall receive no compensation for their services as such, but their reasonable and necessary expenses actually incurred in the services of the city shall be paid upon order of the commission. 
Section 3.5. - Election of mayor. 
    The city commission shall, at its first meeting following each regular city election, elect one of its members to serve as mayor for a term expiring at the first commission meeting following the next regular city election. 
Section 3.6. - Duties of mayor. 
(a)  Insofar as required by law, and for all ceremonial purposes, the mayor shall be recognized as the head of the city. He shall have an equal voice and vote in the proceedings of the commission, but shall have no veto power. He shall be the presiding officer of the commission. 
(b)  He shall be a conservator of the peace, and may exercise within the city the powers conferred upon sheriffs to suppress disorder, and shall have the power to command the assistance of all ablebodied citizens to aid in the enforcement of the ordinances of the city, and to suppress riot and disorderly conduct. 
(c)  He shall authenticate by his signature such instruments as the commission, this charter, or the laws of the State of Michigan or of the United States shall require. 
(d)  He shall exercise only such powers as the state laws, this charter, or the commission shall specifically confer upon or require of him. 
Section 3.7. - Mayor pro tem. 
    The city commission may designate a mayor pro tem to perform the duties of the mayor when, because of absence from the city, disability, or otherwise, the mayor is temporarily unable to perform the duties of his office. 
Section 3.8. - City manager. 
    The commission shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite period, and shall fix his compensation. He shall serve at the pleasure of the commission. The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city government. He shall be selected on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to his training and experience and without regard to his political or religious preferences. If he is not a resident of the City of Clare at the time of his appointment, he shall become a resident thereof within 90 days after his appointment, and shall so remain throughout his tenure of office. 
Section 3.9. - Functions and duties of city manager. 
    The functions and duties of the city manager shall be: 
(a)  To see that all laws and ordinances are enforced; 
(b)  To appoint, with the consent of the commission, the heads of the several city departments whose appointment is not otherwise specified herein; and to remove such department heads without the consent of the commission; 
(c)  To manage and supervise all public improvements, works and undertakings of the city. He shall have charge of the construction, repair, maintenance, and cleaning of streets, sidewalks, bridges, pavements, sewers, and of all public buildings or other property belonging to the city. He shall manage and supervise all city utilities and shall be responsible for the presentation of property, tools, and appliances of the city; 
(d)  To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise, or in any contract, are faithfully kept and performed; 
(e)  To recommend an annual budget to the city commission and to administer the budget as finally adopted under policies formulated by the commission, and to keep the commission fully advised at all times as to the financial condition and needs of the city; 
(f)  To recommend to the commission for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient; 
(g)  To assume all the duties and responsibilities as personnel director of all city employees or delegate such duties to some other officer or employee of the city. No such delegation shall relieve him of any responsibility for the proper conduct of such duties; 
(h)  To exercise and perform all administrative functions of the city that are not imposed by this charter or any city ordinance upon some other official; 
(i)  To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this charter or as may be required of him by ordinance or by direction of the commission. 
Section 3.10. - Acting city manager. 
    The commission may appoint or designate an acting city manager during the period of a vacancy in the office or during the absence of the city manager from the city. Such acting manager shall, while [he] is in such office, have all the responsibilities, duties, functions and authority of the city manager. 
Section 3.11. - Relationship of council to administrative service. 
    The city manager shall be responsible to the commission for the efficient administration of all departments of the city government under his jurisdiction. Neither the commission, nor any of its members or committees, shall dictate the appointment of any person to the office by the city manager, or in any way interfere with the city manager to prevent him from exercising his judgment in the appointment of officers and employees in the administrative service. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the commission and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the city manager, and neither the council, nor any member thereof, shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the city manager. 
Section 3.12. - City clerk; appointment. 
    The commission shall appoint a city clerk who shall serve at its pleasure, and shall fix his compensation. 
Section 3.13. - City clerk; functions and duties. 
(a)  The clerk shall be the clerk of the commission and shall attend all meetings of the commission and shall keep a permanent journal, in the English language, of its proceedings. He shall keep a record of all ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the commission. 
(b)  He shall be custodian of the city seal, and shall affix it to all documents and instruments requiring the seal, and shall attest the same. He shall also be custodian of all papers, documents, and records pertaining to the City of Clare, the custody of which is not otherwise provided for. He shall give to the proper departments or officials ample notice of the expiration or termination of any franchises, contracts, or agreements. 
(c)  He shall certify by his signature all ordinances and resolutions enacted or passed by the commission and perform any other duties required of him by state law, this charter, or by the commission. 
(d)  He shall provide and maintain in his office a supply of forms for all petitions required to be filed for any purpose by the provisions of this charter, and shall accept no petitions for any purpose set forth in this charter which are not on the forms provided by him for such purpose. 
(e)  He shall be responsible for the maintenance of a system of accounts of the city which shall conform to any uniform system required by state law and by the commission. All accounts of the city shall be balanced at the end of each calendar month, and a report made thereof by the clerk to the commission and the city manager. Provided, however, that the commission may provide for the responsibility of the maintenance of the accounts of the city by some officer other than the clerk. 
Section 3.14. - City treasurer, appointment. 
    The commission shall appoint a city treasurer who shall serve at its pleasure, and shall fix his compensation. 
Section 3.15. - City treasurer; functions and duties. 
(a)  The treasurer shall have the responsibility for the custody of all moneys of the city, the clerk's bond, and all evidences of value belonging to the city, or held in trust by the city. 
(b)  He shall receive all moneys belonging to and receivable by the city, including license fees, taxes, assessments, and all other charges belonging to and payable to the city and shall in all cases give a receipt therefor. 
(c)  He shall keep and deposit all moneys or funds in such a manner and only in such places as the commission may determine. He shall report the same in detail to the clerk. 
(d)  He shall have such powers and duties in regard to the collection and custody of state, county, school district, and city taxes and moneys as may be conferred upon him by this charter or by state law. 
(e)  He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by this charter or by the city commission. 
Section 3.16. - City attorney; appointment. 
    The commission shall appoint a city attorney who shall serve at its pleasure, and shall fix his compensation. 
Section 3.17. - City attorney; functions and duties. 
(a)  The city attorney shall act as legal advisor to, and attorney and counsel for, the commission and all its members in matters relating to their official duties. He shall give written opinions to any official or department of the city when requested in writing by the commission or the city manager so to do, and shall file a copy of same with the clerk. 
(b)  He shall conduct for the city all cases in all courts and before all legally constituted tribunals whenever the city is a party thereto. 
(c)  He shall prepare, or officially pass upon, all contracts, bonds, and other instruments in writing, in which the city is concerned, and shall certify before execution as to their legality and correctness of form. 
(d)  He shall file in the office of the clerk the original copy of all franchises granted by the city, of all contracts and agreements entered into by or on behalf of the city, and of all papers constituting a part of the proceedings in all courts or legally constituted tribunals to which the city is a party, together with the pertinent data and information concerning the same. 
(e)  He shall be charged with the responsibility of calling to the attention of the commission and the city manager all matters of law and changes or developments therein affecting the city. 
(f)  He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this charter or by the commission. 
(g)  Upon the recommendation of the city attorney, or upon its own motion, the commission may retain special legal counsel to handle any matter to which the city is a party or in which the city has an interest, or to assist and counsel with the city attorney therein. 
    The remuneration set by the commission for the city attorney shall be in contemplation of the normal duties of that office. Special compensation may be provided at the discretion of the commission in cases of appeals to, or litigation commenced in, the federal courts, the circuit court or state supreme court, work requiring extensive hearings before quasi-judicial or administrative tribunals, for legal work in connection with the issuance of bonds of the city, and for condemnation proceedings. No such special compensation shall be given by the commission except in accordance with an agreement between itself and the city attorney made before the service for which such special compensation is to be paid has been rendered. 
Section 3.18. - Other administrative officers; appointment. 
    The other administrative officers shall be the city assessor, city health officer, city engineer, chief of police, chief of fire, and such additional administrative officers as the city commission may deem necessary. All administrative officers except the city clerk, city treasurer, and the city attorney shall be appointed by the city manager, with the consent of the council, and shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager, who shall set their salaries or wages in accordance with budget appropriations. No person shall be eligible to appointment as an administrative officer of the city unless he be a citizen of the United States of America. 
Section 3.19. - Other administrative officers; functions and duties. 
    The city assessor shall possess all the powers vested in, and shall be charged with all the duties imposed upon, assessing officers by the general laws of the state. He shall make and prepare all regular and special assessment rolls in the manner prescribed by this charter and the general laws of the state. He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him in this charter or by the commission or city manager. 
    The functions and duties of each city department, and the duties and responsibilities of the officers and employees thereof, shall be established by law or ordinance by the city commission except where otherwise provided in this charter, provided that the city manager may prescribe by regulation for the duties and responsibilities not inconsistent with this charter or ordinances or law of the commission. 
Section 3.20. - Combination of departments and offices. 
    The commission may combine any administrative offices provided in this charter in any manner not inconsistent with state law, including the combination of the office of clerk with that of treasurer, or that of either the clerk and/or the treasurer with that of city manager or with any other office. 
CHAPTER 4. - ELECTIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan Election Law, MCL 168.1 et seq. 

Section 4.1. - Officers to be elected and terms. 
    The elective officers of the city shall be five commissioners, all of whom shall be elected from the city at large. No more than three commissioners shall be elected at each regular city election. The names of all candidates for commission shall appear on the same ballot, and each elector shall be entitled to vote for the lesser of three candidates or the number of candidates who appear on the ballot. The candidates shall be elected for four-year terms. The term of office of the commissioners shall commence on, and date from, the Monday following January 1 of the year following the election. Odd numbered year terms superseded by MCL 168.644(G)(2). 
(Referendum of 11-3-1987; Res. No. 2017-149 , § 3, 11-6-2017) 
Section 4.2. - Wards and precincts. 
    The City of Clare shall consist of one ward. The commission may, by ordinance, establish convenient election precincts, but until the commission shall do so, there shall be one election precinct in the city. 
State Law reference- Election precincts, MCL 168.654 et seq. 
Section 4.3. - Qualification of electors. 
    The inhabitants of the city having the qualifications of electors in the State of Michigan, and no others, shall be electors of the city. 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for registration of electors, MCL 117.3(c); registration of electors, MCL 168.491 et seq. 
Section 4.4. - Election date. 
    A regular city election shall be held in one or more precincts at such place therein as shall be designated by the commission on the regular November election date as established by law. 
(Res. No. 2017-149 , § 4, 11-6-2017) 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for time of holding election, MCL 117.3(c). Note: The city's regular election shall be held in even year general elections and its primary shall be held in even year primary elections MCL 168.642a(4). 
Section 4.5. - Election procedure. 
    The general election laws of the state shall apply to and control, as near as may be, all procedures relating to registration and city elections, except as such general laws relate to political parties or partisan procedure, or require more than one publication of notice, and except as otherwise provided in this charter. 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for manner and means of holding elections, MCL 117.3(c); Michigan election law, MCL 168.1 et seq. 
Section 4.6. - Nonpartisan elections. 
    The election of all city officers shall be on a nonpartisan basis. 
Section 4.7. - Special elections. 
    Special city elections shall be held when called by resolution of the commission at least twenty-one days in advance of such election, or when required by this charter or the general laws of the state. Any resolution calling a special election shall set forth the purpose of such election. No more than two special city elections shall be held in any one calendar year. 
State Law reference- Special primaries and elections, MCL 168.631 et seq. 
Section 4.8. - Notice of election. 
    Notice of the time and place of holding any city election and of the officers to be elected and the questions to be voted upon shall, except as herein otherwise provided, be given by the clerk in the same manner and at the same time as provided in the state election law for the giving of notice by township clerks. 
State Law reference- Notice of time and place of election, MCL 168.635a. 
Section 4.9. - Voting hours. 
    The polls of all elections shall be opened and closed at the time prescribed by law for the opening and closing of polls at state elections. 
State Law reference- Opening and closing of polls, hours, MCL 168.720. 
Section 4.10. - Election commission. 
    An election commission is hereby created, consisting of the clerk, the mayor, and the city attorney. The clerk shall be chairman. The commission shall have charge of all activities and duties required of it by state law and this charter relating to the conduct of elections in the city. The compensation of election personnel shall be determined in advance by the city commission. In any case where election procedure is in doubt, the election commission shall prescribe the procedure to be followed. 
State Law reference- Boards of city election commissioners, MCL 168.25. 
Section 4.11. - Nominations. 
    The method of nomination of all officers provided for in this charter who are elected by the electors of the city shall be by petition. Such petitions shall be signed by not less than 25, nor more than 50 qualified registered electors of the City of Clare. No person shall sign his name to a greater number of petitions for any one office than there will be persons elected to said office at said election. Where any signature appears on more petitions than there are candidates to be elected to said office, such names shall be counted only in the order of the respective dates of signing as shown in the petition. Nomination petitions shall be filed with the clerk by 4:00 p.m. on the fifteenth Tuesday before the election, pursuant to MCL 168.644f. The clerk shall publish notice in accordance with current election law. 
(Res. No. 2017-149 , § 5, 11-6-2017) 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for nomination of elective officers, MCL 117.3(b); candidates for board offices, MCL 168.646a. 
Section 4.12. - Form of petition. 
    The form of petition shall be substantially as that required by state law for state and county officers, except for references to political parties. Official petition forms shall be prepared and furnished by the clerk. Before the clerk shall furnish any nomination petitions to any person, he shall enter thereon in ink the name of the person desiring to become a candidate for office, or the person in whose behalf the petition is to be circulated and the name of the office for which he is to be a candidate. 
State Law reference- Nominating petition, MCL 168.544c. 
Section 4.13. - Approval of petition. 
    The clerk shall accept for filing only nomination petitions on official blanks containing the required number of signatures for candidates having those qualifications required for elective city officials by this charter. When petitions are filed by persons other than the person whose name appears thereon as a candidate, they may be accepted for filing only when accompanied by the written consent of the person in whose behalf the petition or petitions were circulated. The clerk shall, forthwith after the filing of a petition, determine the sufficiency of the signatures on each petition filed, and if he finds that any petition does not contain the required number of legal signatures of registered electors, he shall immediately notify the candidate in writing of the insufficiency of his petition. Each petition which is found by the clerk to contain the required number of signatures of registered electors for candidates shall be marked "In Order," with the date thereof, and he shall so notify the candidate whose name appears thereon, in writing. 
Section 4.14. - Public inspection of petitions. 
    All nomination petitions shall be open to public inspection in the office of the clerk beginning five days after the final filing date for such petitions. 
State Law reference- Freedom of information act, MCL 15.261 et seq. 
Section 4.15. - Form of ballots. 
    The form of the ballot used in any city election shall conform as nearly as may be to that prescribed by the general laws of the state, except that no party designation or emblem shall appear upon any city ballot. The names of qualified nominees for each office shall be listed in a single column and shall be rotated systematically on the ballots. In all other respects the printing and numbering of ballots shall conform to the general laws of the state relating to elections. 
State Law reference- Form of ballots, MCL 168.568 et seq.; preparation of ballots, MCL 168.323. 
Section 4.16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Res. No. 2017-149 , § 6, adopted Nov. 6, 2017, repealed § 4-16, which pertained to canvass of votes and derived from the Original Code. 
Section 4.17. - Recount. 
    A recount of the votes cast at any city election for any office or upon any proposition may be had in accordance with the general election laws of the state. 
State Law reference- Recounts, MCL 168.24a, 168.861 et seq. 
Section 4.18. - Recall. 
    Any elected official may be recalled from office by the electors of the city in a manner provided by the general laws of the state. A vacancy created by the recall of any elected official shall be filled in the manner prescribed by law. 
State Law reference- Permissible that charter provide for recall of its officers, MCL 117.4i(g); recall generally, MCL 168.951 et seq. 
CHAPTER 5. - GENERAL PROVISIONS REGARDING OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL OF CITY 

Section 5.1. - Eligibility for office in city. 
    No person shall be elected or appointed to any office who is in default to the city, or to any school district, county, or other municipal corporation of the state, now or heretofore existing. The election or appointment of any such defaulter shall be void. 
Section 5.2. - Vacancies in office. 
    Any city office shall become vacant upon the occurrence of one or more of the following events before the expiration of the term of such office: 
(a)  For any reason specified by state law creating a vacancy; 
(b)  If any officer of the city shall absent himself continuously from the city for more than sixty days without the permission of the commission; 
(c)  If the officer shall be convicted of any act constituting misconduct in office under the provision of this charter. 
State Law reference- Filling vacancies, MCL 201.37. 
Section 5.3. - Resignation of elective officers. 
    Resignations of elective officers shall be made in writing and filed with the clerk and shall be acted upon by the commission at its next regular meeting following receipt thereof by the clerk. 
Section 5.4. - Filling vacancies in elective offices. 
    If a vacancy occurs in any elective office, the commission shall, within thirty days after such vacancy occurs, appoint a person who possesses the qualifications required of holders of said office for the balance of the term. In the case of a vacancy in the position of commissioner, the commission shall elect a successor to serve the balance of the unexpired term of the commissioner whose position has become vacant. If three or more vacancies in the position of commissioners exist simultaneously, a special election shall be called immediately to fill such vacancies. 
State Law reference- Filling vacancies, MCL 201.37. 
Section 5.5. - Change in term of office or compensation. 
    The terms of officers of the city may not be shortened, or extended beyond the period for which any such officer was elected, except that an elective officer of the city shall, after his term has expired, continue to hold office until his successor is elected and has qualified. The commission shall not grant or authorize extra compensation to any city officer, or to any employee, agent, or contractor, after the service has been rendered or the contract entered into. 
State Law reference- Salaries, terms of office, MCL 117.5(d). 
Section 5.6. - Oath of office. 
    Every officer, elected or appointed, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take the oath of office prescribed by section 2 of article XVI of the constitution of the state and shall file the same with the clerk, together with any bond which may be required by this charter or by the commission to give. In case of failure to comply with the provisions of this section within ten days from the date of his election or appointment, such officer shall be deemed to have declined the office and such office shall thereupon become vacant unless the commission shall, by resolution, extend the time in which such officer may qualify as above set forth. 
Editor's note- The constitutional provision referred to in this section is to the 1908 constitution. The same provision appears in Mich. Const. 1963, art. XI, § 1. 
Section 5.7. - Surety bonds. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the commission may require any officer or employee to give a bond, to be approved by the commission, conditioned upon the faithful and proper performance of the duties of his office or employment, in such sum as the commission shall determine. All such officers or employees receiving, disbursing, or responsible for the city funds shall be bonded. The resignation or removal of any bonded officer or employee shall not, nor shall the appointment of another to the office or employment, exonerate such officer or employee or his sureties from any liability incurred by him or them. All official bonds shall be corporate surety bonds and the premiums thereon shall be paid by the city, except as otherwise provided in this charter. No bond required by this section shall be renewed upon its expiration or in the event of the reappointment of any officer or employee to a position for which a bond is required, but a new bond shall be furnished. No bond shall be issued for a term exceeding two years. All bonds of all officers or employees shall be filed with the clerk, except that [of] the clerk, himself, which shall be filed with the treasurer. 
Section 5.8. - Pecuniary interest prohibited. 
    No officer of the city shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly (other than the common public interest), in the profits of any contract, job, work, or service to be performed for the city; nor shall he stand as surety or give any bail or appearance bond required by the ordinances of the city. The foregoing prohibitions, as the same may apply to any commissioner, shall not apply if the commission shall declare in its records, by the unanimous vote of the remaining members of the commission that the best interests of the city are to be served by the waiving of any such prohibition. No officer of the city shall personally, or as an agent, provide any bond which is subject to approval by the commission. Any officer of the city who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of misconduct in office. 
State Law reference- Conflicts of interest as to contracts, MCL 15.321 et seq.; standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq. 
Section 5.9. - Employment and removal of personnel other than officers. 
    Employees of the city, other than those officers provided [for] by this charter, and other than department heads, shall be employed and removed by department heads with the approval of the city manager. 
Section 5.10. - Merit system. 
    Appointments, removals, and promotions of officers and employees of the city shall be based upon the qualifications of the officers and employees and upon their performance of duties without any reference to their political or religious preferences. 
Section 5.11. - Employee welfare benefits; retirement system. 
    The commission shall have the power to make available to the administrative officers and employees of the city and its department and boards any recognized standard plan of group life, hospital, health, or accident insurance, either independently of, or as a supplement to, any retirement plan provided for the employees and officers. The commission shall also have the power to provide for a retirement system for its employees independently of any other employee welfare benefits. 
CHAPTER 6. - PROCEDURE OF THE CITY COMMISSION 

Section 6.1. - Regular meetings. 
    The commission shall meet at the existing official commission chambers at 8:00 p.m. on the Monday next following each regular city election, and regular meetings shall be held at least twice a month thereafter at official commission chambers to be designated by resolution of the commission except that, if physical conditions make it impossible to meet at the official chambers, the meeting may be held elsewhere, provided that public notice of such change of meeting place shall be given. 
Section 6.2. - Special meetings. 
    Special meetings may be called by the city clerk on the written request of the mayor, the city manager, or any two members of the commission upon at least twenty-four hours' written notice to each member of the commission, served personally or left at his usual place of residence; but any special meeting at which all members of the commission are present or have waived notice thereof in writing, shall be a legal meeting for all purposes. 
Section 6.3. - Meetings to be public. 
    All regular and special meetings of the commission shall be open to the public and citizens shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard. 
State Law reference- Open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq. 
Section 6.4. - Quorum. 
    Three members of the commission shall be a quorum for the transaction of business at commission meetings, but in the absence of a quorum, two members may adjourn the meeting to a later date. 
Section 6.5. - Rules of the commission. 
    The commission shall determine its own rules and order of business, and shall keep a journal of its proceedings, in the English language, which shall be signed by the mayor and clerk. Provided, however, that the vote upon all ordinances and resolutions shall be taken by "yea" and "nay" vote and entered upon the record, except that where the vote is unanimous it shall only be necessary to so state. No member shall vote on any question in which he is financially interested (other than the common public interest) or any question concerning his own official conduct, but on all other questions each member who is present shall vote unless excused by the unanimous consent of the other members present. Provided further, that any citizen or taxpayer shall have access to the minutes and records of all meetings of the commission at all reasonable times. Provided further, that a summary of the commission proceedings at each meeting shall be prepared by the city clerk and published in a newspaper of local circulation in the city. 
Section 6.6. - Compulsory attendance at meetings. 
    The commission may, by vote of not less than two of its members, compel the attendance of its members and other officers of the city at its regular and special meetings and enforce orderly conduct therein; and any member of the commission or other officer of the city who refuses to attend such meetings or conducts himself in a disorderly manner thereat shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office. The chief of police shall serve as the sergeant-at-arms of the commission in the enforcement of the provisions of this section. Provided further, that if a commissioner shall miss five consecutive regular meetings of the commission or twenty-five percent or more of such meetings in any fiscal year of the city, unless such absence shall be excused by the commission and the reason therefor entered in the proceedings, his office shall become vacant. 
Section 6.7. - Business at special meetings. 
    No business shall be transacted at any special meeting of the commission unless the same has been stated in the notice of such meeting; however, if all the members of the commission are present at any special meeting, then any business which might lawfully come before a regular meeting may be transacted at such special meeting. 
Section 6.8. - No standing committees. 
    There shall be no standing committees of the commission. 
Section 6.9. - Investigations. 
    The commission or any person or committee authorized by it for the purpose, shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any department, office, or officer of the city and to make investigations as to municipal affairs, and for that purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and compel the production of books, papers, and other evidence. Failure on the part of any officer of the city to obey such subpoena or to produce books, papers, or other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this section shall constitute misconduct in office. If such failure shall be on the part of any employee of the city, it shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
CHAPTER 7. - CITY LEGISLATION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Power of city to adopt ordinances relative to municipal concerns, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 22; charter to provide for adopting, amending and repealing ordinances and publication thereof, MCL 117.3(k). 

Section 7.1. - Prior city ordinances and regulations. 
    All bylaws, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City of Clare which are not inconsistent with this charter and which are in force and effect at the time of the adoption of this charter shall continue in full force and effect until repealed or amended. 
Section 7.2. - Revision of ordinances. 
    Within two years after the adoption of this charter and at least once in every ten years the commission shall direct and complete the compilation or codification and the publication of the charter and of all ordinances of the city then in force, in looseleaf or pamphlet form, and may provide for a reasonable charge for copies thereof. No further publication of any such compilation or codification shall be required for the validity thereof. In case the compilation or codification of the ordinances of the city shall have been maintained current and up-to-date during any ten-year period, no recompilation or recodification of the ordinances of the city shall be required during or at the end of such period. 
    The copies of the ordinances and of any compilation, code, or codes referred to in the charter may be certified by the clerk and, when so certified, shall be competent evidence in all courts and legally established tribunals as to the matter contained therein. 
State Law reference- Codification authority, MCL 117.5b. 
Section 7.3. - Form of ordinances. 
    All legislation of the City of Clare shall be by ordinance or by resolution. The word "resolution" as used in this charter shall be the official action of the commission in the form of a motion, and such action shall be limited to matters required or permitted to be done by resolution by this charter or by state or federal law and to matters pertaining to the internal affairs or concerns of the city government. All other acts of the commission, and all acts carrying a penalty for the violation thereof, shall be by ordinance. Each ordinance shall be identified by a number and a short title. Each proposed ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form. The style of all ordinances passed by the commission shall be, "The City of Clare ordains:" 
Section 7.4. - Enactment, amendment, and repeal of ordinances. 
    Ordinances may be enacted, amended, or repealed by affirmative vote of not less than three commissioners, except that when an ordinance is given immediate effect, section 7.5 shall govern. Unless by the affirmative vote of three commissioners, no office shall be created or abolished, no tax or assessment [shall] be imposed, no street, alley, or public ground [shall] be vacated, no real estate or any interest therein [shall] be sold or disposed of, no private property [shall] be taken for public use, nor [shall] any vote of the commission be reconsidered or rescinded at a special meeting, nor any money appropriated except as otherwise provided by this charter. The adoption, amendment or repeal of an ordinance, cannot be acted on at the first commission meeting that it is introduced for consideration. 
    No ordinance shall be revised, altered, or amended by reference to the title only, but the section or sections of the ordinance revised, altered, or amended shall be reenacted and published at length in a newspaper of local circulation in the city. However, an ordinance may be repealed by reference to its number and title only. 
(Referendum of 11-3-1987) 
Section 7.5. - When ordinances take effect. 
    The effective date of all ordinances shall be prescribed therein, but the effective date shall not be earlier than fifteen days after the enactment nor before publication thereof, except that ordinances immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health, or safety may be given earlier effect by the affirmative vote of not less than three commissioners if three or four commissioners are present at the meeting, and by the affirmative vote of not less than four commissioners if five commissioners are present at the meeting. In case an ordinance is given effect earlier than fifteen days after its enactment, all requirements for publication may be met by posting copies thereof in conspicuous locations in three public places in the city; and the clerk shall, immediately after such posting, enter in the ordinance book under the record of the ordinance a certificate under his hand stating the time and place of such publication by posting, which certificate shall be prima facie evidence of the due publication and posting of the ordinance. 
Section 7.6. - Publication of ordinances. 
    Each ordinance passed by the commission shall be published at least once within 14 days after its adoption in a newspaper of local circulation in the city. The publication of any ordinance in full after its final passage as a part of the published proceedings of the commission shall constitute publication of such ordinance as required herein. All ordinances and revisions, alterations, or amendments of same shall be recorded by the clerk in a book to be called "The Ordinance Book," and it shall be the duty of the mayor and clerk to authenticate such records by their official signatures thereon. 
Editor's note- The charter requirement of publication prior to operation is superseded by state statute. A city may publish a summary instead, provided that the summary includes the designation of a location in the city where a true copy of the ordinance can be inspected or obtained. See MCL 117.3(k). 
Section 7.7. - Public health and safety. 
    Through the departments and agencies of the city government, the commission shall provide for the public peace and health, and for the safety of persons and property. The commission shall constitute the board of health of the city, and it and its officers shall possess all powers, privileges, and immunities granted to boards of health by state law. 
Editor's note- Most health functions are now performed by the county. 
Section 7.8. - Licenses. 
    The commission shall by ordinance prescribe the terms and conditions upon which licenses may be granted, suspended, or revoked; and may require and exact payment of such reasonable funds for any licenses as it may deem proper. The persons receiving the licenses shall, before the issuing thereof, execute a bond to the city, when required by any ordinance, in such sum and with such securities as described by such ordinance, conditioned for the safe observance of the charter of the city, and the ordinance under which the license is granted. 
Section 7.9. - Streets and alleys. 
    Except insofar as limited by state law and the provisions of this charter, the commission shall have power to establish, vacate, and use, and to patrol and regulate the use of, its streets, alleys, bridges, and public places, whether such public places [shall] be located within or without the limits of the city, and space above and beneath them. Such power shall include, but not be limited to, the proper policing and supervision thereof; to the licensing and regulation, or the prohibition, of the placing of signs, awnings, awning posts, and other things which are of such nature as to impede or make dangerous the use of sidewalks or streets, upon or over the sidewalks or streets of the city; in the licensing and regulation of the construction and use of openings of sidewalks and streets and of all vaults, structures, and excavations under the same. Provided, that when the commission shall deem it advisable to vacate, discontinue or abolish any highway, street, lane, alley or public ground or any part thereof, it shall appoint a time, not less than four weeks thereafter when it shall meet and hear objections thereto; notice of such meetings, with a copy of said resolution shall be given in such manner as shall be prescribed by ordinance or resolution. Objections to such proposed action of the commission may be filed with the clerk in writing, and if any such [objections] shall be filed, the street, alley or public ground, or any part thereof, shall not be vacated or discontinued, except by a vote of four of the members-elect of the commission. 
Section 7.10. - House trailers. 
    The commission may, by ordinance, provide for the prohibition or regulation of the use, occupancy, sanitation, and parking of house trailers within the city. The right of the commission to so regulate any house trailer shall not be abrogated because of any detachment thereof from its wheels or because of placing it on, or attaching it to, the ground by means of any temporary or permanent foundation, or in any manner whatsoever. 
Editor's note- MCL 125.2307 prohibits the city from discriminating against mobile homes in favor of site-built homes. 
Section 7.11. - Ordinance to create zoning. 
    The first city commission elected under this charter shall, within six months after taking office, pass a zoning ordinance providing for the establishment of districts or zones within which the use of land and structures, the height, the area, the size and location of buildings, and required open spaces for light and ventilation of such buildings, and the density of population shall be prescribed. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate land use, MCL 125.581 et seq.; municipal planning, MCL 125.31 et seq. 
Section 7.12. - Initiative and referendum. 
    An ordinance may be initiated or a referendum on an ordinance enacted by the commission may be had, by a petition as hereinafter provided. 
State Law reference- Permissible that charter provide for initiative and referendum, MCL 117.4i(g). 
Section 7.13. - Initiative and referendum petitions. 
    An initiatory or referendary petition shall be signed by registered electors equal in number to twenty-five percent of the votes cast for the commissioner receiving the largest number of votes at the last general city election prior to the filing of the petition, provided that all signatures shall have been obtained within two months before the date of filing said petition and provided further that the petition shall be approved as to form by the city attorney before being circulated. No such petition need be on one paper, but may be the aggregate of two or more petition papers. The form of petition shall follow the general form of petition provided by state law and shall contain a sworn affidavit by the circulator thereof that each signature was made in his presence and is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. Petitions shall be filed with the city clerk who shall determine within fifteen days the sufficiency thereof and so certify. If found to be insufficient or improper, the clerk shall notify forthwith the person filing such petition and fifteen days from such notifications shall be allowed or [for] the filing of supplemental petition papers. When found sufficient and proper, the clerk shall present the petition to the commission at its next regular meeting. 
Section 7.14. - Commission procedure on petitions. 
    Upon receiving an initiatory or referendary petition from the clerk, the commission shall within thirty days either: adopt the ordinance as submitted by an initiatory petition; or repeal the ordinance referred to by a referendary petition; or instead determine to submit the proposal provided for in the petition to the electors. 
Section 7.15. - Submission to electors. 
    Should the commission decide to submit the proposal to the electors, it shall be submitted at the next election held in the city for any other purpose, or, in the discretion of the commission, at a special election. The result shall be determined by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon, except in cases where otherwise required by the Constitution or laws of the State of Michigan. 
Section 7.16. - Ordinance suspended. 
    The certification by the clerk of the sufficiency of a referendary petition shall automatically suspend the ordinance in question pending repeal by the commission or final determination by the electors as the case may be. An ordinance adopted by the electorate through initiatory proceedings may not be amended or repealed by the commission for a period of two years after the date of the election at which it was adopted and then only by the affirmative vote of four commissioners. Should two or more ordinances adopted at the same election have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the highest number of votes shall prevail as to those provisions. 
CHAPTER 8. - GENERAL FINANCE-BUDGET, AUDIT, PURCHASING[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Revised municipal finance act, MCL 141.2101 et seq.; local government fiscal responsibility act, MCL 141.1201 et sq.; fiscal stabilization act, MCL 141.1001 et seq.; uniform budgeting and accounting act, MCL 141.421 et seq. 

Section 8.1. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of July and end on the thirtieth day of June of the following year. Such year shall also contribute [constitute] the budget year of the city government. The period from March 12 to June 30 inclusive of the year in which this charter is adopted shall constitute a fiscal period and budget period for that year only in order to accomplish the transition from the fiscal year as existing in the City of Clare previous to the adoption of this charter. 
Section 8.2. - Budget procedure. 
    The city manager shall submit his recommended budget for the ensuing fiscal year to the city commission on or before the second regular monthly meeting in April. 
Section 8.3. - Budget hearings. 
    A public hearing on the budget shall be held before its final adoption at such time and place as the commission shall direct, and notice of such public hearing shall be published at least one week in advance by the clerk. A copy of the proposed budget shall be on file and available to the public for inspection during the office hours at the office of the clerk for a period of not less than one week prior to such public hearing. 
State Law reference- Public hearing required prior to adoption of budget, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 32. 
Section 8.4. - Adoption of budget and tax limits. 
    Not later than the first regular monthly meeting in June, the commission shall by resolution adopt the budget for the next fiscal year and shall in such resolution provide for a levy of the amount necessary to be raised by tax upon real and personal property for municipal purposes. The aforesaid levy shall not exceed two percent of the assessed valuation of all real and personal property subject to taxation in the city, exclusive of any levy required for the payment of principal and interest on outstanding bonds. 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for taxation of real and personal property not to exceed two percent of value, MCL 117.3(g); property taxes, MCL 211.1 et seq. 
Section 8.5. - Transfer of appropriations. 
    After the budget has been adopted no money shall be drawn from the treasury of the city, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred except pursuant to the budget appropriations. The commission may transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or any portion thereof from one department, fund, or agency to another. The balance of any appropriation which has not been encumbered at the end of the fiscal year shall revert to the general fund and may be reappropriated during the next fiscal year. 
Section 8.6. - Budget control. 
    At the beginning of each quarterly period during the fiscal year, and more often if required by the commission, the city manager shall submit to the commission data showing the relation between the estimated and actual income and expenses to date; and if it shall appear that the income is less than anticipated, the commission may reduce appropriations, except amounts required for debt and interest charges, to such a degree as may be necessary to keep expenditures within the cash income. 
Section 8.7. - Depository. 
    The commission shall designate a depository or depositories for city funds, and shall provide for the regular deposit of all city moneys. The commission shall provide for such security for city deposits as is authorized or permitted by the general laws of the state, except that personal surety bonds [shall] not be deemed proper security. 
State Law reference- Designation of public fund depositories, MCL 129.11 et seq.; deposits of public moneys, MCL 211.43b. 
Section 8.8. - Independent audit. 
    An independent audit shall be made of all accounts of the city government at least annually and more frequently if deemed necessary by the commission. Such audit shall be made by qualified accountants experienced in municipal accounting. An abstract of the results of such audit shall be made public by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. An annual report of the city business shall be made available to the public by the city manager in such form as will disclose pertinent facts concerning the activities and finances of the city government. 
State Law reference- Annual accounting of public funds, Mich. Const. 1963, art. IX, § 21. 
Section 8.9. - Purchasing procedure. 
    The city manager shall be responsible for city purchasing. Competitive prices for all purchases and public improvements shall be obtained and the purchase made from, or the contract awarded to, the lowest competent bidder. Formal sealed bids shall be obtained in all transactions involving the expenditure of an amount to be decided by ordinance that is reflective of the current, inflationary market. The transaction will be evidenced by a written contract submitted to and approved by the commission; provided that in cases where the commission indicates by formal resolution upon the written recommendation of the city manager that it is clearly to the advantage of the city to contract without competitive bidding, it may so authorize. Detailed purchasing and contract procedure shall be established by ordinance. The commission may also authorize the making of public improvements or the performing of any other city work by any city department or agency without competitive bidding. 
(Referendum of 11-3-1987) 
CHAPTER 9. - TAXATION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- General powers of city to levy taxes for public purposes, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 21; charter to provide for taxation, MCL 117.3(h). 

Section 9.1. - Power to provide funds. 
    The city shall have the power to assess taxes and lay and collect rents, tolls, and excises. 
Section 9.2. - Subjects of taxation. 
    The subjects of ad valorem taxation for city purposes shall be the same as for state, county, and school purposes under the general law. Except as otherwise provided by this charter, city taxes shall be levied, collected, and returned in the manner provided by state law. 
State Law reference- Charter to provide that subjects of taxation for municipal purposes are the same as for state, county and school purposes, MCL 117.3(i); property taxes generally, MCL 211.1 et seq. 
Section 9.3. - Exemptions. 
    No exemption from taxation shall be allowed except such as are expressly required to be made by state law. 
State Law reference- Real estate exemptions, MCL 211.7 et seq. 
Section 9.4. - Assessments. 
    Unless otherwise provided by state law, the first day of April in each year shall be the assessment day for both real and personal property in the city. Prior to the first meeting of the board of review in each year, the assessor shall make and complete and certify an assessment roll of all property in the city liable to taxation in accordance with the manner and form provided in the general tax laws of the state. 
Editor's note- MCL 211.30a requires the review of assessments to be completed on or before the first Monday in April. 
State Law reference- Time, place and method of assessments, MCL 211.10 et seq. 
Section 9.5. - Valuing of real and personal property. 
    Said assessor shall estimate, according to state law, the value of every parcel of real property and of all taxable personal property of each person and shall record the same appropriately in the roll, provided, however, that land shall be assessed separately from building improvements thereon, and that the roll shall show separate figures for the value of the land and of the building improvements. He shall give notice by first class mail of any increase in the assessment of any property to the owner of record according to the last assessment roll of the city, but the failure to give such notice or of any such owner to receive any such notice shall not invalidate any assessment roll or any assessment thereon. 
Section 9.6. - Board of review. 
    The commission shall annually, in the month of April, appoint three qualified freeholders who are electors of the city, and who may hold other city offices or employment, to serve as members of the board of review, and shall set their compensation and the time of their appointment. The assessor shall be clerk of the board and shall keep a record of its proceedings, but he may not be a member of the board. 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for board of review, MCL 117.3(a). 
Section 9.7. - Meeting of the board of review. 
    The board of review shall convene on the first Monday in May of each year to review and correct the assessment roll and shall remain in session for not less than four days. The board shall have the same powers and perform the duties in all respects as are by general law conferred upon and required of boards of review in townships. It shall choose its own chairman and a majority of its members shall constitute a quorum. On or before the third Monday in May the board of review shall endorse the assessment roll as provided hereafter. 
Editor's note- MCL 211.30a requires the review of assessments to be completed on or before the first Monday in April. 
Section 9.8. - Notice of meetings. 
    Notice of the time and place of the sessions of the board of review shall be published by the city clerk at least ten days prior to the first Monday in May. 
State Law reference- Open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq. 
Section 9.9. - Action of board. 
    The board shall hear the complaints of all persons considering themselves aggrieved by assessments and if it shall appear that any person or property has been wrongfully assessed, or omitted from the roll, the board shall correct the roll in such manner as it shall deem just. In all cases, the assessment roll shall be reviewed according to facts existing on the assessment day and no change of status of any property after said day shall be considered by the board in making its decision. After the board of review shall have completed its review of the assessment roll, a majority of its members shall endorse thereon and sign a statement to the effect that the same is the assessment roll as approved by the board. The omission of such endorsement shall not affect the validity of such roll. Upon the completion of said roll and the endorsement thereof, the same shall be the assessment roll of the city. 
State Law reference- Board of review endorsement and signed statement, MCL 211.30(3); completed roll valid, conclusive presumption, MCL 211.31. 
Section 9.10. - Clerk to certify tax levy. 
    Within three days after the commission has adopted the budget for the ensuing year, the clerk shall certify to the assessor the total amount which the commission determines shall be raised by general tax; all amounts of special assessments which the commission requires to be assessed or reassessed upon any property or against any person; and all other amounts which the commission may determine shall be charged, assessed, or reassessed against any person or property. 
Section 9.11. - City tax roll. 
    After the last day for the meeting of the board of review, the assessor shall prepare a copy of the assessment roll to be known as the "City Tax Roll," and upon receiving the certification of the several amounts to be raised, as provided in the preceding section, the assessor shall proceed forthwith to spread upon said tax roll the several amounts determined by the commission to be charged, assessed, or reassessed against persons or property; and shall also proceed to spread the amounts of the general city tax according to and in proportion to the several valuations set forth in said assessment roll. For the purpose of avoiding fractions in computation, the assessor may add to the amount of the several taxes to be raised not more than one percent; said excess shall belong to the city. 
State Law reference- Completion of assessment, avoidance of fractions, MCL 211.39. 
Section 9.12. - Tax roll certified for collection. 
    After extending the taxes aforesaid and not later than the third Monday in June in each year, the assessor shall certify said tax roll, and the mayor shall annex his warrant thereto, directing and requiring the treasurer to collect from the several persons named in said roll the several sums mentioned therein opposite their respective names as a tax or assessment and granting to him, for the purpose of collecting the taxes, assessments, and charges on such roll, all the powers and immunities possessed by township treasurers for the collection of taxes under the general laws of the state. 
State Law reference- Collection of taxes, MCL 211.44 et seq. 
Section 9.13. - Taxes liens on property. 
    The city taxes thus assessed shall become at once a debt due to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed, and the amounts assessed on any interest in real property shall on the first day of July become a lien upon such real property, and the lien for such amounts and for all interest and other charges thereon shall continue until payment thereof. All personal taxes shall also be a first lien, prior, superior, and paramount, upon all personal property of the persons so assessed from and after the first day of July in each year and shall so remain until paid, which said tax liens shall take precedence over all other claims, encumbrances and liens upon said personal property whatsoever, whether created by chattel mortgage, execution, levy, judgment, or otherwise, and whether arising before or after the assessment of said personal taxes, and no transfer of personal property assessed for taxes thereon shall operate to divest or destroy such lien except where such personal property is actually sold in the regular course of retail trade. 
Section 9.14. - Taxes due; notification thereof. 
    City taxes shall be due on the first day of July of the year when levied and shall be payable as stated in the warrant of the mayor annexed to said roll. The treasurer shall not be required to call upon the persons named in the city tax roll, nor to make personal demand for the payment of taxes, but he shall give notice to the taxpayers of the city, at least six days prior to the first day of July in each year, of the time when said taxes will be due for collection by publication, at least once, in one or more of the newspapers published or circulated in the city, or shall give such notice by first class mail addressed to the owners of the property upon which taxes are assessed according to the names of such owners and their addresses as indicated on the tax roll, which notice shall be deemed sufficient for the payment of all taxes on said tax roll. Failure on the part of the treasurer to give said notice shall not invalidate the taxes on said tax roll nor release the person or property assessed from the penalty provided in this chapter in case of nonpayment of the same. 
Section 9.15. - Collection fees and interest. 
    All taxes paid on or before August 15 of each year shall be collected by the treasurer without additional charge. On August 15 he shall add to all taxes paid thereafter a collection fee of one percent of the amount of said taxes, and on the first day of September and of each succeeding month he shall add an additional one-half of one percent of said taxes as a collection fee. Such collection fee shall belong to the city and constitute a charge and shall be a lien against the property to which the taxes themselves apply, collectible in the same manner as the taxes to which they are added. 
Section 9.16. - Sale of goods and chattels. 
    In case any person shall neglect or refuse to pay any tax imposed upon any real or personal property belonging to him, as aforesaid, the treasurer shall levy the same by distress and sale of the goods and chattels of said person liable to pay the same, wherever such goods and chattels may be found, either in said city or elsewhere in the county where such city is located, or in any adjoining county, first by giving public notice of such sale in the manner and for the time required by law in the case of such sale made by township treasurers, and for such purpose and for the collection of the taxes aforesaid, the treasurer may bring suit therefor, and shall have all the powers and perform the like duties so far as applicable as are conferred upon or required of township treasurers in the collection of taxes levied in townships. 
Section 9.17. - Tax roll to county treasurer. 
    If the treasurer has been unable to collect any of the city taxes on said roll on real property before the first day of March following the date when said roll was received by him, it shall be his duty to return all such unpaid taxes on real property to the county treasurer in the same manner and with like effect as returns by township treasurers of township, school, and county taxes. Such returns shall be made upon a delinquent tax roll to be prepared by the treasurer and shall include all the additional charges and fees hereinbefore provided, which charges shall, in such return, be added to the amount assessed in said tax roll against each description. The taxes thus returned shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes returned to the county treasurer are collected under the provisions of the general laws of the state and shall be and remain a lien upon the lands against which they are assessed, until paid. 
State Law reference- Return of delinquent taxes, MCL 211.55 et seq. 
Section 9.18. - Protection of city lien. 
    The city shall have power to acquire by purchase any premises within the city at any tax or other public sale, or by direct purchase from the State of Michigan or the fee owner, when such purchase is necessary to protect the lien of the city for taxes or special assessments, or both, on said premises and may hold, lease or sell the same for the purpose of securing therefrom the amount of such taxes or special assessments, or both, together with any incidental expenses incurred in connection with the exercise of this power; provided that the lease or sale of such property shall be subject to the restrictions contained elsewhere in this charter on the leasing and sale of city property. Any such procedure exercised by the city in the protection of its tax lien shall be deemed to be for a public purpose. 
Section 9.19. - State, county and school taxes. 
    For the purpose of assessing taxes in the city for state, county, and school purposes, the city shall be considered the same as a township, and all provisions of state law relative to the collection of such taxes and the fees to be paid therefor, the accounting therefor to the appropriate taxing units, and the returning of property to the county treasurer for nonpayment thereof shall apply to the performance thereof by the treasurer, who shall perform the same duties and have the same powers as township treasurers under state law. 
CHAPTER 10. - BORROWING POWER[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal power to borrow money and contract debts, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 21; charter may provide for city borrowing, MCL 117.4a. 

Section 10.1. - General borrowing. 
    Subject to the applicable provisions of state law and this charter, the commission, by proper ordinance or resolution, may authorize the borrowing of money for any purpose within the scope of the powers vested in the city and the issuance of bonds of the city or other evidences of indebtedness therefor, and may pledge the full faith, credit, and resources of the city for the payment of the obligation created therefor. 
Section 10.2. - Special assessment bonds. 
    The commission shall, subject to the applicable provisions of the general laws of the state, have authority to borrow money in anticipation of the payment of special assessments made for the purpose of defraying the costs of any public improvement, or in anticipation of the payment of any combination of such special assessments, and to issue bonds therefor. Such special assessment bonds may be solely an obligation of the special assessment district or districts or may be both an obligation of the special assessment district or districts and a general obligation of the city. All collections on each special assessment roll or combination of rolls shall be set apart in a separate fund for the payment of the principal and interest of the bonds issued in anticipation of the payment of such special assessments, and shall be used for no other purpose. 
State Law reference- Obligations in anticipation of special assessments, MCL 133.9. 
Section 10.3. - Other bonds. 
    The city shall have power to issue revenue or other types of bonds in the manner and for the purpose permitted by the constitution and general laws of the State of Michigan, including mortgage bonds for the acquiring, owning, purchasing, constructing, improving, or operating of any public utility subject to the provisions of section 2.6 of this charter. 
Section 10.4. - Preparation and record of bonds. 
    Each bond or other evidence of indebtedness shall contain on its face a statement specifying the purpose for which the same is issued and it shall be unlawful for any officer of the city to use the proceeds thereof for any other purpose, and any officer who shall violate this provision shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office. All bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the city shall be signed by the mayor and countersigned by the clerk, under the seal of the city. Interest coupons may be executed with the facsimile signatures of the mayor and clerk. A complete and detailed record of all bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the city shall be kept by the clerk. Upon payment of any bond or other evidence of indebtedness, the same shall be marked "cancelled." 
Section 10.5. - Unissued bonds. 
    No unissued bonds of the city shall be issued or sold to secure funds for any purpose other than that for which they were specifically authorized, and if such bonds are not sold within five (5) years after authorization, such authorization shall, as to such bonds, be null and void, and such bonds shall be cancelled. 
Section 10.6. - Limitation on indebtedness. 
    The city may not incur indebtedness, by the issue of bonds or otherwise, in any such which, including existing indebtedness, shall exceed 10 percentum of the assessed valuation of the real and personal property within the city subject to taxation as shown by the last preceding assessment roll of the city; provided, that moneys on hand in a sinking fund limited to the payment of indebtedness may be treated as a reduction of such indebtedness to that extent. 
    In the case of fire, flood, or other calamity requiring an emergency fund for the relief of the inhabitants of the city or for the repairing or rebuilding of any municipal buildings, works, bridges, or streets, the commission of the city may borrow money due in not more than three years and in an amount not exceeding one-fourth of one percent of the assessed valuation of the city notwithstanding such loan may increase the indebtedness beyond the limitation fixed in this charter. 
CHAPTER 11. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Special assessments for public improvements, MCL 68.31 et seq.; higher interest rates permitted when there are obligations in anticipation of special assessments, MCL 133.9; public improvement or public building, MCL 141.261 et seq.; notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq.; deferment of special assessment for homesteads, MCL 211.761 et seq. 

Section 11.1. - General power relative to special assessments. 
    The commission shall have the power to determine the necessity of any local or public improvement and to determine that the whole or any power of the expense thereof shall be defrayed by special assessment upon the property especially benefited, provided that all special assessments levied shall be based upon or be in proportion to the benefits derived or to be derived. 
Section 11.2. - Detailed procedure to be fixed by ordinance. 
    The commission shall prescribe by general ordinance the complete special assessment procedure concerning the initiation of projects, plans and specifications; estimates of costs; notice of hearings; making and confirming assessment rolls, and the correction of errors therein; collection of special assessments; and any other matters concerning the making of improvements by the special assessment method, subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
Section 11.3. - Hazards and nuisances. 
    When any lot, building, or structure within the city, because of accumulation of refuse or debris, the uncontrolled growing of weeds, or age or dilapidation or because of any other condition or happening, becomes, in the opinion of the commission, a public hazard or nuisance which is dangerous to the health or safety of the inhabitants of the city or of those of them residing or habitually going near such lot, building, or structure, the commission may, after investigation, give notice to the owner of the land upon which such hazard or nuisance exists, or to the owner of the building or structure itself, specifying the nature of the nuisance and requiring such owner to alter, repair, tear down, or remove the nuisance promptly and within a time to be specified by the commission, which shall be commensurate with the nature of the nuisance. If at the expiration of the time limit in said notice, said owner has not complied with the requirements thereof, or in any case where the owner of the land or of the building or structure itself is not known; the commission may order such hazard or nuisance abated by the proper department or agency of the city which is qualified to do the work required, and the cost of said abatement to be assessed against the lot, premises, or description of real property upon which such hazard or nuisance was located. Procedures to be followed to make this section fully effective shall be established by ordinance. 
Section 11.4. - Sidewalks. 
    The commission may prescribe that sidewalks, except crosswalks, shall be built by the owners of land within the city in the public streets adjacent to and abutting upon such lots and premises in the manner and within the time to be prescribed by ordinance; Provided, that, in case of the failure of any such owner to comply with the provisions of such ordinance, the city may build or cause to be built such sidewalk and assess the cost thereof against such owner and against the land improved thereby, as a special assessment in the manner prescribed by ordinance, provided further that the city commission may determine that a percentage of the cost of sidewalks built by the owner or built by the city and assessed against the owner, may be paid from general city funds. 
Section 11.5. - Objection to improvements. 
    If, at or prior to final confirmation of any special assessment, more than fifty (50) percent of the number of owners of privately owned real property to be assessed for any improvement or in case of paving or similar improvements more than fifty (50) percent of the number of owners of frontage to be assessed for any such improvement, shall object in writing to the proposed improvement, the improvement shall not be made by the proceedings authorized by this chapter without a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the members-elect of the commission, provided that this section shall not apply to sidewalk construction. 
Section 11.6. - Installment payments of assessments. 
    The commission may provide for the payment of special assessments in annual installments, not to exceed 15 in number, the first installment being due upon confirmation of the roll and the deferred installments being due annually thereafter or, in the discretion of the commission, may be spread upon and made a part of each annual city tax roll thereafter until all are paid. Interest may be charged upon deferred installments at a rate not to exceed 6 percent per year, payable annually. Under any installment plan adopted, the whole or any deferred installments with accrued interest to date of payment may be paid in advance of the due dates established. 
Section 11.7. - Additional assessments and refunds. 
    When any special assessment roll shall prove insufficient to meet the costs of the improvements for which it was made, the commission may make an additional pro rata assessment, but the total amount assessed against any lot or parcel of land shall not exceed the value of benefits received by such lot or parcel of land. Should the assessment prove larger than necessary by five percent or less, the commission may place the excess in the city treasury or make a pro rata refund. Should the assessment exceed the amount necessary by more than five percent, the entire excess shall be refunded to owners of property upon which payments have been made, in full, on a pro rata basis. Provided, however, that no refunds of special assessments may be made which impair or contravene the provisions of any outstanding obligation or bonds secured in whole or part by such special assessments. The city commission may provide by resolution that the amount of any such excess, whether in excess of five percent or not, may be allowed as a credit on the last installment of the special assessment. 
Section 11.8. - Special assessment accounts. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, moneys raised by special assessments to pay the cost of any local improvement shall be held in a special fund to pay such cost or to repay any money borrowed therefor. Each special assessment account must be used only for the improvement project for which the assessment was levied, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
Section 11.9. - Contested assessments. 
    Except and unless notice is given to the commission in writing of an intention to contest or enjoin the collection of any special assessment within thirty days after the date of the meeting of the commission at which it is finally determined to proceed with the making of the improvement in question, which notice shall state the grounds on which the proceedings are to be contested, no suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of such special assessment; and, regardless of whether or not any public improvement is completed in any special assessment district, no owner of real property located in such district shall be entitled to commence any suit or action for the purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of any such special assessment after he has received a benefit from the substantial completion of that portion of such public improvement for which he is assessed. 
State Law reference- Statement of right to file written appeal, MCL 211.746. 
Section 11.10. - Reassessment for benefits. 
    Whenever the commission shall deem any special assessment invalid or defective for any reason whatsoever, or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall have adjudged such assessment to be illegal for any reason whatsoever, in whole or in part, the commission shall have power to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made, whether the improvement or any part thereof has been completed or not, and whether any part of the assessment has been collected or not. All proceedings on such reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be made in the same manner as provided for the original assessment. If any portion of the original assessment shall have been collected and not refunded, it shall be applied upon the reassessment, and the reassessment shall to that extent be deemed satisfied. If more than the amount reassessed shall have been collected, the balance shall be refunded to the person or persons making such payment. 
Section 11.11. - Delinquent special assessments. 
    Special assessments and all interest and charges thereon, from the date of confirmation of the roll shall be and remain a lien upon the property assessed of the same character and effect as the lien created by general law for state and county taxes, and by this charter for city taxes, until paid. From such date and after confirmation as shall be fixed by the commission, the same collection fees shall be collected on delinquent special assessments and upon delinquent installments of such special assessments beginning on the following August 15 of each year, as are provided by this charter to be collected on delinquent city taxes. Such delinquent special assessments shall be subject to the same penalties, and the lands upon which the same are a lien shall be subject to sale therefor, the same as are delinquent city taxes and the lands upon which they constitute a lien. 
Section 11.12. - Lien not destroyed by judgment. 
    No judgment or decree, or any act of the commission vacating a special assessment shall destroy or impair the lien of the city upon the premises assessed, for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the same, or as by a regular vote or proceeding might have been lawfully assessed thereon. 
CHAPTER 12. - MUNICIPAL UTILITIES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Restrictions on municipal utilities, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, §§ 24, 25. 

Section 12.1. - General powers respecting utilities. 
    The city shall possess and hereby reserves to itself all the powers granted the cities by the constitution and general laws of the State of Michigan to acquire, construct, own, operate, improve, enlarge, extend, repair, and maintain either within or without its corporate limits, including, but not by the way of limitation, public utilities for supplying water, light, heat, power, gas, sewage treatment, and garbage disposal facilities and projects for the housing of its citizens, or any of them to the municipality and the inhabitants thereof; and also to sell and deliver water, light, heat, power, gas, and other public utility services without its corporate limits to an amount not to exceed limitations set by state law and the constitution. 
Section 12.2. - Rates. 
    The commission shall have the power to fix, from time to time, such just and equitable rates as may be deemed advisable for supplying the inhabitants of the city and others with water; with electricity for light, heat, and power; and with such other utility services as the city may provide. 
Section 12.3. - Utility charges-Collection. 
    The commission shall provide, by ordinance, for the collection of all public utility charges made by the city. With respect to water, the city shall have all the power granted to cities by Public Act No. 178 of 1939 (MCL 123.161 et seq.), as amended. When any person or persons, or any firm or corporation, shall fail or refuse to pay to the city any sums due on utility bills, service or services upon which such delinquency exists may be shut off or discontinued and suit may be instituted by the city for the collection of the same in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
Section 12.4. - Accounts. 
    Separate accounts, distinct from any other city accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the city in such a manner as to show the true and complete financial results of such city ownership or operation, or both, including all assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. They shall show, as nearly as possible, the value of any service furnished to, or rendered by, any such public utility by or to any other city department. The commission shall annually cause a report to be made showing the financial results of such city ownership or operation, or both, which report shall give for each utility the information specified in this section, and such further information as the commission shall deem expedient. Such report shall be on file in the office of the clerk for public inspection. 
Section 12.5. - Disposal of utility plants and property. 
    The city shall not have power to sell, exchange, lease, or in any way alien or dispose of the property, easements, income, or other equipment, privilege, or asset belonging to and appertaining to any utility which it may acquire, unless and except the proposition for such purpose shall first have been submitted, at an election held for that purpose in the manner provided in this charter, to the electors of the city who are qualified to vote on questions involving the direct expenditure of money or the issuance of a general obligation bond of the city and approved by them by a three-fifths majority vote. The provisions of this section shall not, however, apply to the sale or exchange of any articles of equipment of any city owned utility as are worn out or useless or which could, with advantage to the service, be replaced by new and improvement [improved] machinery or equipment. 
CHAPTER 13. - CONTRACTS-FRANCHISES-PERMITS 

Section 13.1. - City may perform public work. 
    The commission shall have power to do any public work or make any public improvement by the employment of the necessary labor and the purchase of the necessary supplies and materials with separate accounting as to each improvement so made, or to do such work by contract duly let after competitive bidding. The commission shall also have power to do any public work or make any public improvement under any legally constituted plan under which the labor is furnished by any other governmental unit, department, or agency of the United States government or the State of Michigan, or which is wholly or in part financed by them or either of them. 
Section 13.2. - Plans and specifications. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this charter the responsibility for the preparation of plans and specifications, estimating the cost of advertising for bids, supervision and approval of the work for any public work or public or special improvement is vested in the city manager. 
Section 13.3. - Contracts. 
    Whenever it becomes desirable for the city to enter into a contract with a second party for any purpose whatsoever, such instrument shall be drawn or approved as to form by the city attorney and certified to as to sufficiency of funds by the officer charged with maintenance of the accounting system of the city. The letting and making of such contracts is hereby vested in the commission, which in its discretion, shall have the power to reject any and all bids. Copies of all contracts shall be filed in the office of the clerk. 
    When it becomes necessary, in the prosecution of any work or improvement done under contract, to make alterations or modifications in such contract, such alterations or modifications shall be made only upon resolution of the commission. No such order shall be effective until the price to be paid for the material and work, or both, under the altered or modified contract shall have been agreed upon in writing and signed by the contractor and the city manager upon authority of the commission and a copy thereof and of the proceedings authorizing such alteration or modification [shall have been] certified by the clerk and attached by the clerk to the original contract on file in his office. 
Section 13.4. - Limitation on leasing of public property. 
    The city commission may not rent or lease public property for a period longer than one year unless such rental or lease agreement shall have been referred to the people at a regular or special election and shall have received the approval of a majority of the electors voting thereon at such election. No such lease shall be approved by the commission for presentation to the electorate before thirty days after application therefor has been filed with the commission, nor until a public hearing has been held thereon. No such lease shall be submitted to the electors unless the party leasing or renting the property has filed with the clerk his unconditional acceptance of all the terms of such lease or rental agreement. 
Section 13.5. - Franchises. 
    No franchise or grant which is not revocable at the will of the commission shall be granted or become operative until the same shall have been referred to the people at a regular or special election and shall have received the approval of three-fifths of the electors voting thereon. All irrevocable public utility franchises and all renewals, extensions, and amendments thereof shall be granted only by ordinance. No such ordinance shall be approved by the commission for presentation to the electorate before thirty days after application therefor has been filed with the commission, nor until a public hearing has been held thereon. No such ordinance shall be submitted to the electors at an election to be held less than thirty days after the grantee named therein has filed with the clerk his unconditional acceptance of all of the terms of such franchise, and it shall not be submitted to a special election unless the expense of holding the election, as determined by the commission, shall have been paid to the treasurer by the grantee. No exclusive franchise shall ever be granted, and no franchise shall be granted for a longer term than thirty years. 
State Law reference- Submittal to electors required if franchise irrevocable, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 25; expense of special election to be paid by grantee, MCL 117.5(i); franchise limited to 30 years, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 30. 
Section 13.6. - Leases, licenses and franchises remain in effect. 
    All leases, licenses and franchises granted by the City of Clare and in force within the city when this charter becomes law, shall remain in full force and effect until the expiration of the time for which they were respectively granted, has lapsed under conditions contained in the license or franchise granted, or until any such license or franchises may have been taken over by the city by purchase, condemnation, grant or otherwise. 
Section 13.7. - Control and revocation of franchises. 
    The commission shall cause to be instituted such actions or proceedings as may be necessary to prosecute a public utility company for violations of its franchise, the city charter, or ordinances of the city, and may revoke, cancel, or annul all franchises that may have been granted by the city which, for any reason, have become inoperative, illegal, or void and not binding upon the city. 
Section 13.8. - Rights of regulation. 
    All public utility franchises granted after the adoption of this charter, whether it be so provided in the granting ordinance or not, shall be subject to the following rights of the city, provided, however that this enumeration is not to be construed as being exclusive or as impairing the right of the commission to insert in such franchise any provision as may be within the power of the city to impose or require: 
(a)  To repeal the same for misuse, or nonuse, or for failure to comply with the provisions thereof; 
(b)  To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard of efficiency; 
(c)  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates; 
(d)  To require conditions and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof; 
(e)  To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the commission to be conducive to the safety, welfare, and accommodation of the public. 
Section 13.9. - Regulation of rates. 
    All public utility franchises shall make provision therein for fixing rates, fares, and charges, and for readjustments thereof at periodic intervals at the discretion of the city. The value of the property of the utility used as a basis for fixing such rates, fares, and charges, shall in no event include a value predicated upon the franchise, goodwill, or prospective profits. 
Section 13.10. - Use of streets by utility. 
    Every public utility franchise shall be subject to the right of the city to use, control, and regulate the use of its streets, alleys, bridges, and public places and the space above and beneath them. Every public utility shall pay such part of the cost of improvement or maintenance of streets, alleys, bridges, and public places, as shall arise from its use thereof and shall protect and save the city harmless from all damages arising from said use; and may be required by the city to permit joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys, and public places of the city, by the city, and by other utilities insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental therefor; provided, that in the absence of agreement, upon application by any public utility, the commission shall provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefor, which award shall be final. 
CHAPTER 14. - SUPERVISORS[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- Chapter 14 dealt with the board of supervisors. This chapter is no longer applicable to the city by virtue of Public Act No. 261 of 1966 (MCL 46.401 et seq.), effective March 10, 1967. 

CHAPTER 15. - JUSTICE COURT[12] 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note- Chapter 15 dealt with the justice court. Justice courts were abolished by Public Act No. 154 of 1968 (MCL 600.9921), effective January 1, 1969, and were supplanted by state district courts. 

CHAPTER 16. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Section 16.1. - City liability-Notice to city required. 
    The city shall not be liable for damages sustained by any person, either to his person or property, by reason of the negligence of the city, its officers, or employees, nor by reason of any defective highway, street, bridge, sidewalk, crosswalk or culvert, or by reason of any obstruction, ice, snow or other encumbrance upon such street, sidewalk, crosswalk, or public highway, situated in the city, unless such person shall serve or cause to be served, within sixty days after such injury shall have occurred, a notice in writing upon the clerk, which notice shall set forth substantially the time and place of such injury, the nature of the defect, the manner in which it occurred, and the extent of such injury as far as the same has become known, the names and addresses of the witnesses known at the time by the claimant, and a statement that the person receiving such injury intends to hold the city liable for such damages as may have been sustained by him. No person shall bring any action against the city for any damages to person or property arising out of any of the reasons or circumstances aforesaid, unless he shall have first presented to the clerk his claim in writing and under oath [setting] forth particularly the nature and extent of such injury and the amount of damages claimed by reason thereof, which claim shall be presented to the commission by the clerk and the commission [shall] be given opportunity to act thereon, either by allowing or refusing to allow the claim. 
    It shall be a sufficient bar and answer in any court to any action or proceeding for the collection of any demand or claim against the city, under this section, that the notice of injury and the verified proof of claim, as in this section required, were not presented and filed within the time and in the manner as herein provided. 
Editor's note- Liability for negligence of city in governmental functions is governed by MCL 691.1401 et seq. 
Section 16.2. - No estoppel by representation. 
    No official of the city shall have power to make any representation or recital of fact in any franchise, contact, document, or agreement contrary to any public record of the city. Any such representation shall be void and of no effect as against the city. 
Section 16.3. - Records to be public. 
    All records of the city shall be public and shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times. 
State Law reference- Freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq. 
Section 16.4. - Tense. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context, all words used in this charter indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of the adoption of this charter, but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any event or requirement for which provision is made therein, either as a power, immunity, requirement, or prohibition. 
Section 16.5. - Headings. 
    The chapter and section headings used in this charter are for convenience only and shall not be considered to be a part of this charter. 
Section 16.6. - Effect of illegality of any part of charter. 
    Should any provision or section, or portion thereof, of this charter be held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, illegal, or unconstitutional, such holding shall not be constructed as affecting the validity of this charter as a whole or of any remaining portion of such provision or section; it being hereby declared to be the intent of the charter commission and of the electors who voted thereon that such unconstitutionality or illegality shall not affect the validity of any part of this charter except that specifically affected by such holding. 
CHAPTER 17. - SCHEDULE[13] 
Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note- This chapter contained the transition schedule for implementation of this charter and is no longer necessary. 

CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Legislation Date Section  Section 
this Code Elec. of  3-12-1948 chs. 1-17 Chs. 1-17 Res. No. 
2017-149 11- 6-2017 3 4.1 4 4.4 5 4.11 6       Rpld 4.16  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Clare, Michigan," and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as the "Clare City Code." 
(Code 1985, § 1.5) 
Charter reference- Revision of ordinances, § 7.2. 
State Law reference- Authority to codify ordinances, MCL 117.5b. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to this Code and to all ordinances and resolutions unless the context requires otherwise: 
    Generally. When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general. All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the commission may be effectuated. Terms and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical terms, technical phrases, and term and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings. 
    Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Clare, Michigan. 
    City. The term "city" means the City of Clare, Michigan. 
    City commission and commission. The terms "city commission" and "commission" mean the city commission of the City of Clare, Michigan. 
    Civil infraction. The term "civil infraction" means an act or omission prohibited by law which is not a crime and for which civil sanctions may be ordered. 
    Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Clare, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. In computing a period of days, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any period or a fixed or final day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the period or day is extended to include the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
    Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either...or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either...or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly, but not in combination. 
    County. The term "county" means Clare or Isabella County, Michigan, as the context requires. 
    Crime. The term "crime" means an act or omission forbidden by law that is not designated as a civil infraction and that is punishable, upon conviction, by any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Imprisonment. 
(2)  A fine not designated as a civil fine. 
(3)  Other penal discipline. 
    Delegation of authority. A provision that authorizes or requires a city officer or city employee to perform an act or make a decision authorizes such officer or employee to act or make a decision through authorized subordinates. 
    Gender. Terms of one gender include the other genders. 
    Health department and department of public health. The terms "health department" and "department of public health" mean the county health department. 
    Health officer. The term "health officer" means the director of the county health department. 
    Highway. The term "highway" includes any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place, or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass or causeway, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Includes and including. The terms "includes" and "including" are terms of enlargement and not of limitation or exclusive enumeration, and the use of the terms does not create a presumption that components not expressed are excluded. 
    Joint authority. A grant of authority to three or more persons as a public body confers the authority on a majority of the number of members as fixed by statute or ordinance. 
    May. The term "may" is construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
    May not. The term "may not" states a prohibition. 
    MCL. The abbreviation "MCL" means the Michigan Compiled Laws, as amended. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Must. The term "must" is construed as being mandatory. 
    Number. The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
    Oath, affirmation, sworn and affirmed. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases where an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. In similar cases, the term "sworn" shall include the term "affirmed." 
    Officers, departments, boards, commissions or employees. References to "officers, departments, boards, commissions" or "employees" are to city officers, city departments, city boards, city commissions and city employees. 
    Owner. The term "owner," as applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of such property. With respect to special assessments, however, the owner shall be considered to be the person that appears on the assessment roll for the purpose of giving notice and billing. 
    Person. The term "person" means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, club, joint venture, estate, trust, limited liability company, governmental unit and any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the individuals constituting such group or unit. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" shall mean any property other than real property. 
    Preceding and following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Premises. The term "premises," as applied to real property, includes land and structures. 
    Property. The term "property" means real and personal property. 
    Public acts. References to "public acts" shall be references to the Public Acts of Michigan. (For example, a reference to Public Act No. 279 of 1909 is a reference to Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1909.) Any reference to a public act, whether by act number or by short title, is a reference to the act as amended. 
    Public place. The term "public place" means any place to or upon which the public resorts or travels, whether such place is owned or controlled by the city or any agency of the state, or is a place to or upon which the public resorts or travels by custom, or by invitation, express and implied. 
    Real property, real estate and land. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curblines or lateral lines and the right-of-way lines, which is intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The term "state" means the State of Michigan. 
    Street, highway and alley. The terms "street" and "highway" mean the entire width subject to an easement for public right-of-way, or owned in fee by the city, county or state, of every way or place, of whatever nature, whenever any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of public travel. The term "alley" means any such way or place providing a secondary means of ingress and egress from a property. 
    Swear. The term "swear" includes the term "affirm." 
    Tenses. The present tense shall include the past and future tenses. The future tense shall include the present tense. Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context, all terms used in this Code indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of adoption of this Code, but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any act, event or requirement for which provision is made therein, either as a power, immunity, requirement or prohibition. 
    Week. The term "week" means seven consecutive days. 
    Written. The term "written" shall include any representation of words, letters, symbols or figures. 
    Year. The term "year" shall mean 12 consecutive months. 
(Code 1985, §§ 1.8-1.10) 
State Law reference- Definitions and rules of construction applicable to state statutes, MCL 8.3 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Section catchlines and other headings. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code, printed in boldface type, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and are not titles of such sections, or of any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any such section, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code have no legal effect and only indicate legislative history. Charter references, cross references and state law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections, or that otherwise appear in footnote form, are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters, articles, divisions and subdivisions or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code. 
(d)  No provision of this Code shall be held invalid by reason of deficiency in any chapter, article, division, subdivision or section heading. 
(Code 1985, § 1.6) 
State Law reference- Catchlines in state statutes, MCL 8.4b. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  Unless specifically provided otherwise, the repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance originally repealed, nor impair the effect of any saving provision therein. 
(b)  The repeal or amendment of an ordinance does not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor does such repeal or amendment affect any rights, privileges, suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the amendment or repeal. 
State Law reference- Effect of repeal of state statutes, MCL 8.4. 
Sec. 1-5. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any ordinance or portion of any ordinance: 
(1)  Annexing property into the city or describing the corporate limits. 
(2)  Deannexing property or excluding property from the city. 
(3)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(4)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed or agreement. 
(5)  Granting any specific right or franchise, or establishing the procedure for granting a right or franchise. 
(6)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(7)  Providing for the duties of city officers or employees not codified in this Code. 
(8)  Providing for salaries or other employee benefits. 
(9)  Adopting or amending a comprehensive plan. 
(10)  Levying or imposing any special assessments. 
(11)  Dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley. 
(12)  Establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk. 
(13)  Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision. 
(14)  Not codified in this Code that levies, imposes or otherwise relates to taxes, exemptions from taxes and fees in lieu of taxes. 
(15)  Pertaining to rezoning property. 
(16)  That is temporary, although general in effect. 
(17)  That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(18)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
(b)  The ordinances or portions of ordinances designated in subsection (a) of this section continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-6. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously adopted by the city relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions as to state statutes, MCL 8.3u. 
Sec. 1-7. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any city ordinance on the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance or resolution, or other official act of the commission, which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
Sec. 1-9. - Fees. 
    Where a fee is set or established by the city commission and amended from time to time by resolution or ordinance, a list of such fees will be available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 1-10. - Severability of parts of Code. 
(a)  It is the legislative intent of the city commission in adopting this Code, that all provisions and sections of this Code be liberally construed to protect and preserve the peace, health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city, and should any provision or section of this Code be held unconstitutional or invalid, such holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of any of the remaining provisions or sections, notwithstanding the invalidity of any provision or section thereof. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall apply to the amendment of any section of this Code, whether or not the wording of this section is set forth in the amendatory ordinance. 
(Code 1985, § 1.14) 
Sec. 1-11. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of the Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. Portions of this Code repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)  Amendments to provisions of this Code may be made with the following language: "Section _____ (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Code of Ordinances, City of Clare, Michigan, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." 
(c)  If a new section, subdivision, division, article or chapter is to be added to the Code, the following language may be used: "Section _____ (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Code of Ordinances, City of Clare, Michigan, is hereby created to read as follows:...." 
(d)  All provisions desired to be repealed should be repealed specifically by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as appropriate, or by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance. 
(Code 1985, § 1.2) 
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of the supplement shall be numbered so that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be prepared so that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)  Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in the Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in the Code. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to the Code. 
(4)  Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections. 
(5)  Change the terms "this ordinance," or similar terms, to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section" or "sections _______ to _______" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code). 
(6)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in the Code. 
Sec. 1-13. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the term "violation of this Code" shall mean any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a violation by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense or a violation, or by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  Any provision of this Code that is made or declared to be a misdemeanor, civil infraction or municipal civil infraction is a violation of this Code. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(d)  Except as specifically provided otherwise by state law or city ordinance, all violations of this Code are misdemeanors. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person convicted of a violation of this Code that is a misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. However, unless otherwise provided by law, a person convicted of a violation of this Code which substantially corresponds to a violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of imprisonment is 93 days, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 93 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(e)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, with respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. As to other violations, each violation constitutes a separate offense. 
(f)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise, or other administrative sanctions. 
(g)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief or civil or quasi-judicial enforcement. 
(Code 1985, § 1.12) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, MCL 117.4i(k), 117.4l. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Municipal powers, ch. 2; plan of government, ch. 3. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement saved from repeal, § 1-5(a)(4); any ordinance making or approving any appropriation or budget saved from repeal, § 1-5(a)(6); community development, ch. 16; elections, ch. 18; law enforcement, ch. 26; offenses affecting governmental functions, § 28-31 et seq.; special assessments, ch. 38; utilities, ch. 46; administration of sewer system, § 46-191 et seq.; administration and enforcement of zoning regulations, § 52-31 et seq. 
State Law reference- Home rule cities, MCL 117.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Plan of government, ch. 3; elections, ch. 4; procedure of the city commission, ch. 6; city legislation, ch. 7. 
State Law reference- Open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq.; freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq. 

Secs. 2-31-2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Officers and personnel, ch. 5. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance providing for the duties of city officers or employees not codified in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-5(a)(7); any ordinance providing for salaries or other employee benefits saved from repeal, § 1-5(a)(8); chief of police auxiliary corps, § 26-32. 
State Law reference- Freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq.; standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.; conflicts of interests as to contracts, MCL 15.321 et seq.; political activities by public employees, MCL 15.401 et seq.; legal defense of public employees, MCL 691.1408; incompatible offices, MCL 15.181 et seq.; nondiscrimination in employment, MCL 37.2102. 

Sec. 2-61. - City manager. 
    The city manager shall ensure that all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations adopted by the city commission and the provisions of this Code are properly enforced. He shall attend all regular and special meetings of the city commission. During the absence or disability of the city manager, an acting city manager shall be appointed in accordance with section 3.10 of the charter. 
(Code 1985, § 1.31) 
Sec. 2-62. - Department heads. 
    All administrative officers, including the city clerk, police chief, fire chief, treasurer, assessor, department of public works superintendent, water and wastewater superintendent and any other heads of departments as determined by the city commission shall be responsible to the city manager for the effective administration of their respective departments and offices, and all activities assigned to them. The city manager shall employ or appoint all officers and employees, except as otherwise provided by the city charter or this Code. The city manager may set aside any action taken by an administrative office, other than the city attorney, and may supersede any officer, other than the city attorney, in the functions of their respective offices. 
(Code 1985, § 1.32) 
Sec. 2-63. - Vacancies. 
    In case of a vacancy in the office or during the absence of any administrative officer, the city manager may designate an interim acting head or personally perform the functions of the office until such vacancy is filled in accordance with the charter. 
(Code 1985, § 1.33) 
Sec. 2-64. - New practices; department activity reports. 
(a)  All department heads shall keep informed as to the latest practice in their particular fields and shall inaugurate, with the approval of the city manager, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the service and to the public. 
(b)  Reports of the activities of each department shall be made to the city manager as he shall direct. 
(Code 1985, § 1.34(1, 2)) 
Secs. 2-65-2-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Construction board of appeals, § 10-32; board of appeals for existing building code, § 10-62; cemetery board created, § 14-33; housing commission, § 16-31 et seq.; parks and recreation advisory board, § 30-31 et seq.; planning commission, § 52-51 et seq.; zoning board of appeals, § 52-71 et seq. 
State Law reference- Open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq.; freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq. 

Secs. 2-91-2-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- General finance, ch. 8; taxation, ch. 9; borrowing power, ch. 10; special assessments, ch. 11; contracts, ch. 13. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-5(a)(3). 
State Law reference- Revised municipal finance act, MCL 141.2101 et seq.; uniform budgeting and accounting act, MCL 141.421 et seq.; deposit of public moneys, MCL 211.43b. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-121. - Assessor. 
    The office of assessor shall be headed by the city assessor, whose duty it shall be to perform all work in connection with the assessing of property and the preparation of all assessment and tax rolls and tax notices. The city assessor shall, on or before the first Monday in March of each year, make and complete the assessment roll. The city assessor shall be certified as qualified by the state assessor's board at the level prescribed by the Michigan Administrative Code (R211.431-R211.439). 
(Code 1985, § 1.41) 
Sec. 2-122. - Board of review. 
    Notwithstanding the meeting requirements for the board of review in the charter, in order to comply with the requirement of section 30a of Public Act No. 206 of 1893 (MCL 211.30a) to complete the review of assessments on or before the first Monday in April, the board of review shall meet at the times set out in section 30 of Public Act No. 206 of 1893 (MCL 211.30). 
(Code 1985, § 1.42) 
Sec. 2-123. - Purchasing policy and procedures. 
    The city manager shall develop the purchasing policy and procedures for the city. The purchasing policy and procedures, and all subsequent amendments, changes, modifications and/or deletions thereto, shall be approved by formal action of the city commission. Once approved, the purchasing policy and procedures shall be incorporated in a policy and procedures manual with all other administrative policies and procedures of the city. The city clerk shall be responsible for maintaining a current copy of this and all other approved policies and procedures, and shall distribute and make available copies to all interested and affected parties. 
(Code 1985, § 1.76) 
Charter reference- Purchasing procedure, § 8.9. 
Secs. 2-124-2-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RECOVERY OF EXPENSES 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Secs. 2-141-2-160. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Single Lot Assessments[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference- Hazards and nuisances, § 11.3. 

Sec. 2-161. - Generally. 
(a)  When any expense shall have been incurred by the city upon or in respect to any single premises, which expense is chargeable against the premises and the owner thereof under the provisions of this Code or section 11.3 of the Charter, and which is not of that class required to be pro rated among the several lots and parcels of land in a special assessment district, an account of the labor, material and service for which such expense was incurred, with a description of the premises upon or in respect to which the expense was incurred, and the name of the owner, if known, shall be reported to the clerk, who shall immediately charge and bill the owner, if known. 
(b)  The clerk, at the end of each quarter, shall report to the city commission all sums so owing to the city and which have not been paid within 30 days after the mailing of the bill for such amounts. 
(c)  The city commission shall, at such times as it may deem advisable, direct the assessor to prepare a special assessment roll covering all such charges reported to the city commission, together with a penalty of ten percent. Such roll shall be filed with the clerk, who shall advise the city commission of the filing thereof, and the city commission shall thereupon set a date for the hearing of objections to such assessment roll. The assessment roll shall be open to public inspection for a period of seven days before the city commission shall meet to review the roll and hear complaints. The city clerk shall give notice in advance, by publication, of the opening of the roll to public inspection and of the meeting of the city commission to hear complaints and shall also give like notice to the owners of the property affected, by first class mail at their addresses as shown on the current general assessment roll of the city, at least ten days prior to the date of such hearing. 
(d)  Such special assessments and all interest and charges thereon shall, from the date of confirmation of the roll, be and remain a lien upon the property assessed, of the same character and effect as a lien created by general law for state and county taxes, until paid. 
(e)  The same penalty and interest shall be paid on such assessments, when delinquent from such date after confirmation as shall be fixed by the city commission, as are provided by the city charter to be paid on delinquent general city taxes, and such assessments, with penalties and interest, shall be added by the treasurer to the next general city tax roll or general county and school tax roll, as shall be convenient, and shall thereafter be collected and returned in the same manner as general city taxes. 
(Code 1985, § 1.13) 
Secs. 2-162-2-180. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Hazardous Materials Release[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 20. 

Sec. 2-181. - Purpose. 
    In order to protect the city from incurring extraordinary expenses resulting from the utilization of municipal resources to respond to an incident involving hazardous materials, the city commission authorizes the imposition of charges to recover reasonable and actual costs incurred by the city in responding to calls for assistance in connection with a hazardous materials release. 
(Code 1985, ch. 83, § 1) 
Sec. 2-182. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Hazardous materials includes, but is not limited to, a chemical that is a combustible liquid, a flammable gas, explosive, flammable, an organic peroxide, an oxidizer, pyrophoric, unstable reactive or water reactive. 
    Release means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, leaching, dumping or disposing into the environment. 
    Responsible party means any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, commercial entity, consortium, joint venture, government entity or any other legal entity that is responsible for the release of a hazardous material, either actual or threatened, or is an owner, tenant, occupant or party in control of property onto which or from which there is a hazardous materials release. 
(Code 1985, ch. 83, §§ 2-4) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-183. - Charges imposed upon responsible party. 
(a)  Where the fire department responds to a call for assistance in connection with a hazardous materials release, actual costs incurred by the city in responding to such a call shall be imposed upon the responsible parties, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The actual reasonable cost of providing each pumper required, in the opinion of the officer in command, to stand by at the hazardous materials incident. For each hour, or fraction thereof, that the pumps are activated, an additional sum shall be charged. 
(2)  The actual reasonable cost of providing each water tender required, in the opinion of the officer in command, to be utilized in responding to the hazardous materials incident. 
(3)  The actual reasonable cost of providing each additional fire department vehicle required, in the opinion of the officer in command, to be utilized in responding to the hazardous materials incident. 
(4)  All personnel-related costs incurred by the city as a result of responding to the hazardous materials incident. Such costs may include, but are not limited to, wages, salaries, and fringe benefits and insurance for full-time and part-time firefighters, overtime pay and related fringe benefit costs for hourly employees and fire run fees paid to on-call firefighters. Such personnel-related charges shall commence after the first hour that the fire department has responded to the hazardous materials incident, and shall continue until all municipal personnel have concluded hazardous materials incident related responsibilities. 
(5)  Other expenses incurred by the city in responding to the hazardous materials incident, including, but not limited to, rental or purchase of machinery, equipment, labor, consultants, legal and engineering fees, medical and hospitalization costs, and the replacement costs related to disposable personal protective equipment, extinguishing agents, supplies, water purchased from municipal water systems, and meals and refreshments for personnel while responding to the hazardous material incident. 
(6)  Charges to the city imposed by any local, state or federal government entities related to the hazardous materials incident. 
(7)  Costs incurred in accounting for all hazardous material incident related expenditures, including billing and collection costs. 
(b)  Charges imposed pursuant to subsections (a)(1)-(3) of this section shall be set from time to time by resolution of the city commission, based upon the actual reasonable cost of providing such services and response. Charges imposed pursuant to subsections (a)(4)-(7) of this section shall be the actual costs incurred. 
(Code 1985, ch. 83, §§ 5, 6) 
Sec. 2-184. - Billing procedures. 
    Following the conclusion of a hazardous materials incident, the fire chief shall submit a detailed listing of all known expenses to the municipal treasurer, who shall prepare an invoice to the responsible party for payment. The treasurer's invoice shall demand full payment within 30 days of receipt of the bill. Any additional expenses that become known to the fire chief following the transmittal of the bill to the responsible party shall be billed in the same manner on a subsequent bill to the responsible party. For any amounts due that remain unpaid after 30 days, the city shall impose a late charge of one percent per month, or fraction thereof. 
(Code 1985, ch. 83, § 7) 
Sec. 2-185. - Other remedies. 
    The city may pursue any other remedy or institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect charges imposed under this subdivision. The recovery of charges imposed under this subdivision does not limit liability of responsible parties under local ordinance, or state or federal law, rule or regulation. 
(Code 1985, ch. 83, § 8) 
Secs. 2-186-2-200. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Fire Protection Services[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 22. 

Sec. 2-201. - User fees. 
    The regulations in this subdivision relative to defraying the cost of providing fire protection services shall apply whenever the fire department responds to a vehicular accident, spill of flammable liquids, fire or suspected fire. 
(Code 1985, § 9.200(intro. ¶)) 
Sec. 2-202. - Fire department emergency responses. 
    In any emergency that requires the fire department to respond, the fire department may assess a charge based on the cost of labor, materials and equipment usage. 
(Code 1985, § 9.200(3)) 
Sec. 2-203. - Authority to set fees. 
    The city commission shall set the fees for fire protection services from time to time by resolution. 
(Code 1985, § 9.200(4)) 
Secs. 2-204-2-220. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - Public Safety Response Cost Recovery 

Sec. 2-221. - Purpose. 
    In order to protect the city from incurring extraordinary expenses resulting from the utilization of city resources to respond to emergencies, the city commission authorizes city departments to impose charges to recover reasonable and actual costs incurred by the city in responding to calls for assistance in connection with an emergency service response. 
(Ord. No. 2012-001, § 1, 1-3-2012) 
Sec. 2-222. - "Costs" defined. 
    Costs of the emergency response shall mean the costs incurred in responding to an emergency event, except as may be limited by a policy adopted by the governing body. Costs include, labor, equipment usage, and materials associated with services provided and attorney fees. 
(Ord. No. 2012-001, § 2, 1-3-2012) 
Sec. 2-223. - "Emergency response" defined. 
    For purposes of this subdivision, emergency response shall mean any response by the City of Clare Police Department or City of Clare Fire Department or an entity operating at the request of the City of Clare Fire Department or Police Department or any other responder as set forth in the National Incident Management System (Homeland Security Presidential Directive 5), to any call, including medical emergencies, for assistance from any person, property owner, government agency, emergency service provider, or other entity. 
(Ord. No. 2012-001, § 3, 1-3-2012) 
Sec. 2-224. - "Hazardous materials response" defined. 
    Hazardous materials response shall mean any response to an event involving any chemical, substance, compound, mixture, or other materials defined as designated as, listed as, or having the same characteristics as any substance, compound, mixture or materials listed as hazardous under federal or state law or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2012-001, § 4, 1-3-2012) 
Sec. 2-225. - Liability for expense of emergency response. 
    A responsible party shall be billed, as provided elsewhere in this subdivision, for emergency response costs. Responsible party shall be defined as: 
(1)  Any owner, lessor, lessee, or operator of any property who is responsible for, or contributes to an emergency response shall be liable for the expense of the emergency response. 
(2)  Any registered owner, lessor, lessee, or operator of any motor vehicle, that is the subject of an emergency response, shall be liable for the expense of the emergency response, without regard to fault or having caused an accident or other mishap. 
(3)  Any public or private utility whose activities or facilities necessitated an emergency response shall be liable for the expense of the emergency response. 
(4)  Any person owning, maintaining or operating a railroad shall be liable for the expense of the emergency response. 
(5)  When an emergency response directly benefits more than one person or property, each person and/or property benefited may be held jointly and severally liable for the payment of the expense of the emergency response. For purposes of an emergency response involving a motor vehicle, occupants other than the operator and the registered owner shall not be liable for the expense of the emergency response. 
(6)  Cost recovery for any hazardous materials response may be pursued in a civil action, pursuant to the Natural Resource Environmental Protection Act (MCL 324.20135(1)(b)). 
(Ord. No. 2012-001, § 5, 1-3-2012) 
Sec. 2-226. - [Charges.] 
    Charges imposed under this subdivision shall be set by the city commission based upon the actual reasonable cost of providing said services and response, by resolution from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2012-001, § 6, 1-3-2012) 
Sec. 2-227. - Collection and billing of emergency response costs. 
    The police chief or fire chief, or his or her designee, shall prepare and deliver an invoice for charges imposed to the responsible party or parties for payment. The responsible party shall reimburse the city as directed by the invoice, for the charges set forth in the invoice within 30 days. The responsible party shall be liable for any costs associated with the collection of the unpaid balance that remains after the expiration of 30 days. All payments under this subdivision shall be made directly to the City of Clare. 
    Collection recovery costs incurred by the City of Clare, including billing and collection costs, court costs, and attorney fees, shall be assessed to a responsible party who fails to remit reimbursement for the costs of the provided emergency services in accordance with the billing procedures of this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2012-001, § 7, 1-3-2012) 
Sec. 2-228. - Other remedies. 
    The city may pursue any other remedy, or may institute any appropriate action or proceeding, in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect charges imposed under this subdivision. The recovery of charges imposed under this subdivision does not limit liability of responsible parties under local ordinance or state or federal law, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2012-001, § 8, 1-3-2012) 
Chapter 4 - AIRPORT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40. 
State Law reference- Aeronautics code, MCL 259.1 et seq.; airport zoning act, MCL 259.431 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 4-1-4-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL AIRPORT POLICIES, RULES, REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS 

Sec. 4-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Air industrial park means any property located at the Clare Municipal Airport zoned and developed as industrial. 
    Airport means all property, including easements and right-of-ways, belonging to the Clare Municipal Airport, including areas not used for aeronautical purposes. 
    Airport advisory board means the primary advisory body for the city commission on all matters relating to the Clare Municipal Airport. 
    Airport management means the collective entities of the airport advisory board, airport manager, city manager and city commission. 
    Airport manager means the manager of the airport as recommended to the airport advisory board and appointed by the city commission. 
    Commercial operation means an activity or operation occurring at the Clare Municipal Airport, such as the sale of gasoline or oil, the soliciting or engaging in charter flying or flight instruction, the overhaul or repair of an aircraft or of engines or accessories, the sale of aircraft parts or otherwise offering aeronautical facilities or services to the pubic for profit. 
    Commercial operator means any person engaged in a commercial operation. 
    Emergency vehicle means police or fire vehicles, ambulances and any vehicle conveying an authorized airport official or employee in response to an emergency call. 
    Fixed base operator (FBO) means a commercial operator who provides one or more aviation-related commercial services and whose primary base of operations is the Clare Municipal Airport. 
    Flying club means a nonprofit corporation, partnership or association having three or more members all of whom are owners or stockholders in the corporation owning the club's aircraft and having as its primary purpose the use of such aircraft for the personal use and enjoyment of its members. 
    Hangar area means the area as designated from time to time in the airport master plan and hangar development plan for the construction and operation of hangars. 
    Landing field means ramps, taxiways and runways, and grass surrounding such areas as designated by the airport management. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company or association and includes any director, trustee, receiver, agent or similar representative. 
    Pilot means any person who is responsible for the control of an aircraft. 
    Pilot's association means any fraternal organization with three or more members whose primary collective purpose is the promotion of general aviation. 
    Public taxiways means the taxiways designated by the airport management as open to all aircraft. 
    Taxiways means the rights-of-way designated by the airport management and connecting to a runway and thereby serving all aircraft based on or using the airport and essential to the use and operation of the airport. 
    Terminal parking area means the parking area for aircraft adjacent to the terminal building, as designated by the airport management. 
    Vehicle means any device used primarily for the ground transportation of persons or property. 
(Code 1985, § 3.90(1)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 4-32. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Above ground level ..... AGL Air industrial park ..... AIP Building officials and code administrators ..... BOCA Emergency locator transmitter ..... ELT Environmental Protection Agency ..... EPA Federal Aviation Administration ..... FAA Michigan Aeronautics Commission ..... MAC  
(Code 1985, § 3.90(2)) 
Sec. 4-33. - Rules and regulations adopted. 
    All rules and regulations enacted by the MAC and/or FAA relative to air persons, aircraft, air traffic and airports in effect on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, or any amendments adopted in the future, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article as fully as if such rules and regulations were completely set forth in this section. 
(Code 1985, § 3.90(3)) 
Sec. 4-34. - Suspension of flying operations. 
    The airport manager and/or, in his absence, the city manager shall have the authority to suspend flying operations when, in his opinion, the condition of the landing field is such as to make flying operations unsafe. 
(Code 1985, § 3.90(3)) 
Sec. 4-35. - Written authority required for commercial operations. 
    No person shall utilize the airport property as a base or point of operation for the purposes of engaging in commercial operations of any nature without having previously obtained the written authority of the airport management. 
(Code 1985, § 3.90(3)) 
Sec. 4-36. - Acquisition of jointly owned airport land or air rights. 
(a)  The city commission is hereby authorized to enter into agreements with other governmental units or agencies of the state and/or agencies of the United States government concerning the acquisition of jointly owned airport land or air rights, and the manner in which title or lease thereto shall be held, and also in reference to the acquisition and maintenance of jointly owned airport landing facilities and/or navigational aids to be constructed on jointly owned property which may be acquired. 
(b)  The city commission is hereby authorized to acquire, either exclusively or in conjunction with other governmental units or agencies of the state and/or with agencies of the United States government, land or interests in land or air rights over land either in or without the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of constructing exclusively or jointly owned landing facilities or navigational aids for aircraft, or other appropriate facilities incidental to the operation of landing facilities and aids, or for the purpose of protecting the approaches to landing areas for aircraft either in or without the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 3.90(3)) 
Sec. 4-37. - Nondiscrimination. 
    All commercial operators using the airport and air industrial park shall furnish their services on a fair, equal and nondiscriminatory basis. Commercial operators will not, on the grounds of religion, race, color, national origin, sex, age, height, weight, marital status or handicap, discriminate or permit discrimination against any person or groups of persons in any manner prohibited by title VI of the City Rights Act of 1964, or by part 15 of the Federal Aviation Regulations. Airport management shall have the right to take such action as the federal government and the state may direct to enforce such obligation. 
(Code 1985, § 3.90(4)) 
Sec. 4-38. - Traffic. 
(a)  Pedestrian. 
(1)  No person shall enter upon the landing field without authorization from airport management. Authorized persons shall include pilots, commercial operators, passengers and mechanics attached to the airport, commercial operators and pilots not attached to the airport but conducting flight operations into or at the airport, persons having business with commercial operators or duly authorized officials charged with enforcing local, state or federal laws or regulations. 
(2)  All persons, when requested by airport management, shall present identification and show cause for entering the landing field. 
(3)  This subsection (a) shall not prohibit the owner of a hangar or airplane, or his bona fide guests, from access to his property when not engaged in a flying operation. 
(b)  Vehicular. 
(1)  No person shall operate any vehicle upon or drive across the landing field without authorization from the airport manager. Authorized persons shall include persons operating vehicles which are used for administrative and maintenance purposes, emergency vehicles, vehicles transporting airplane owners or pilots based at the airport, transient pilots or commercial operators and their employees. 
(2)  Authorization to enter upon the landing field with a vehicle to travel to and from their parked aircraft may be given to owners of hangars and aircraft based at the airport, pilots and mechanics employed by a commercial operator and others whom the airport manager may deem necessary. Such authorization shall be given in writing and carried in the vehicle while on the airport. 
(3)  Access to the landing field by authorized vehicles shall be permitted as long as such vehicles do not interfere with normal operations and are not a hazard to parked or operating aircraft. 
(4)  The parking of vehicles is permitted in areas designated by the airport manager. 
(Code 1985, § 3.91) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 44. 
Sec. 4-39. - Aircraft. 
(a)  Registration. All aircraft based on the airport shall be registered with the airport manager. Any purchase, sale or transfer of such aircraft shall be reported within 15 days. 
(b)  Parking. 
(1)  Any aircraft using the terminal parking area may park only in areas designated by the airport manager. Aircraft parked overnight must be chocked and/or tied down by the pilot in the designated tiedown areas. Overnight parking and monthly tiedown fees, as established by the city commission, shall be paid to the airport manager. 
(2)  Aircraft parked in the hangar areas shall be placed so as not to interfere with normal traffic. Overnight parking of aircraft and vehicles outside of hangars in the private hangar areas exceeding three days is prohibited. The aircraft engines will not run up so as to cause debris to be blown into hangars, buildings or aircraft. 
(c)  Dismantled and disassembled. Disassembled aircraft must be stored inside a hangar; however, an exception may be made by the airport manager for the shortterm (not to exceed seven days) storage outside a hangar of partially dismantled aircraft undergoing active repair. 
(Code 1985, § 3.92) 
Sec. 4-40. - Hangars and buildings. 
(a)  Hangars and other buildings shall be constructed in accordance with the single state construction code. A lease approved by airport management must be signed prior to commencement of any construction. Additionally, a building permit shall be issued by the city, and the airport manager shall review and approve construction plans to ensure aviation safety factors are considered and that proposed construction complies with the approved hangar development plan, prior to the commencement of any construction. 
(b)  Unless otherwise approved by airport management, the primary use of aircraft hangars will be for aviation-related purposes (i.e., storage and maintenance of aircraft). 
(c)  No commercial activities may be conducted in hangars and other airport buildings unless licensed by airport management. 
(Code 1985, § 3.93) 
Sec. 4-41. - Fire safety. 
(a)  Airport. 
(1)  All persons using the airport shall exercise the utmost care to guard against fire or injury to persons or property. 
(2)  All persons shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations, insurance requirements, and with "NO SMOKING," "FIRE LANE" and other regulations and signs posted by the airport management. 
(b)  Aircraft. 
(1)  No airplane shall be fueled or drained of fuel while the engine is running or while in a hangar or other enclosed space; however, preflight fuel samplings are allowed in such areas. 
(2)  The cleaning of engines or other parts of an airplane within an enclosure shall be with nonflammable liquids. If volatile flammable liquids are employed, cleaning operations shall be conducted in the open air. 
(Code 1985, § 3.94) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 22. 
Sec. 4-42. - Commercial operations. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  No person shall engage in commercial operations on the airport without a license issued by the city and the payment of fees as specified by the city. 
(2)  A license shall not be granted until the applicant has delivered to airport management satisfactory documentation that the minimum standards as set forth in subsection (b) of this section and the additional requirements as provided in section 4-46 for the specific commercial operation requested have been met. As a further condition of the license, the commercial operator shall also agree to notify the airport manager within three days of any change in the information initially furnished to meet such standards and requirements. 
(3)  Current copies of all required certificates and licenses must be placed on file with the airport manager. 
(b)  Minimum standards. All commercial operators shall meet and maintain the following minimum requirements in order to be licensed: 
(1)  Proof of sufficient financial experience and backing shall be provided which, in the opinion of airport management, will be adequate to facilitate delivery of the provided service. 
(2)  Facilities used for commercial activities must be approved by airport management for the type of aviation-related service being provided. 
(3)  Insurance shall be carried as specified by airport management. Current certificates of all policies must be placed on file with the airport manager. 
(4)  Qualified and, when required by law, certified personnel for the type of service offered shall be available during hours of operation, as specified in an individual service agreement with the city. 
(5)  Flight and ground schools must be licensed by the state bureau of aeronautics and meet minimum standards established by the state. Flight and ground schools must be formally approved by airport management. 
(6)  A formal agreement with airport management shall be entered into, stipulating the terms of the service provided and the responsibilities of the service provider and airport management. 
(7)  All environmental, state, federal and local rules, regulations and codes for the services provided shall be met. 
(8)  Licensing and permit fees established by airport management shall be paid. 
(c)  Temporary licenses and permits. A temporary license or permit, with an established fee, for a specified period of time may be granted for any commercial operation specified in this section. All rules, regulations, policies and requirements established for commercial operations at the airport will be required for issuance of a temporary license or permit, except: 
(1)  Temporary licenses and permits shall be for a shortterm period not to exceed six months in duration. 
(2)  Temporary licenses and permits will be approved and issued by the airport manager, or in his absence, the city manager. 
(3)  An indemnification certificate may be accepted in lieu of the required insurance. 
(4)  The commercial service provider will not be required to establish or maintain an office at the Clare Municipal Airport. 
(5)  Mandated hours of operation of the temporary commercial service provider will be waived or established in the terms of the issued temporary permit or license. 
(d)  Additional requirements for commercial operations. 
(1)  Aircraft sales. Any commercial operator desiring to engage in the sale of new or used aircraft must provide, as a minimum, the following: 
a.  Personnel. One or more persons holding a current pilot certificate, with ratings appropriate for the type of aircraft to be demonstrated. 
b.  Hours of operation. Hours of operation as specified in the license, permit or agreement issued by the city. 
c.  Parts and service. An adequate supply of or access to parts and servicing facilities to provide maintenance service to customers' aircraft during the warranty period. 
(2)  Airframe and/or power plant repair. Any commercial operator desiring to engage in airframe and/or power plant repair service must provide, as a minimum, the following: 
a.  Personnel. One person currently certified by the FAA, with ratings appropriate for work performed. 
b.  Hours of operation. Hours of operation between 8:00 a.m.-5:00 p.m., five days per week, with provisions for emergency mechanical services on-call during weekends and holidays. 
c.  Equipment. Sufficient equipment, supplies and availability of parts to perform maintenance in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations, or the equivalent, on various types of based aircraft. 
d.  Facilities. A 2,000-square-foot hangar and a 100-square-foot office. 
(3)  Aircraft rental. 
a.  Any commercial operator desiring to engage in the rental of aircraft shall provide, as a minimum, the following: 
1.  Number. Own or have exclusive lease in writing for one aircraft. 
2.  Hours of operation. Hours of operation of eight hours per day, six days per week. 
3.  Maintenance. Maintenance in accordance with current FAA rules. 
b.  Private airplane owners, based at the airport, desiring to rent their aircraft shall not be required to maintain specific hours of operation, but shall be required to meet all other requirements stipulated for aircraft rentals by commercial operators. 
(4)  Flight training. Any commercial operator desiring to engage in pilot flight instruction shall provide, as a minimum, the following: 
a.  Certification. Certification in accordance with FAA and state aeronautics commission rules and regulations. 
b.  Personnel. One person certified by the FAA as a flight instructor, with proper ratings to cover training required. 
c.  Aircraft. One aircraft, equipped for flight and training under instruction conditions, owned or exclusively leased in writing by the commercial operator or the individual receiving the flight training. 
d.  Hours of operation. Hours of operation as specified on the permit. 
e.  Insurance. Insurance as specified by the city. 
(5)  Air taxi or charter service. Any commercial operator desiring to engage in air taxi or charter service shall provide, as a minimum, the following: 
a.  Personnel. One or more persons holding a current FAA commercial pilot certificate, appropriately rated to conduct air service offered, and additional personnel to attend the office during normal working hours. 
b.  Aircraft. One or more aircraft, equipped for flight in accordance with federal air regulations. 
c.  Hours of operation. Hours of operation of eight hours per day, six days per week, and provision of on-call service during nonworking hours. 
d.  Certification. Meet all certification provisions of federal air regulations. 
(6)  Aircraft fuels and dispensing service. Any commercial operator desiring to dispense aviation fuels and oil and/or provide any other related line service shall, as a minimum, provide the following: 
a.  Hours of operation. Hours of operation as specified by formal agreement with airport management. 
b.  Equipment. Equipment as specified by formal agreement with airport management. 
c.  Supplier. Pay to the city a flowage fee for each gallon of fuel delivered to the premises. The supplier shall submit monthly supporting invoices to airport management, and the airport management shall have the right to audit the records of the commercial operator. 
d.  Installation. Secure written approval from airport management prior to the installation of storage and fixed dispensing units. 
(7)  Hangaring aircraft. Any commercial operator desiring to engage in hangaring aircraft must provide, as a minimum, the following: 
a.  A hangar approved under the hangar airport development plan. 
b.  A contact telephone number visibly posted on the hangar door. 
(8)  Radio, instrument or propeller service. Any commercial operator desiring to provide radio, instrument or propeller service shall, as a minimum, provide the following: 
a.  Personnel. One qualified repairman to provide services as defined in the FAA and MAC rules and regulations. 
b.  Hours of operation. Hours of operation of eight hours per day, five days per week. 
c.  Facilities. Repair facilities of not less than 800 square feet. 
(9)  Aerial applications. Any commercial operator desiring to engage in aerial application operations must provide, as a minimum, the following: 
a.  Personnel. One person holding appropriate FAA and state required certifications, properly rated for the aircraft to be used, and meeting the requirements of FAA regulations and applicable regulations of the state. 
b.  Aircraft. One aircraft meeting all the requirements of FAA regulations and applicable requirements of the state. 
c.  Certification. Hold an agricultural aircraft operator's certificate issued by the FAA and comply with requirements of the state and political subdivision thereof. 
d.  Facilities. Maintain a segregated chemical storage area protected from public access. 
e.  Hours of operation. Be available on-call during daylight hours of the normal aerial application season. 
(10)  Specialized commercial flight services. Any commercial operator desiring to engage in specialized commercial air activities, including, but not limited to, the following: banner towing and aerial advertising, aerial photography or survey, firefighting or fire patrol, power line or pipe line patrol and any other operation specifically excluded from part 135 of the FAA regulations, shall provide, as a minimum, the following: 
a.  Personnel. One person holding appropriate certifications, with appropriate ratings for the aircraft to be flown. 
b.  Aircraft. One properly certified aircraft. 
(11)  Multiple services. Any commercial operator desiring to engage in two or more commercial operations must provide, as a minimum, the following before offering the service: 
a.  Personnel. Multiple responsibilities may be assigned to personnel to meet personnel requirements for all activities. 
b.  Aircraft. All equipment required for each service must be provided. 
c.  Service. All service required for each activity must be provided during the hours of operation specified. 
d.  Hours of operation. Operators will adhere to hours of operation as specified for the appropriate single activity. 
e.  Notification. Notification must be given in writing to the airport manager prior to offering and immediately following discontinuance of the service. 
(12)  Proration of hours and notice of services. 
a.  Where a license has been granted to more than one commercial operator for the same commercial operation, airport management may prorate, on a weekly basis, the minimum hours of service requirement as set forth in this section for such operation among the operators licensed for such operation and may also exempt any national holiday from the schedule. Such action, however, shall not preclude the operators from offering such service at any time. 
b.  Airport management may prepare appropriate notices detailing the type and hours of service offered by each operator and designating the hours of service responsibilities. Such notices shall be posted in appropriate public places by the airport manager. 
(Code 1985, § 3.95) 
Sec. 4-43. - Flying clubs. 
    All flying clubs desiring to base their aircraft on the airport must obtain a license from the airport manager and meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Each flying club must be a nonprofit corporation, partnership or association. 
(2)  Each member of the flying club must be a bona fide owner of the aircraft or a stockholder in the corporate owner. 
(3)  The flying club may not derive greater revenue from the use of its aircraft than the amount necessary for the actual use of operation, maintenance and replacement of aircraft. 
(4)  The flying club must file with the airport manager a current officers list and mailing address of the flying club. 
(5)  The flying club's aircraft will not be used by other than bona fide members for rental and by no one for commercial operations. 
(6)  Each aircraft owned by the flying club must carry insurance as specified by the city commission. Certificates of all policies must be placed on file with the airport manager. 
(Code 1985, § 3.98) 
Sec. 4-44. - Pilot's associations. 
    Pilot's associations desiring to use the Clare Municipal Airport as their home base must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Each pilot's association must be a nonprofit corporation or association. 
(2)  Any activities of the pilot's association which affect general operations of the airport or other airport users must have the approval of the airport manager. 
(3)  The pilot's association must file with the airport manager a current officers list and mailing address of the pilot's association. 
(4)  Primary voting membership within the pilot's association is intended for currently licensed pilots or aircraft owners. 
(5)  Associate nonvoting membership must be allowed and available to the general public. 
(6)  Activities of the pilot's association must be related to the promotion of general aviation. 
(7)  All revenues generated by the pilot's association must be utilized for the pilot's association's operations, functions or the promotion of general aviation. 
(Code 1985, § 3.99) 
Sec. 4-45. - Violations. 
(a)  In the event of failure to adhere to and comply with the rules, regulations and standards stipulated in this article, airport management will notify the violator of such violations. Whenever practicable, such notice shall be in writing. If the violator fails to correct the violation within the time specified in the notice, such failure will be deemed by airport management good and sufficient cause to remove any person or aircraft from the airport and deny the person or aircraft any further use and privileges of the airport to safeguard the airport and public in general. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the rules, regulations and standards stipulated in this article is guilty of a misdemeanor and such violation shall also constitute grounds for revocation of such person's commercial operator's license or permit issued by airport management. 
(c)  Any person observing a violation of this article shall report the violation to the airport manager on forms provided for such purpose. 
(Code 1985, § 3.96) 
Sec. 4-46. - Appeals and exceptions. 
(a)  Appeals. Any person shall have the right to appeal actions and interpretations of the rules and regulations of this article to the airport manager. If not satisfied with the ruling of the airport manager, any person shall further have the right to appeal actions to the city manager, airport advisory board and city commission in such stated order. Such appeals shall be in writing and filed within 21 days of any such decision or interpretation. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Authority to grant. The airport manager or, in his absence, the city manager shall have the authority to grant such exceptions as may be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the rules and regulations of this article where a literal application of such rules and regulations would result in an unreasonable and unnecessary difficulty or burden and the relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest, but would do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of the rules and regulations of this article, based upon the following standards: 
a.  Compatibility with the airport master plan and airport development plan. 
b.  Whether any nuisance conditions would be created, such as traffic congestion, lighting, etc. 
c.  Safety concerns. 
d.  Any other reasonable alternative available to the exception. 
e.  Self-created problems. 
(2)  Conditions. 
a.  Any exception shall be requested and approved in writing and shall stipulate the reasons the exception is requested and approved. 
b.  Any such exception may be allowed, subject to any reasonable conditions that the airport manager may deem necessary to effectuate the purpose of the rules and regulations of this article. 
c.  Notice of all approved exceptions will be provided to the airport advisory board by the airport manager within 45 days of approval. 
(Code 1985, § 3.97) 
Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 12. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1-6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POOL ROOMS 

Sec. 6-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Pool room means any place open to the public for playing pool or billiards. 
(Code 1985, § 7.171) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-32. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of operating a pool room without first obtaining a license. No license shall be granted except upon certification of the chief of police and unless a complete set of fingerprints of the applicant for such license is on file in the noncriminal identification file of the police department. Each license shall designate the number of pool or billiard tables permitted thereunder, and no licensee shall keep or maintain more pool tables than permitted by such license. 
(Code 1985, § 7.172) 
Sec. 6-33. - Hours of operation. 
    No person shall keep any pool room open on any day between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., nor on Sunday between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon. 
(Code 1985, § 7.173) 
Sec. 6-34. - Public institutions excepted. 
    This article shall not be applicable to pool rooms operated and owned by public institutions. 
(Code 1985, § 7.174) 
Secs. 6-35-6-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DANCES AND DANCEHALLS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Liquor prohibited without license at public dances, MCL 750.464a; authority to restrict minors at dancehalls, MCL 750.141. 

Sec. 6-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public dance means any dance to which the general public is invited, expressly or impliedly, except dances sponsored by the city. 
    Teenage dance means any public dance where minors under 17 years of age are permitted to attend. 
(Code 1985, § 7.181) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-62. - Registration required for teenage dances. 
    No person shall conduct or permit any teenage dance to be conducted on a premises under his control unless each such teenage dance is registered with the police department not less than 24 hours prior to the holding thereof. 
(Code 1985, § 7.184) 
Sec. 6-63. - General regulations. 
    The following general regulations shall apply to the conduct of all teenage dances: 
(1)  No minor admitted to a teenage dance shall be permitted to leave and thereafter enter the dancing premises during the course of the event and no pass-out checks shall be issued, except in emergencies and when authorized specifically by the adult person responsible for conducting the dance or a special police officer in charge of the premises as provided in subsection (3) of this section. 
(2)  No alcoholic liquor shall be sold, consumed or available on the premises in or about which any teenage dance is held. Admission to a teenage dance shall be denied to any person showing any evidence of drinking any alcoholic liquor or who has any alcoholic liquor on his person. 
(3)  Sufficient supervisors shall be provided at every teenage dance in order to keep law and order and to properly supervise and obtain acceptable standards of social behavior at all times. At all times during the course of every teenage dance there shall be on the premises at least one supervisor who is a special police officer in uniform, provided at the expense of the adult person registering such teenage dance, which officer may be either an off-duty police officer of the city or a deputy sheriff. 
(4)  No person 20 years of age or more shall attend or be permitted to attend any teenage dance as a participant; provided, however, that this subsection shall not prevent or interfere with the attendance of supervisors, parents or sponsors who do not participate in the dance, nor shall it prohibit persons employed as entertainers, musicians, waitresses or other attendants at such dances. No person under the age of 14 years shall attend or be permitted to attend any teenage dance. 
(5)  No dance which must be registered as a teenage dance shall be conducted in any place other than a dancehall conforming with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 7.185) 
Sec. 6-64. - Police regulations. 
    The location, conduct and performance of teenage dances shall be subject to such additional reasonable and proper rules, regulations and orders as shall be imposed by the police department. If, for any stated reason, the police department shall find and determine that a dancehall is not a fit and proper place for the holding of a teenage dance, no such teenage dance shall be held therein until the situation or circumstances making such location improper have been corrected. If the police department shall determine that the supervisors provided are not satisfactory or adequate, such supervisors shall be replaced or supplemented as required. It shall be the obligation of the persons sponsoring and registering the teenage dance and all persons participating in such dance to obey and comply with the rules, regulations and orders of the police department in the conduct of such dance. Any such person failing or refusing to obey and comply with any such rule, regulation or order shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1985, § 7.186) 
Cross reference- Law enforcement, ch. 26. 
Secs. 6-65-6-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Public exhibitions and entertainment, MCL 750.463 et seq.; carnival-amusement safety act of 1966, MCL 408.651 et seq. 

Sec. 6-91. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain within the city limits a carnival, amusement park or circus, unless the owner, licensee, bailee or person in possession thereof has obtained from the city a license to operate the carnival, amusement park or circus, and has displayed the license in a prominent place on the premises. 
(Code 1985, § 7.211) 
Sec. 6-92. - Application. 
    Application for a license under this article shall be made on a form furnished by the city clerk, which shall set forth the owner's name and address, the type and amount of liability insurance carried and the name of the insurance carrier, and whether or not the applicant is sponsored by a civic, religious, service or fraternal organization in the city. The applicant shall also state the place within the city where the applicant proposes to carry on his entertainment. 
(Code 1985, § 7.212) 
Sec. 6-93. - License fee. 
    Every licensee under this article shall pay the inspection, regulation and license fee as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time. 
(Code 1985, § 7.213) 
Sec. 6-94. - Approval of license and location. 
(a)  No license under this article shall be issued, except upon certification by the chief of police. 
(b)  The location of any carnival, amusement park or circus type of entertainment shall be subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(Code 1985, § 7.214) 
Secs. 6-95-6-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 

Sec. 6-121. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult bookstore means an establishment that has as a substantial portion of its stock-in-trade and offers for sale, for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, movies, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other visual representations that are characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia designed for use as part of, or in connection with, specified sexual activities. 
    Adult motion picture theater means an establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videos, slides or other photographic reproductions are shown and in which a substantial portion of the total presentation is devoted to the showing of material characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
    Cabaret means any place wherein food and any type of alcoholic beverage is sold or given away on the premises and the operator thereof holds a yearly license to sell such beverages by the glass and which features topless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainers. 
    Massage parlor means an establishment or place primarily in the business of providing massage services and is not a myotherapy establishment. 
    Specified anatomical areas means and includes any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means and includes any one or more of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; 
(2)  Human sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including, but not limited to, intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
(3)  Human masturbation, actual or simulated; 
(4)  Human excretory functions as part of, or as related to, any of the activities described in subsections (1)-(3) of this definition; and 
(5)  Physical violence, bondage, mutilation or rape, actual or simulated, as part of, or as related to, any of the activities described in subsections (1)-(4) of this definition. 
    Substantial portion means a use or activity accounting for more than 20 percent of any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Stock-in-trade; 
(2)  Display space; 
(3)  Floor space; or 
(4)  Viewing time, movie display time or entertainment time measured per month. 
(Code 1985, § 9.168) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2; zoning, ch. 52. 
Sec. 6-122. - Permit required; exception. 
(a)  No adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, cabaret or massage parlor (referred to in this article as "adult entertainment establishments") shall be operated or maintained in the city without first obtaining a permit to operate such establishment. Such permit is to be issued by the city commission. A permit may be issued only for one adult entertainment establishment located at a fixed and certain place. Any person desirous of operating more than one adult entertainment establishment must have a permit for each establishment. No permit or interest in a permit may be transferred to any person. 
(b)  All private schools and public schools located within the city are exempt from obtaining a permit under this article when instructing pupils in sex education as part of its curriculum. 
(Code 1985, § 9.169) 
Sec. 6-123. - Permit application. 
(a)  Any person desiring to secure a permit shall make application to the city clerk. The city clerk shall date the application. A copy of the application shall be distributed promptly to the police chief of the city. The application for a permit shall be upon a form provided by the city clerk. An applicant for a license, which shall include all partners or limited partners of a partnership applicant and all officers and directors of a corporate applicant and all stockholders, including more than five percent of the stock of a corporate applicant, or any other person who is interested directly in the ownership or operation of the business, shall furnish the following information, under oath: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant, including all aliases. 
(2)  Date of birth of the applicant. 
(3)  Social Security number of the applicant. 
(4)  State vehicle operator's license number of the applicant. 
(5)  Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age. 
(6)  All residential addresses of the applicant for the past three years. 
(7)  Applicant's height, weight and color of eyes and hair. 
(8)  Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for five years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(9)  Whether the applicant previously operated in this or any other county, city or state under an adult entertainment or similar business permit or license and whether the applicant has ever had such a permit or license revoked or suspended, the reason for such revocation or suspension and the business entity or trade name under which the applicant operated that was subject to the suspension or revocation. 
(10)  All criminal statute, whether federal or state, or city ordinance violation convictions, forfeitures of bonds or pleadings of nolo contendere on all criminal charges, except minor traffic violations. 
(11)  Applicant's fingerprints and two portrait photographs at least two inches by two inches. 
(12)  Address of the adult entertainment establishment to be operated by the applicant. 
(13)  If the applicant is a corporation, specify the name of the corporation, the date and state of incorporation, the name and address of all shareholders owning more than five percent of the stock in the corporation and all officers and directors of the corporation. 
(b)  Within 21 days of receiving an application for a permit, the city clerk shall notify the applicant whether the application is granted or denied. Whenever an application is denied, the city clerk shall advise the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for such action. If the applicant requests a hearing within ten days of receipt of the notification of denial, a public hearing shall be held within 30 days thereafter before the city commission, as provided in this article. Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant to the investigation of the application, or to appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath regarding such application, or to submit to or cooperate with any investigation required by this article shall constitute an admission by the applicant that he is ineligible for such permit and shall be grounds for denial thereof by the city clerk. 
(Code 1985, § 9.170) 
Sec. 6-124. - Standards for issuance of permit. 
    To receive a permit to operate an adult entertainment establishment, an applicant must meet the following standards: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, he shall: 
a.  Be at least 18 years of age. 
b.  Not have been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to a felony or any crime of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction within five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
c.  Not have been found to have previously violated this article or a substantially similar ordinance within five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(2)  If the applicant is a corporation: 
a.  All officers, directors and stockholders required to be named under section 6-123 of this section shall be at least 18 years of age. 
b.  No officer, director or stockholder required to be named under section 6-123 of this section shall have been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction within five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
c.  No officer, director or stockholder required to be named under section 6-123 of this section shall have been found to have previously violated this article or a substantially similar ordinance within five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(3)  If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture or any other type of organization where two or more persons have a financial interest: 
a.  All persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other type of organization shall not have been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to a felony or other crime of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction within five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
b.  No person having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture or other type of organization shall have been found to have violated any provision of this article or a substantially similar ordinance within five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
c.  No permit shall be issued unless the city chief of police has investigated the applicant's qualifications for the permit. The results of the investigation shall be filed in writing with the city clerk no later than 14 days after the date of the application. 
(Code 1985, § 9.171) 
Sec. 6-125. - Fee. 
    A permit fee as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time shall be submitted with the application for a permit. If the application is denied, one-half of the fee shall be returned. 
(Code 1985, § 9.172) 
Sec. 6-126. - Display of permit. 
    The permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the adult entertainment establishment. 
(Code 1985, § 9.173) 
Sec. 6-127. - Expiration and renewal of permit; renewal and late penalty fees. 
    Every permit issued pursuant to this article will terminate at the expiration of one year from the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked, and must be renewed before operation is allowed in the following year. Any operator desiring to renew a permit shall make application to the city clerk. The application for renewal must be filed not later than 60 days before the license expires and shall be dated by the city clerk. A copy of the application for renewal shall be distributed promptly by the city clerk to the city police chief and the business operator. The application for renewal shall be upon a form provided by the city clerk and shall contain such information and data, given under oath or affirmation, as is required for an application for a new permit. A permit renewal fee as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time shall be submitted with the application for renewal. In addition to the renewal fee, a late penalty as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time shall be assessed against the applicant who files for a renewal less than 60 days before the permit expires. If the application is denied, one-half of the total fees collected shall be returned. If the city police department is aware of any information bearing on the operator's qualifications, that information shall be filed in writing with the city clerk. 
(Code 1985, § 9.174) 
Sec. 6-128. - Revocation or suspension of permit. 
(a)  The city commission can revoke or suspend a permit for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Discovery that false or misleading information or data was given on or material facts were omitted from any application. 
(2)  The operator or any employee of the operator has violated any provision of this article or any rule or regulation adopted by the city commission pursuant to this article; provided, however, that in the case of a first offense by an operator where the conduct was solely that of an employee, the penalty shall not exceed a suspension of 30 days if the city commission shall find that the operator had no actual or constructive knowledge of such violation and could not by the exercise of due diligence have had such actual or constructive knowledge. 
(3)  The operator becomes ineligible to obtain a permit or is convicted of or pleads nolo contendere to any felony or crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature. 
(4)  Any cost or fee required to be paid by this article is not paid. 
(5)  Any intoxicating liquor or cereal malt beverage is served or consumed on the premises of the adult entertainment establishment. 
(6)  The operator fails to maintain a special use permit for the site as required by chapter 52, or fails to comply with conditions of the special use permit. 
(b)  The city commission, before revoking or suspending any permit, shall give the operator at least ten days' written notice of the charges against him and the opportunity for a public hearing before the city commission as follows: 
(1)  Before the city commission revokes or suspends a permit issued in this article, the city commission shall cause written notice to be sent by certified mail to the permitted individual or applicant affected, at the address stated in the permit or application, informing such person of the right to a hearing upon request. 
(2)  If the permitted individual or applicant does not request a hearing within 14 days of the date the notice was sent, the permit may be forthwith revoked or suspended. If the permitted individual requests a hearing before the city commission regarding the proposed revocation or suspension, such hearing shall be held within 21 days after the date of the written request. 
(3)  Any permit issued by the city may be immediately suspended by the city manager or duly appointed city official if it is determined that the permitted individual has violated, or a person at or upon the permitted location has violated this article or state law and that continued operation under the permit is contrary to the public health, safety and welfare. A permitted individual shall have the right to a hearing before the city commission on any license suspension by the city manager and notice thereof shall be given in accordance with subsections (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section. 
(4)  Both the city and the permitted individual shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to present evidence on the issue at the hearing. Action taken by the city commission shall be final and any fees under this article shall not be refunded to the applicant or permitted individual. 
(c)  The transfer of a permit or any interest in a permit shall automatically and immediately revoke the permit. 
(d)  Any operator whose permit is revoked shall not be eligible to receive a permit for one year from the date of revocation. No location or premises for which a permit has been issued shall be used as an adult entertainment establishment for six months from the date of revocation of the permit. 
(Code 1985, § 9.175) 
Sec. 6-129. - Private viewing booths, rooms and cubicles. 
    Any adult entertainment establishment having available for customers, patrons or members, any booth, room or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult entertainment, must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the adult entertainment establishment, and shall be unobstructed by any door, lock or other control-type device. 
(2)  Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet with the following construction requirements: 
a.  Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic area by a wall. 
b.  Each booth, room or cubicle shall have at least one side totally open to a public lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all times of any person occupying the booth, room or cubicle. 
c.  All walls shall be solid and without any openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth textured and easily cleanable. 
d.  The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth textured and easily cleanable. 
e.  The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle, when not in use, shall be a minimum of ten footcandles at all times, as measured from the floor. 
(3)  Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of the same sex shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth. 
(Code 1985, § 9.176) 
Sec. 6-130. - Operator's responsibilities. 
(a)  The operator shall maintain a register of all employees, showing, for each employee, the name and alias used by the employee, home address, age, date of birth, sex, height, weight, color of hair and eyes, telephone numbers, Social Security number, dates of employment and termination, and duties. The information on each employee shall be maintained in the register on the premises for a period of three years following termination of employment. 
(b)  Daily hours of operation of any adult entertainment establishment shall be limited to Monday through Saturday during the period of time from 8:00 a.m. to midnight. Adult entertainment establishments shall not be permitted to operate on Sundays. 
(c)  The operator shall make the register of employees available immediately for inspection at all reasonable times upon demand of a member of the city police department. 
(d)  No merchandise or pictures of the products or entertainment on the premises shall be displayed in window areas or any areas where they can be viewed from a public sidewalk adjacent to the establishment. 
(e)  Any individual viewing booths, entertainment rooms or similar cubicles designed or used for individuals to view specified anatomical areas or sexual activities shall not be completely enclosed from the common areas, hallways or other areas of the adult entertainment business. 
(f)  No employee or patron under 18 years of age shall be allowed on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment. 
(g)  No intoxicating liquor or cereal malt beverage shall be served or consumed on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment. 
(h)  The operator shall maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary manner at all times. 
(i)  Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge or approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator's negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or caused the omission. Any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator for purposes of determining whether the operator's license shall be revoked, suspended or renewed. 
(j)  No employee of an adult entertainment establishment shall allow any minor to loiter around or frequent an adult entertainment establishment or allow any minor to view adult entertainment. 
(k)  The operator shall maintain at all times at least ten footcandles, as measured from the floor, for light in the public portions of the establishment, including aisles. However, if a lesser level of illumination in the aisles shall be necessary to enable a patron to view the adult entertainment in a booth, room or cubicle adjoining an aisle, a lesser amount of illumination may be maintained in such aisles, provided, however, at no time shall there be less than one footcandle of illumination in such aisles, as measured from the floor. 
(l)  The operator shall ensure compliance of the establishment and its patrons with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 9.177) 
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 20; animals and pets in parks, § 30-73. 
State Law reference- Wildlife conservation, MCL 324.40101 et seq.; endangered species protection, MCL 324.36501 et seq.; crimes relating to animals and birds, MCL 750.49 et seq.; local authority to adopt animal control ordinance, MCL 287.290. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply. Words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. 
    Dog means any dog or doglike creature, such as a wolf, fox, etc., when domesticated, whether male, female or unsexed. 
    Dangerous dog means: 
(1)  Any dog with a propensity, tendency, or disposition to attach, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or other domestic animals; or 
(2)  Any dog that attacks, attempts to attack or that, by its actions, gives indication that it is liable to attack a human being or other domestic animal one or more times without provocation. 
    Guide/service dogs means any guide dog, signal dog, or other dog individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including, but not limited to, guiding individuals with impaired vision, alerting individuals with impaired hearing to intruders or sounds, providing minimal protection or rescue work, pulling a wheelchair, or fetching dropped items, as defined in federal law. 
    Law enforcement dog means a dog trained to aid the police, in duties such as tracking, disabling or detaining criminals or detecting controlled substances. 
    Domestic animal means animals commonly classified as pets, including dogs, cats, livestock, poultry and any animal other than man. 
    Law enforcement officer means the county sheriff and each of his deputies, county animal control personnel, any person designated as an ordinance enforcement officer for the purpose of enforcing this chapter and also means the city police. 
    Livestock means horses, stallions, colts, geldings, mares, sheep, rams, bulls, bullocks, steers, heifers, cows, calves, mules, jacks, jennets, burros, goats, kids and swine, and deer or fur-bearing animals being raised in captivity. 
    Owner means, when applied to the proprietorship of an animal, every person having a right of property in the animal and every person who keeps or harbors the animal or has the animal in his care and every person who permits the animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by him. 
    Poultry means all domestic fowl, ornamental birds (e.g., peacocks) and game birds possessed or being reared under authority of a breeder's license pursuant to part 427 of Public Act No. 57 of 1995 (MCL 324.42701 et seq). 
    Reasonable control means with a secure leash of suitable strength and length, in the hands of one able to restrain or move the animal if necessary, or under strict voice control, so as to enable the attendant to bring the animal to the attendant's side immediately on command; in addition, an enclosed vehicle or container or the owner's occupied property shall be deemed reasonable control. 
    Wild animal means any live monkey or other primate, raccoon, skunk, fox, snake or other reptile, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, wolf, part-wolf, coyote or other animal or any bird of prey, which can normally be found in the wild state. 
(Code 1985, § 9.61; Ord. No. 2014-001 , 3-17-2014) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 8-2. - Keeping and conduct regulated. 
    The keeping of animals and their conduct shall be regulated as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1985 § 9.62) 
Sec. 8-3. - Impoundment; fees. 
(a)  All animals picked up or otherwise coming within the control of a law enforcement officer because of a violation of this chapter shall be impounded with the county authorities and held for such length of time as required by the county impounding authorities. 
(b)  Fees for impounding shall be as set by the county impounding authorities. 
(Code 1985, § 9.63) 
Sec. 8-4. - Authority to destroy. 
(a)  Dogs. A law enforcement officer may kill any dog that he sees in the act of pursuing, worrying or wounding any livestock or poultry, or attacking persons, and there shall be no liability on such officer, in damages or otherwise, for such killing. 
(b)  Dangerous animals. Any law enforcement officer is authorized to destroy any dangerous animal of any kind when it is necessary for the protection of any person or property. 
(Code 1985, § 9.64) 
Sec. 8-5. - Keeping restricted. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall keep or house any animal or poultry within the city, except dogs, cats, birds or other animals commonly classified as pets. No person shall keep any animal in the city that is not of a domesticated species. 
(Code 1985, § 9.65; Ord. No. 2014-001 , 3-17-2014) 
Sec. 8-6. - Cruelty. 
(a)  No person shall cruelly treat any animal in the city in any way. 
(b)  Any person who inhumanely beats, underfeeds, overloads or abandons any animal shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 9.66) 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, MCL 750.50. 
Sec. 8-7. - Unclean and unwholesome housing. 
    No person shall cause or allow any place where any animal is or may be kept to become unclean or unwholesome to an extent that it becomes a health problem or nuisance to abutting residences. 
(Code 1985, § 9.67) 
Sec. 8-8. - Noise. 
    No person shall harbor or keep any animal that disturbs the peace by loud noises at any time of the day or night. 
(Code 1985, § 9.68) 
Cross reference- Noise control, § 20-71 et seq. 
Sec. 8-9. - Diseases. 
(a)  No person shall allow any domestic animal afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease to run at large or be exposed in any public place whereby the health of man or beast may be affected. No such diseased animal shall be shipped or removed from the premises of the owner of the animal, except under the supervision of a law enforcement officer. 
(b)  It is the duty of a law enforcement officer to secure such disposition of any diseased animal and such treatment of affected premises so as to prevent the communication and spread of the contagion or infection, except when the state veterinarian is empowered to act. 
(Code 1985, § 9.69) 
Sec. 8-10. - Running at large. 
(a)  Dangerous and vicious animals. No person shall permit any dangerous or vicious animal of any kind to run at large within the city. 
(b)  Domestic animals. Any domestic animal running at large in any public place in the city shall be impounded in accordance with county regulations. 
(Code 1985, § 9.70; Ord. No. 2014-001 , 3-17-2014) 
Sec. 8-11. - Picketing. 
    It shall be unlawful to picket or tie any dangerous or domestic animal in any of the streets of the city for the purpose of grazing or feeding. 
(Code 1985, § 9.71) 
Sec. 8-12. - Exhibitions and parades. 
    Exhibitions or parades of animals which are of a wild nature or disposition (ferae naturae) in the eyes of the law may be conducted only upon securing a permit from the city clerk. 
(Code 1985, § 9.72) 
Sec. 8-13. - Sanitary disposal of feces and solid waste. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning or responsible for a dog or cat to fail to pick up and remove from any public property (e.g., parks, cemeteries, sidewalks, etc.) or from the property of another such animal's feces or solid waste as the animal may deposit there. 
(Code 1985, § 9.73) 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 36. 
Sec. 8-14. - Keeping wild and vicious animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept on his premises any wild or vicious animal for display or exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This section shall not be construed to apply to zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions or circuses. 
(Code 1985, § 9.74) 
Sec. 8-15. - Sporting events. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or to bring any animal to a sporting event overseen by the city which occurs on city property. All animals or pets, apart from service animals, are banned at all sporting events overseen by the city occurring on city property. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, 1-4-2010) 
Cross reference- Animals and pets, § 30-73. 
Sec. 8-16. - Animals prohibited; exceptions. 
    The following are exempt from complying with the terms and conditions of this ordinance [from which this section derives]: 
(1)  Guide/service and law enforcement dogs. The owner of such a dog, upon request, must provide picture identification certifying that the dog was trained by a qualified organization or trainer. 
(2)  Veterinarian offices. 
(3)  Animal control centers. 
( Ord. No. 2014-001 , 3-17-2014) 
Secs. 8-17-8-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dog law, MCL 287.261 et seq. 

Sec. 8-41. - Nuisance declared. 
    In addition to any penalty imposed on any owner or other person, any dog found in the city either without a license or running at large under conditions set forth in section 8-42 is declared to be a nuisance and shall be impounded at the direction of a law enforcement officer. Any impounding shall be governed by the rules, regulations and fees established by the county. 
(Code 1985, § 9.75) 
Cross reference- Nuisances, § 20-31 et seq. 
Sec. 8-42. - Disturbing the peace and quiet. 
    No owner shall permit a dog to disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood by barking or making other loud or unusual noises. 
(Code 1985, § 9.76) 
Sec. 8-43. - Running at large. 
    No person owning, possessing or harboring a dog shall permit the dog to run at large in the city unless such dog is under the immediate control of its owner or an immediate member of the family. 
(Code 1985, § 9.77) 
Sec. 8-44. - Confinement in public. 
    No dog shall be permitted at any time to be on a highway, in a public park, in a public building or in any other public place, except when held securely on a leash of suitable strength and length by the owner thereof or other responsible person or when confined in a shipping receptacle or closed automobile; however, no dog shall be confined in a closed automobile when the owner knows or should know that the temperature in the car will exceed normally tolerable conditions. 
(Code 1985, § 9.78) 
Sec. 8-45. - Destruction of property. 
    No owner shall at any time allow any licensed or unlicensed dog to destroy property or habitually trespass in a damaging way on property of persons other than the owner. 
(Code 1985, § 9.79) 
Sec. 8-46. - Vicious, ferocious and sick dogs. 
    No person shall permit any vicious or ferocious dog or a dog which is sick with or liable to communicate hydrophobia or other contagious or infectious disease to be in any public place or to be otherwise exposed or a threat to any person or property. 
(Code 1985, § 9.80) 
Sec. 8-47. - Trespass liability. 
    Any dog that enters another person's property or public right-of-way, unaccompanied by its owner or owner's agent, shall constitute a trespass, and the owner shall be liable for any damage transgressed by the dog. 
(Code 1985, § 9.81) 
Sec. 8-48. - Biting. 
(a)  Owner's responsibility. No owner shall at any time allow any licensed or unlicensed dog to attack, molest or bite a person or other animal. 
(b)  Quarantine and impoundment. Whenever any dog bites a person, the owner of the dog shall immediately notify a law enforcement officer, who shall order the dog held on the owner's premises or shall have the dog impounded for a period of two weeks. 
(c)  Examination for rabies. The dog shall be examined immediately after it has bitten any person and again at the end of the two-week quarantine or impoundment period. 
(d)  Release. If, at the end of two weeks, a veterinarian is convinced that the dog is then free from rabies, the dog shall be released from quarantine or from the pound, as the case may be. 
(e)  Death. If the dog dies during the two-week period, it shall be sent to the state department of health for examination for rabies. 
(Code 1985, § 9.82) 
Sec. 8-49. - Kennels generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate a dog kennel in the city without having obtained a kennel license from the city clerk. 
(b)  Any person owning, harboring or keeping for pleasure or profit five or more dogs shall be deemed to operate a dog kennel. 
(c)  The city clerk shall, upon application, issue such kennel license upon payment of a fee established by the city commission, and such fee is to be reviewed and adjusted from time to time as deemed appropriate by the city commission. 
(d)  No kennel shall be permitted within 100 feet of any residential district within the city. 
(e)  Before the kennel license is issued, the city manager or his representative shall inspect the premises to ensure the place proposed for the kennel is suitable and may be kept without the probability of its becoming a public or neighborhood nuisance. 
(Code 1985, § 9.83) 
Sec. 8-50. - Kennel maintenance. 
(a)  No person shall operate a kennel without keeping the kennel in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. 
(b)  No dog kennel shall be permitted in cases where the dogs kept at such kennel are loud, frequently or habitually bark, yelp or howl so as to cause annoyance to the neighborhood or the general public. The license for any dog kennel that permits such kennel to become a nuisance by reason of unsanitary conditions or noise may be suspended or revoked by the city manager. 
(Code 1985, § 9.84) 
Sec. 8-51. - Dogs or other domestic animals in cemeteries. 
(a)  All domestic animals within the cemetery shall be under the affirmative control of the owner at all times. 
(b)  All domestic animals within the cemetery shall be leashed at all times by a physical, clearly visible tether/leash. 
(c)  Owners of all domestic animals shall be responsible for cleaning up all defecation left by their animal. 
(d)  Owners of domestic animals shall not permit the animals to urinate or defecate on headstones, monuments, memorials, or any type of grave marking or decoration. 
(e)  Should any domestic animal urinate or defecate on a headstone, monument, memorial, grave marking, or decoration, it shall constitute malicious destruction of property by the animal's owner, punishable as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2012-007, 11-5-2012) 
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Building inspector's certificate, § 12-42; community development, ch. 16; environment, ch. 20; fire prevention and protection, ch. 22; land divisions and subdivisions of land, ch. 24; solid waste, ch. 36; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40; utilities, ch. 46; building sewers, § 46-124; waterways, ch. 50; zoning, ch. 52. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Deposit for razing or moving buildings. 
    Should the city manager determine that it is desirable or necessary, the moving or wrecking contractor or the owner of any building which is to be razed or moved from or onto any lot or other parcel of land within the city, he shall require a deposit in cash or by a certified check, payable to the city, of a sufficient amount to guarantee the payment of the cost and filling of the basement, plugging the sewers, providing barricades, lights and all things necessary to ensure that the lot or parcel of land is and will remain in a safe condition after the razing or moving of the building has been accomplished. 
(Code 1985, § 8.4) 
Secs. 10-2-10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SINGLE STATE CONSTRUCTION CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Single state construction code, MCL 125.1501 et seq. 

Sec. 10-31. - Agency designated. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the single state construction code in accordance with Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.), the city manager and his designees shall act as the building official of the city, and are hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibilities of the city regarding the building, electrical, residential and energy codes under such act. The city hereby assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of such codes of such act throughout its corporate limits. The city transfers enforcement of the plumbing and mechanical codes to the director pursuant to MCL 125.1508b. 
(Code 1985, § 8.2) 
Sec. 10-32. - Construction board of appeals. 
(a)  Created; membership and terms. Pursuant to Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.), a construction board of appeals shall be created consisting of three members. The members of the construction board of appeals shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval and majority vote of the city commission. The terms of such members shall be for two years. 
(b)  Qualifications. The mayor shall attempt to appoint to the construction board of appeals a licensed architect or civil engineer, a licensed building contractor, and a licensed plumber or a licensed electrician. If people with the appropriate qualifications cannot be found, then the mayor may appoint to the construction board of appeals those applicants best qualified to serve as members of the construction board of appeals. 
(c)  Quorum. Two members of the construction board of appeals shall constitute a quorum. A decision of the construction board of appeals shall require concurrence of at least a majority of the members present. 
(d)  Duties. If the enforcing agency refuses to grant an application for a building permit or makes any other decision pursuant or related to this article, an interested person or the person's agent may appeal in writing to the construction board of appeals. The construction board of appeals shall hear the appeal and render a decision, with a statement of the reasons for the decision, with the enforcing agency not more than 30 days after submission of the written appeal. Failure of the construction board of appeals to render a decision within 30 days of submission of the appeal is a denial of the appeal for purposes of authorizing an appeal to the state construction code commission. 
(e)  Specific variances. After a public hearing, the construction board of appeals may grant a specific variance to a substantive requirement of this article if the literal application of the substantive requirement would result in exceptional practical difficulty to the applicant, and if both of the following requirements are satisfied: 
(1)  Performance of the particular item or part of the building or structure with respect to which the variance is granted shall be adequate for its intended use and shall not substantially deviate from performance required by this article of that particular item or part for the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city. 
(2)  The specific condition justifying the variance shall be neither so general, nor recurrent in nature as to make an amendment of this article with respect to the condition reasonably practical or desirable. 
(f)  Variance conditions. The construction board of appeals may attach, in writing, any condition in connection with the granting of the variance that, in its judgment, is necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city. The breach of a condition shall automatically invalidate the variance and any permit, license and/or certificate granted on the basis thereof. In no case shall more than the minimum variance from this article be granted than is necessary to alleviate the exceptional practical difficulty. 
(Code 1985, § 8.3) 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions, § 2-91 et seq. 
Sec. 10-33. - Revision of fees. 
    The city commission shall have the power to revise the fees required in this article from time to time by resolution. 
(Code 1985, § 8.5) 
Sec. 10-34. - Fire limits. 
    All of the property within the corporate limits of the city shall be considered to be within the fire limits for the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 8.6) 
Sec. 10-35. - Agency designated; [Michigan Plumbing Code.] 
    Pursuant to Section 8b(6) of 1972 PA 230, the City of Clare is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the City of Clare under 1972 PA 230 and the Michigan Plumbing Code, as amended. The City of Clare assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Acts and Codes throughout its corporate limits of 1972 PA 230 and the Michigan Plumbing Code, as amended. The City of Clare shall also administer and enforce the respective provisions of the Michigan Residential, Rehabilitation, and Uniform Energy Codes and all applicable laws and ordinances. A governmental official registered in accordance with 1986 PA 54 shall be appointed to receive all fees, issue permits, plan reviews, notices, orders, and certificates of use and occupancy. All personnel performing plan reviews and inspections shall be registered in accordance with 1986 PA 54. 
(Ord. No. 2010-003, § 1, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 10-36. - Agency designated; [Michigan Mechanical Code.] 
    Pursuant to Section 8b(6) of 1972 PA 230, the City of Clare is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the City of Clare under 1972 PA 230 and the Michigan Mechanical Code, as amended. The City of Clare assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Acts and Codes throughout its corporate limits of 1972 PA 230 and the Michigan Mechanical Code, as amended. The City of Clare shall also administer and enforce the respective provisions of the Michigan Residential, Rehabilitation, and Uniform Energy Codes and all applicable laws and ordinances. A governmental official registered in accordance with 1986 PA 54 shall be appointed to receive all fees, issue permits, plan reviews, notices, orders, and certificates of use and occupancy. All personnel performing plan reviews and inspections shall be registered in accordance with 1986 PA 54. 
(Ord. No. 2010-004, § 1, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 10-37. - [Floodplain management provisions.] 
(a)  Agency designated. Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the Building Official of the City of Clare is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the City of Clare under Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, State of Michigan. The City of Clare assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act throughout the corporate limits of the community adopting this section. 
(b)  Code appendix enforced. Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code shall be enforced by the enforcing agency within the City of Clare. 
(c)  Designation of regulated floodprone hazard areas. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS) entitled Clare County, Michigan (All Jurisdictions) and dated December 3, 2010, and the flood insurance rate map(s) (FIRMS) panel number(s) of 26035C, 0433C, 0434C, 0450C, and 0475C and dated December 3, 2010, are adopted by reference for the purposes of administration of the Michigan Construction Code, and declared to be a part of Section 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code, and to provide the content of the "flood hazards" section of Table R301.2(1) of the Michigan Residential Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-010, 12-1-2010) 
Secs. 10-38-10-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXISTING BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 10-61. - Adopted. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference the current Michigan Building/Residential, Rehabilitation and Energy Code Rules, as filed with the Secretary of State, as if set out in full in this section. 
(Code 1985, § 8.21; Ord. No. 2011-003, 2-7-2011) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Sec. 10-62. - Board of appeals. 
    The construction board of appeals shall act as the board of appeals for the enforcement of the International Existing Building Code. 
(Code 1985, § 8.22) 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions, § 2-91 et seq. 
Sec. 10-63. - Demolition. 
    Any person affected by an order to raze a structure without option to repair, as set forth in section 117, Demolition, of the International Existing Building Code, and desires to seek legal recourse to restrain the order shall, within 20 days after service of such order, apply to a court of record for an order restraining the code official from razing and removing such structure or parts thereof. 
(Code 1985, § 8.24) 
Sec. 10-64. - Building height, area and yards. 
    The minimum square feet required for residences shall be as follows: 
(1)  A one-bedroom home shall have a 720 square foot minimum. 
(2)  A two-bedroom home shall have a 900 square foot minimum. 
(3)  A three-bedroom home shall have a 1,080 square foot minimum. 
(4)  A four-bedroom home shall have a 1,200 square foot minimum. 
(Ord. No. 2013-001, 7-15-2013) 
Secs. 10-65-10-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 10-91. - Adopted. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference the International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 edition, as published by the International Code Council, as the property maintenance code of the city, for the control of buildings and structures as provided in this article, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of such code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of this article as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 10-92. 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Sec. 10-92. - Additions, insertions and changes. 
    The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 edition, are hereby amended or deleted, or additional sections or subsections are added as follows: 
Section 101.1 (page 1, second line). Insert: City of Clare. 
Section 304.14. Insert: March 1 to December 1. 
Section 602.3. Insert: October 1 to May 15. 
Section 602.4. Insert: October 1 to May 15. 
Secs. 10-93-10-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - REMOVAL AND REHABILITATION OF DANGEROUS STRUCTURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-005 , adopted Sept. 8, 2015, repealed the former Art. V, §§ 10-121-10-125, and enacted a new Art. V as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1985, ch. 100, §§ 1-5. 

Sec. 10-121. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dangerous structure or unsafe structure shall mean the same thing and shall mean any building or structure which has any of the following defects or is in any of the following conditions: 
(1)  Any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit does not conform to the approved fire code of the city; 
(2)  Any portion has been damaged by fire, wind, flood or any other cause, in such a manner that the structural strength or stability is appreciably less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of this article or any building code of the city for a new building or similar structure, purpose or location; 
(3)  Any portion, member or appurtenance is likely to fall or become detached or dislodged, or collapse and thereby injure or damage property; 
(4)  Any portion has settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds than is required, in the case of new construction, by this article or the building code of the city; 
(5)  Any part, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction or the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building or structure, or portion thereof, or for any other reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning is likely to fall or give way; 
(6)  Any portion, for any reason whatsoever, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used; 
(7)  Has been so damaged by fire, wind or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become an attractive nuisance to children who might play therein to their danger, or as to afford a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons, or as to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing a nuisance, or unlawful or immoral act; 
(8)  When used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay, damage or age, faulty construction or arrangement, or otherwise, is unsanitary or unfit for human habitation or is in a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease when so determined by the Central Michigan District Health Department or its successors, or is likely to cause injury to the health, safety or general welfare of persons living therein; 
(9)  Becomes vacant, dilapidated and open at a door or window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or accessible to entrance by trespassers, or animals or open to casual entry; 
(10)  A structure that has light, air, or sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, safety or general welfare of those who live or may live within; 
(11)  A structure that is in such a condition so as to constitute a nuisance, as defined by this Code; 
(12)  A structure that has become damaged to such an extent that the cost of repair to place it in a safe, sound, and sanitary condition exceeds fifty percent of the assessed valuation of the structure, at the time when repairs are to be made. 
( Ord. No. 2015-005 , 9-8-2015) 
Sec. 10-122. - Maintaining dangerous buildings or structures. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or agent thereof to keep or maintain or occupy any structure or part thereof which is a dangerous structure or an unsafe structure. 
( Ord. No. 2015-005 , 9-8-2015) 
Sec. 10-123. - Notice. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, when the whole or any part of any building or structure is found to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition, the enforcing agency shall issue a notice of the dangerous and unsafe condition. 
(b)  Such notice shall be directed to the owner, agent or lessee, or party in interest in the structure in whose name the property appears on the last local tax assessment records. 
(c)  Shall include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification. 
(d)  Shall specify the repairs and improvements required to be made to render the structure safe or if the city manager, or his designee, has determined that the structure cannot be made safe, indicate that the structure is to be demolished. 
(e)  Specify a reasonable time within which the repairs and the improvements must be made or the structure must be demolished. 
(f)  Include an explanation of the right to appeal the decision to the city commission within ten days of the receipt of the notice in accordance with section 10-124. 
(g)  The recipient of the notice must notify the city manager within ten calendar days of receipt of the notice of his intent to accept or reject the terms of the notice. 
(h)  The notice shall specify the time and place of a hearing on the condition of the building or structure, at which time and place the person to whom the notice is directed shall have the opportunity to show cause why the building or structure should not be ordered to be demolished or otherwise made safe. 
(i)  The hearing officer shall be an individual appointed by the city commission and shall serve at the pleasure of the city commission. The enforcing agency shall be the city manager or his representative. The enforcing agency shall file a copy of the notice of the dangerous and unsafe condition with the hearing officer. 
(j)  All notices shall be in writing and shall be served personally upon the person to whom they are directed or, in lieu of personal service, may be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to such owner or party in interest at the address shown on the tax records, at least ten days before the date of the hearing described in the notice. If any person to whom a notice is directed is not personally served, in addition to mailing the notice, a copy thereof shall be posted upon a conspicuous part of the building or structure. 
( Ord. No. 2015-005 , 9-8-2015) 
Sec. 10-124. - Findings and order of hearing officer; hearing; costs. 
(a)  The hearing officer shall take testimony of the enforcing agency, the owner of the property and any interested party. The hearing officer shall render his decision either closing the proceedings or ordering the building to be demolished or otherwise made safe. 
(b)  If it is determined by the hearing officer that the building or structure should be demolished or otherwise made safe, he shall make such order, fixing a time in the order for the owner, agent or lessee to comply therewith. 
(c)  If the owner, agent or lessee fails to appear, or neglects or refuses to comply with the order, the hearing officer shall file a report of his findings and a copy of his order with the city commission and request that the necessary action be taken to demolish or otherwise make safe the building or structure. A copy of the findings and order of the hearing officer shall be served on the owner, agent or lessee in the manner prescribed in section 10-123. 
(d)  An owner aggrieved by the final decision or order of the hearing officer may appeal the final decision or order of the hearing officer by filing a written appeal with the city commission within 21 days from the date of the written decision. 
(e)  Upon such appeal, the city commission shall fix a date for a hearing, reviewing the finding and order of the hearing officer, and shall give notice to the owner, agent or lessee in the manner prescribed in section 10-123 of the time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner, agent or lessee shall be given the opportunity to demonstrate to the city commission whether the city commission should approve, disapprove or modify the order for the demolition or repairs or making safe of the building or structure. After the hearing, the city commission shall either approve, disapprove or modify the order for demolition or making safe the building and structure. 
(f)  The cost of the demolition or making the building safe shall be a lien against the real property and shall be reported to the assessing officer of the city, who shall assess the cost against the property on which the building or structure is located. 
(g)  The owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears upon the last local tax assessment records shall be notified of the amount of such cost by first class mail at the address shown on the records. If he fails to pay the cost within 90 days after mailing by the assessor of the notice of the amount thereof, the assessor shall add the amount to the next tax roll of the city and such amount shall be collected in the same manner, in all respects, as provided by law for the collection of taxes by the city. 
( Ord. No. 2015-005 , 9-8-2015) 
Chapter 12 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Amusements and entertainments, ch. 6; community development, ch. 16; attending or operating illegal businesses or occupations, § 28-208; peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants, ch. 32; secondhand goods, ch. 34; telecommunications, ch. 42; commercial delivery vehicles, § 44-3; utilities, ch. 46; vehicles for hire, ch. 48; C-1 commercial district, § 52-181 et seq.; C-2 commercial district, § 52-211 et seq.; I industrial district, § 52-241 et seq.; IP industrial park district, § 52-271 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1-12-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Licenses, § 7.8. 

Sec. 12-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cause includes the doing or omitting of any act or permitting any condition to exist in connection with any trade, profession, business or privilege for which a license or permit is granted under the provisions of this article, or upon any premises or facility used in connection therewith, which act, omission or condition is: 
(1)  Contrary to the health, morals, safety or welfare of the public; 
(2)  Unlawful, irregular or fraudulent in nature; 
(3)  Unauthorized or beyond the scope of the license or permit granted; or 
(4)  Forbidden by the provisions of this article or any duly established rule or regulation of the city applicable to the trade, profession, business or privilege for which the license or permit has been granted. 
(Code 1985, § 7.18) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 12-32. - Required. 
    No person shall engage or be engaged in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege in the city without first obtaining a license from the city in the manner provided for in this article. Any person duly licensed on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be deemed licensed under this article for the balance of the current license year. 
(Code 1985, § 7.1) 
Sec. 12-33. - Multiple businesses. 
    The granting of a license or permit to any person operating, conducting or carrying on any trade, profession, business or privilege which contains within itself, or is composed of, trades, professions, businesses or privileges which are required by this article to be licensed, shall not relieve the person to whom such license or permit is granted from the necessity of securing individual licenses or permits for each such trade, profession, business or privilege, except as specifically provided elsewhere in this article. 
(Code 1985, § 7.2) 
Sec. 12-34. - State licensed businesses. 
    The fact that a license or permit has been granted to any person by the state to engage in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege shall not exempt such person from the necessity of securing a license or permit from the city if such license or permit is required by this article. 
(Code 1985, § 7.3) 
Sec. 12-35. - Applications. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this article, every person required to obtain a license from the city to engage in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege shall make application for such license to the city clerk upon forms provided by the city clerk and shall state, under oath or affirmation, such facts as may be required for or be applicable to the granting of such license. No person shall make a false statement or representation in connection with any application for a license under this article. 
(Code 1985, § 7.4) 
Sec. 12-36. - License year. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article as to certain licenses, the license year shall begin July 1 of each year and shall terminate at 12:00 midnight on June 30 of the following year. Original licenses shall be issued for the balance of the license year at the full license fee, except that after January 1, the fee for any license shall be one-half the full amount, if the full fee is $10.00 or more. License applications for license renewals shall be accepted and licenses issued for a period of 15 days prior to the annual expiration date. In all cases where the provisions of this article permit the issuance of licenses for periods of less than one year, the effective date of such licenses shall commence with the date of issuance thereof. 
(Code 1985, § 7.5) 
Sec. 12-37. - Conditions for issuance. 
    No license or permit required by this article shall be issued to any person who is required to have a license or permit from the state, until such person shall submit evidence of such state license or permit and proof that all fees appertaining thereto have been paid. No license shall be granted to any applicant until such applicant has complied with all of the provisions of this article applicable to the trade, profession, business or privilege for which application for a license is made, nor unless the applicant agrees, in writing, to permit inspection of the licensed premises at reasonable hours by authorized officers of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 7.6) 
Sec. 12-38. - Officer's certification. 
    No license shall be granted where the certification of any officer of the city is required prior to the issuance thereof until such certification is made. 
(Code 1985, § 7.7) 
Sec. 12-39. - Health officer's certificate. 
    In all cases where the certification of the health officer is required prior to the issuance of any license by the city clerk, such certification shall be based upon an actual inspection and a finding that the person making application and the premises in which he proposes to conduct or is conducting the trade, profession, business or privilege comply with all the sanitary requirements of the state and city. 
(Code 1985, § 7.8) 
Sec. 12-40. - Fire chief's certificate. 
    In all cases where the certification of the fire chief is required prior to the issuance of any license by the city clerk, such certification shall be based upon an actual inspection and a finding that the premises in which the person making application for such license proposes to conduct or is conducting the trade, profession, business or privilege comply with all the fire regulations of the state and city. 
(Code 1985, § 7.9) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 22. 
Sec. 12-41. - Chief of police's certificate. 
    In all cases where the certification of the chief of police is required prior to the issuance of any license by the city clerk, such certification shall be based upon a finding that the person making application for such license is of good moral character. 
(Code 1985, § 7.10) 
Sec. 12-42. - Building inspector's certificate. 
    In all cases where the carrying on of the trade, profession, business or privilege involves the use of any structure or land, a license shall not be issued until the building inspector shall certify that the proposed use is not prohibited by chapter 52 or other zoning regulations of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 7.11) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10. 
Sec. 12-43. - Schedule of fees, bonds and insurance. 
    The fee required to be paid, the amount of any bond required to be posted or insurance required to be carried to obtain any license to engage in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege for which a license is required by the provisions of this article shall be as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time. No license shall be issued to any applicant unless he first pays to the city clerk the fee and posts a bond or evidence of insurance coverage in the amount required for the type of license desired. 
(Code 1985, § 7.31) 
Sec. 12-44. - Bonds. 
    Where the provisions of this article require that the applicant for any license or permit furnish a bond, such bond shall be furnished in an amount deemed adequate by the proper city officer, or, where the amount thereof is specified in the schedule of fees and bonds, in the amount so required, the form of such bond shall be acceptable to the city attorney. In lieu of a bond, an applicant for a license or permit may furnish one or more policies of insurance in the same amounts and providing the same protection as called for in any such bond. Any such policies of insurance shall be approved as to substance by the city official issuing such license or permit and as to form by the city attorney. 
(Code 1985, § 7.12) 
Sec. 12-45. - Late renewals. 
    All fees for the renewal of any license which are not paid at the time such fees shall be due shall be paid as late fees, with an additional 25 percent of the license fee required for such license, for the first 15 days that such license fee remains unpaid and thereafter the license fee shall be that stipulated for such licenses, plus 50 percent of such fee. 
(Code 1985, § 7.13) 
Sec. 12-46. - Right to issuance. 
    If the application for any license is approved by the proper officers of the city as provided in this article, such license shall be granted and shall serve as a receipt for payment of the fee prescribed for such license. 
(Code 1985, § 7.14) 
Sec. 12-47. - Payment of fees. 
    The fee required by this article for any license or permit shall be paid at the office of the issuing authority prescribed in this article upon or before the granting of such license or permit. 
(Code 1985, § 7.15) 
Sec. 12-48. - Persons exempt from fees. 
    No license fee shall be required from any person exempt from such fee by state or federal law; however, such persons shall comply with all other provisions of this article. The city clerk shall, in all such cases, issue to such persons licenses which are clearly marked as to such exemption and the reason for the exemption. 
(Code 1985, § 7.16) 
Sec. 12-49. - Suspension or revocation. 
    Any license issued by the city may be suspended by the city manager for cause, and any permit issued by the city may be suspended or revoked by the issuing authority for cause. The licensee shall have the right to a hearing before the city commission on any such action of the city manager, provided a written request for such hearing is filed with the city clerk within five days after receipt of the notice of such suspension. The city commission may confirm such suspension or revoke or reinstate such license. The action taken by the city commission shall be final. Upon suspension or revocation of any license or permit, the fee thereof shall not be refunded. 
(Code 1985, § 7.17) 
Sec. 12-50. - Renewal applications. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this article, an application for renewal of a license shall be considered in the same manner as an original application. 
(Code 1985, § 7.19) 
Sec. 12-51. - Exhibit of license. 
(a)  No licensee shall fail to carry any license issued in accordance with the provisions of this article upon his person at all times when engaged in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege for which the license was granted, except that, where such trade, profession, business or privilege is operated, conducted or carried on at a fixed place or establishment, such license shall be exhibited at all times in some conspicuous place in his place of business. 
(b)  Every licensee shall produce his license for examination when applying for a renewal thereof or when requested to do so by any city police officer or any person representing the issuing authority. 
(Code 1985, § 7.20) 
Sec. 12-52. - Display of tags and stickers on vehicles, mechanical devices and machines. 
    No licensee shall fail to conspicuously display on each vehicle or mechanical device or machine required to be licensed by this article such tags or stickers as are furnished by the city clerk. 
(Code 1985, § 7.21) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 44. 
Sec. 12-53. - Displaying expired and duplicate licenses. 
    No person shall display any expired license or any license for which a duplicate has been issued. 
(Code 1985, § 7.22) 
Sec. 12-54. - Transferability; misuse. 
(a)  No license or permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be transferable unless specifically authorized by the provisions of this article. 
(b)  No licensee or permittee shall, unless specifically authorized by the provisions of this article, transfer or attempt to transfer his license or permit to another, nor shall he make any improper use of such license or permit. 
(c)  In addition to the penalty provided in section 1-13, any attempt by a licensee or permittee to transfer his license or permit to another person, unless specifically authorized by the provisions of this article, or to improperly use the license or permit, shall void the license or permit and result in the automatic revocation of such license or permit. 
(Code 1985, §§ 7.23, 7.24) 
Secs. 12-55-12-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AUCTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Sales at public auction, new merchandise, MCL 446.51; UCC sales at public auction, MCL 440.2328; duties upon sales at auctions, MCL 446.26 et seq. 

Sec. 12-91. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Auction sale means the offering for sale or selling of personal property to the highest bidder or offering for sale at a high price and then offering the personal property at successive lower prices until a buyer is secured. 
(Code 1985, § 7.91) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 12-92. - License required. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, dispose of or offer for sale at public auction within the city any personal property whatsoever, unless and until such person and the person acting or intending to act as auctioneer shall have first obtained a license from the city clerk in accordance with the provisions of article II of this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 7.92) 
Sec. 12-93. - License application. 
    Any person desiring to conduct an auction shall, at least ten days prior to any single proposed auction sale or at least ten days prior to the opening and commencement of any auction business on a continuing basis, file with the city clerk an application, in writing, duly verified by the applicant, which application shall state the following facts: 
(1)  Name, residence and post office address of the person making the application, and if a firm or corporation, the name and post office address of the members of the firm or officers of the corporation, as the case may be. 
(2)  Address at which the auction sale will be conducted. 
(3)  Name, residence and post office address of the auctioneer who will conduct such sale. 
(4)  A detailed inventory of all new merchandise to be offered for sale and a valuation thereof. 
(5)  A detailed inventory of all other personal property to be offered for sale and a valuation thereof. 
(6)  If it is proposed to conduct auction sales on any other basis than a single sale of property on hand at the time of application, then, in such event, the applicant shall submit a statement covering the kind and nature of property to be offered for sale and a fair estimate of the average value of property to remain on hand for sale from day to day. If the license applied for covers only the sale of property then on hand, the statement shall disclose whether the sale will be with or without reservation. 
(7)  All information required under article II of this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 7.93) 
Sec. 12-94. - Continuing auctions. 
    Where the license applied for covers a continuing business, the sale shall be conducted without reservation. 
(Code 1985, § 7.94) 
Sec. 12-95. - License fees. 
    The fees for licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall be as prescribed in section 12-43. 
(Code 1985, § 7.95) 
Sec. 12-96. - Reports. 
    Within ten days after completing any auction or sale extending for a period of not more than six days, the applicant shall file, in duplicate, with the city clerk, a listing of all property sold at such sale and the prices received on each separate bid and sale, together with a detailed inventory of all property unsold at the end of such auction. In all other cases, such listing of sales shall be filed on or before the tenth day of each month to cover all such business for the preceding calendar month. 
(Code 1985, § 7.96) 
Sec. 12-97. - Fraudulent practices. 
    At any sale by auction, no person shall act as a bidder (commonly referred to as a "capper," "booster" or "shill"), offer to make any false bid or falsely offer or pretend to buy any article sold or offered for sale by auction. 
(Code 1985, § 7.97) 
Sec. 12-98. - False representations and statements. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or attempt to sell by auction or advertise for sale any personal property by falsely representing the whole or a part thereof to be bankrupt or insolvent stock, damaged goods or goods saved from fire, or make any false statement as to the previous history or character of such property. 
(Code 1985, § 7.98) 
Sec. 12-99. - Street sales. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct auction sales on any street, sidewalk or other public place. 
(Code 1985, § 7.99) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40. 
Sec. 12-100. - Exempt sales. 
    The provisions of this article shall not extend or apply to the following sales: 
(1)  Sales under mortgage foreclosure or under direction of a court or court officers. 
(2)  Sales by or on behalf of or under authority of the city, the United States or the state, or any political subdivision, branch, board, agency or commission of such governmental bodies. 
(3)  Sales made in pursuance of judgment, decree, order or authority of any court or seizure of any officer. 
(4)  Sales by receivers appointed by law or by a general assignment for the benefit of creditors. 
(Code 1985, § 7.101) 
Chapter 14 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40. 
State Law reference- Authority to acquire and maintain cemeteries, MCL 128.1 et seq.; permit for disposition of body, MCL 333.2850; cemetery regulations act, MCL 456.521 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1-14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY CEMETERIES 

Sec. 14-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Board and cemetery board mean the city cemetery board created under section 14-33. 
    Burial lot means a cemetery burial plat comprised of two or more burial spaces, designated and maintained for the interment of human bodies and for no other purpose. 
    Burial space means an individual cemetery gravesite, designated and maintained for the interment of human bodies and for no other purpose. 
    Cemetery means Cherry Grove Cemetery, as heretofore established, and any other public cemetery owned, managed or controlled by the city. 
    Owner means any person owning or possessing the privilege, license or right of interment in any burial space. 
(Code 1985, § 3.21) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-32. - Management, supervision and care. 
    The cemeteries which have been or may be established by the city and maintained either within or without its limits, of which plats have been or shall be filed in the office of the city clerk, shall be under the management, supervision and care of the city through the office of the city manager and the city cemetery board as created in section 14-33. 
(Code 1985, § 3.22) 
Sec. 14-33. - Cemetery board created. 
(a)  The city cemetery board (also referred to as the "Cherry Grove Cemetery Advisory Board") is hereby created and constituted. The board shall consist of five members appointed by and to serve at the will of the city commission. Each member shall be appointed for a term of three years, except that the initial board appointees shall serve for staggered terms from one to three years. No less than three members of the cemetery board shall be electors of the city, and the remaining members, if not city electors, shall be deemed by the city commission to have specific skills or interests which qualify them for membership on the board. The city commission may remove any member of the board at will or for good cause, including, but not limited to, inattention to duties or want of proper judgment, skill or taste for the proper discharge of duties assigned to the member. Such board members shall serve without compensation. 
(b)  The board shall appoint one of its own members as a chairperson, and any other officers it shall deem necessary. 
(c)  The board shall: 
(1)  Conduct its meetings in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order; 
(2)  Conduct its meetings after proper notice; 
(3)  Hold its meetings in a public building and the meetings shall be open to the public; 
(4)  Comply with the state open meetings act; and 
(5)  Establish its own rules and procedures consistent therewith. 
(Code 1985, § 3.23) 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions, § 2-91 et seq. 
Sec. 14-34. - Powers and duties of the board. 
(a)  The board, subject to the directions and ordinances of the city commission, shall, through the office of the city manager, have the full care and management of any such cemetery or burial place within the city. The board shall direct the improvements and embellishments to the grounds and cause such grounds to be laid out into burial spaces, lots, avenues and walks. The burial spaces and lots are to be numbered and the avenues and walks are to be named, and plats thereof are to be recorded in the office of the city clerk. The board shall also have the power, with the concurrence of the city commission, to take, receive and hold, in the name of the city, any real or personal property, by devise or otherwise, which may be granted, transferred or devised to such board in trust for the purpose of caring for and keeping for cemetery purposes. 
(b)  It shall be the board's duty to care for, through the office of the city manager, manage and preserve the cemeteries entrusted to it, including the grounds, tombs and monuments therein. The board may make rules and regulations for the burial of the dead, the care and protection of the grounds, monuments and appurtenances of the cemetery, and the orderly conduct of persons visiting the grounds as may be consistent with the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state, as it deems necessary. Such rules shall be approved and adopted by the city commission and, once adopted, filed with the city clerk and made available to the public by the city clerk. The city manager shall enforce any rules or regulations made by the board and adopted by the city commission. 
(c)  The board shall report to the city commission on a quarterly basis, or more often should the city commission call for a report. The board's report shall include the state of the cemeteries, identify goals set by the board, plans for achieving the board's goals, status of its previous goals set, identify any needs or problems needing the city commission's attention or redress and make any recommendations the board may have. 
(d)  The city clerk shall keep a register of all interments made in any city cemetery, in which shall appear the name of the deceased, the date and place of interment and other such information as may be required. The city clerk shall provide the register to the board for its review on a quarterly basis. The board shall make a determination as to whether any owner of a lot or burial space has abandoned the space. The determination of abandonment may be based on a wide variety of criteria, including, but not limited to, the known death of all family members; failure to care for or maintain the burial space in accordance with the laws, regulations or rules related to the cemetery over a span of seven years or more; a statement of abandonment by the owner; and contested ownership, etc. On an annual basis on Memorial Day, the director of public works shall submit, through the city manager, a report to the board of all lots within the cemetery believed to be abandoned, and detailing his rationale for such belief. Using the director of public works' report as a reference, the cemetery board shall meet in public session to make all determinations of abandonment. The cemetery board shall attempt to give notice to any interested parties by mail and/or publication, as necessary, of its intended action. Any board determination of abandonment shall be made by adoption of a formal resolution. Once adopted, the resolution shall be served on the owner personally or sent via first class mail to the owner's last known address. If, within 30 days after sending the resolution, the owner does not respond or comply with the violated rule, regulation or law, the cemetery board may cause a petition of abandonment to be filed in the Clare County Circuit Court by the city attorney. 
(Code 1985, § 3.24) 
Sec. 14-35. - Sale of burial spaces. 
(a)  Any person desiring to purchase a burial space in any city cemetery shall make application and pay to the city clerk the required amount for the burial space selected. Upon the board's notification of the purchase of any burial space, the city clerk shall prepare and deliver to the purchaser, a duly executed deed for the burial space. Such deed shall convey to the purchaser the right of interment only, and shall be paid subject to the provisions of this article, existing rules and regulations, and such ordinances, rules and regulations as may be adopted by the city commission. 
(b)  If a cemetery burial space not owned by the city is for sale, the city shall be given the first opportunity to purchase the space at the prevailing lot selling prices in effect in the city at the time. 
(Code 1985, § 3.25) 
Sec. 14-36. - Burial space owner's burial rights. 
    The owner of any burial space in any city cemetery shall have the right of burial of the dead only and shall allow no interments for remuneration. All interments in burial spaces shall be restricted to members of the family and immediate relatives of the owner thereof, unless special permission by the owner is filed, in writing, in the office of the city clerk, with the consent of the city manager endorsed thereon. 
(Code 1985, § 3.26) 
Sec. 14-37. - Burial space records. 
    The city clerk shall keep proper records in which the deeds to all burial spaces shall be recorded at length. In connection with all such records, the city clerk shall also keep a general index in which shall be noted, alphabetically, the names of the parties to every such instrument of conveyance. 
(Code 1985, § 3.27) 
Sec. 14-38. - Conduct. 
    No person shall: 
(1)  Girdle, cut, break, climb, bruise or otherwise injure any plant, tree or shrubbery, or cut, break, pluck or take away, or otherwise injure any plant or flower standing, being or growing in any cemetery; 
(2)  Write upon, cut, deface, tear down, climb over, enter through, sit upon or tie horses or other animals to or otherwise injure any of the fences in or about such cemetery; 
(3)  Write upon, mutilate, mar, deface, move, molest or otherwise injure any monument, gravestone or other memorial for the dead in the cemetery; 
(4)  Break, interfere or tamper with, or otherwise injure or make use of, except for the purposes for which erected, any pump, windmill, water pipe or other mechanism or personal property in such cemetery; 
(5)  Remove, disturb or molest any of the survey stakes in the cemetery; 
(6)  Trespass upon or injure any of the lots or any other place appointed for grass or shrubbery in the cemetery; 
(7)  Use the streets and alleys in the cemetery as a public highway for the purpose of making a shortcut in traveling from the public road on the north side to the public road on the west side of the cemetery or from any other point on one side to any other point on any other side of the cemetery; 
(8)  Carry in and upon such grounds, any firearms, or use firearms therein, except when carried or used in a ceremony for burial or in memoria of the dead; or 
(9)  In any way disturb the quiet and good order of the cemetery by improper noise and conduct. 
(Code 1985, § 3.28) 
Sec. 14-39. - General regulations. 
    The cemetery board shall develop, from time to time and as it deems necessary, specific rules and regulations for the city's cemeteries. Such rules and regulations shall be submitted to and adopted by the city commission and shall be enacted and enforceable in accordance with the terms of this article. In addition to such specific rules and regulations, the following general regulations are also adopted: 
(1)  Speed of vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle in any such cemetery faster than ten miles per hour. 
(2)  Operation of vehicles and parking. 
a.  No person shall drive or move any vehicle within any such cemetery, except over a roadway open for vehicular traffic, or obstruct any path or driveway within the cemetery open to vehicular traffic. 
b.  No person shall use the cemetery grounds or any driveway therein as a public thoroughfare or drive any vehicle through such grounds, except for the purpose of making deliveries in the cemetery or visiting any gravesite. 
c.  No person shall disobey the directives of the representative of the board or city relating to the movement or standing of vehicles within such cemetery. 
(3)  Rubbish and debris. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any rubbish, trash, waste materials, litter or debris of any kind in a city cemetery. 
(4)  Property damage. No person shall remove, molest, injure, mar, deface, throw down or destroy any headstone, monument, survey marker, corner marker, tomb, vault or mausoleum in a city cemetery, or molest any grave or place of burial therein. This shall not prohibit acts by cemetery officers and employees or public officials in carrying out their duties. 
(5)  Trees, shrubs and flowers. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to plant any tree, shrub or other plant in a city cemetery, except those permitted by the general landscape plan approved by the board. The city's director of public works enforces the board's landscape plan; therefore, all requests for plantings must be submitted to the director of public works for approval. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to cut down, injure, break or destroy any tree, shrub or other plant growing in a city cemetery, or pick, pluck or cut any flower or decorative plant, except as authorized by the cemetery rules. 
(Code 1985, § 3.29) 
Sec. 14-40. - Perpetual care. 
(a)  The city commission shall, from time to time, establish by resolution the amounts to be paid for cemetery lots, which amounts shall include a sufficient sum to provide for perpetual care of the lots sold. 
(b)  The city may accept sums donated by any testator, trustee or other person for the care of the cemetery or any lots therein. 
(c)  The city shall be obligated to maintain and care for all lots in the cemetery for which perpetual care has been paid, except as otherwise provided by the statutes of the state. 
(d)  Any interest money available in any perpetual care fund or other cemetery fund belonging to the city shall be used for such cemetery purposes as the city commission shall determine. 
(Code 1985, § 3.30) 
Chapter 16 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; businesses, ch. 12; environment, ch. 20; land divisions and subdivisions of land, ch. 24; special assessments, ch. 38; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40; utilities, ch. 46; waterways, ch. 50; zoning, ch. 52. 
State Law reference- Housing and slums clearance projects, MCL 125.651 et seq.; housing corporation law, MCL 125.601 et seq.; urban redevelopment corporations, MCL 125.901 et seq.; rehabilitation of blighted areas, MCL 125.71 et seq.; state housing development authority act of 1966, MCL 125.1401 et seq.; downtown development authority, MCL 125.1651 et seq.; economic development corporations, MCL 125.1601 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1-16-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOUSING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions, § 2-91 et seq. 

Sec. 16-31. - Continued. 
    The Clare Housing Commission, created pursuant to Public Act No. 18 of 1933 (Ex. Sess.) (MCL 125.651 et seq.), is hereby continued. 
(Code 1985, § 1.101) 
Sec. 16-32. - Members, term, appointment and compensation. 
    In accordance with section 4 of Public Act No. 18 of 1933 (Ex. Sess.) (MCL 125.654), the city housing commission shall consist of five members to be appointed by the mayor. Each of such members shall serve for a term of five years and until his successor shall be appointed and qualified. Members of the first commission shall be appointed for staggered terms. Members shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for any actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(Code 1985, § 1.102) 
Sec. 16-33. - Powers and duties. 
    The city housing commission shall have all the powers and duties vested or permitted to be vested in housing commissions by Public Act No. 18 of 1933 (Ex. Sess.) (MCL 125.651 et seq.), as amended, and any laws enacted which are supplemental thereto, it being the intention of this article to vest in the city housing commission all powers and duties permitted by law. 
(Code 1985, § 1.103) 
Sec. 16-34. - Employees. 
    The city housing commission shall select and appoint such employees as it shall deem necessary for the proper exercise of its powers, functions and duties, and shall pay such employees compensation as it shall, with the approval of the city manager and city commission, fix and determine. 
(Code 1985, § 1.104) 
Secs. 16-35-16-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION FOR HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- State housing development authority act of 1966, MCL 125.1401 et seq. 

Sec. 16-61. - Applicability; exception. 
    The tax exemption established in subsection 1 of section 15a of Public Act No. 346 of 1966 (MCL 125.1415a) (referred to in this article as "the act") shall not apply to all or any classes of housing projects enumerated in the act, located within the city boundaries, except for the class of housing projects or sections of projects otherwise eligible under the act which are especially designed for occupancy by the elderly as defined by the state housing development authority pursuant to the act. 
(Code 1985, ch. 6, § 1) 
Sec. 16-62. - Level of service charge. 
    If a member of the class of housing projects eligible for exemption as set forth in section 16-61 is financed either directly or indirectly under section 8 of the U.S. Housing Act of 1937, as amended by the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, the service charge in lieu of all property taxes to be paid by that project or project section shall be the maximum amount chargeable pursuant to Public Act No. 346 of 1966 (MCL 125.1401 et seq.), otherwise known as the state housing development authority act of 1966. 
(Code 1985, ch. 6, § 2) 
Sec. 16-63. - Recognition of member of eligible class. 
(a)  Requests for exemptions under the provisions of this article shall be submitted to the city clerk, on a form provided by the city, not later than 120 days prior to the projected commencement of construction of proposed projects within the eligible class. Within three days of receipt of a request for exemption, the city clerk shall forward the request to the city assessor, who shall review the request and, after review and comment, forward the request to the city manager within five days of receipt. The city manager shall review the request and, within ten days of receipt, submit the request, with recommendations, to the city commission for consideration. The city commission shall review the request and, by resolution, approve or disapprove the request for exemption under the provisions of this article within 20 days of receipt. The city commission shall stipulate the terms and expiration date of the exemption granted for all requests approved. 
(b)  A current list of all properties determined both to be a member of the class eligible to pay a service charge in lieu of taxes as set forth in section 16-61 and to be financed under section 8 of the U.S. Housing Act, as amended, and thus eligible to pay a service charge at the level set forth in section 16-62 and approved for exemption by the city commission shall be maintained by the city assessor. A report of such properties, including the property description, property owners and the terms and expiration date of the approved exemptions, shall be submitted annually to the city commission by the city assessor not later than the first Monday of May. 
(Code 1985, ch. 6, § 3) 
Sec. 16-64. - Payment of service charge. 
    The service charge in lieu of taxes shall be payable on or before April 15 each year. 
(Code 1985, ch. 6, § 4) 
Sec. 16-65. - Term. 
    The term of exemptions granted under this article shall not exceed 20 years. 
(Code 1985, ch. 6, § 5) 
Sec. 16-66. - Castle housing tax exemption. 
(a)  [Title.] This section shall be known and cited as the "City of Clare Castle Housing Tax Exemption Ordinance." 
(b)  Preamble. It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of low income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 PA 346, as amended, MCL 125.1401, et seq., MSA 116.114(1), et seq.). The city is authorized by this act to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this act at any amount it chooses, not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this act. It is further acknowledged that such housing for persons of low income is a public necessity, and as the city will be benefited and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by providing certain real estate tax exemption for such housing is a valid public purpose; further, that the continuance of the provisions of this section for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the period contemplated in this section are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of housing developments which are constructed and financed in reliance on such tax exemption. 
    The city acknowledges that Fourth Street Senior Housing Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership, a Michigan limited partnership having its principal offices at 1574 East Washington Road, Farwell, MI. 48862 (the "sponsor") has offered, subject to receipt of an allocation under the Low Income Housing Tax Credit Program (LIHTC) from the Michigan State Housing Development Authority, to erect, own and operate a housing development identified as Fourth Street Senior Housing on certain property described on exhibit A, in the City of Clare, to serve persons of low income, and that the sponsor has offered to pay the city on account of this housing development an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all taxes. 
(c)  Definitions. 
    Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
    Act means the State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346 of 1966 of the State of Michigan, as amended. 
    Annual shelter rent means the total collections during an agreed annual period from all occupants of a housing development representing rent or occupancy charges, exclusive of charges for gas, electricity, heat, or other utilities furnished to the occupants. 
    Contract rents are as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development in regulations promulgated pursuant to the U.S. Housing Act of 1937, as amended. 
    Housing development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for persons of low income and such elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal, and educational facilities as the authority determines improve the quality of the development as it relates to housing for persons of low income. 
    Sponsor means person(s) or entities which have applied to the authority for an allocation under the LIHTC program to finance a housing development. 
    Utilities mean fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and or electrical service which are paid by the housing development. 
(d)  Class of housing developments; closure of class. It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes shall be the 24-unit senior citizen apartment project commonly known as Clare Castle located in the City of Clare and which is financed or assisted pursuant to the act, to be located on the property described on exhibit A. It is further determined that Fourth Street Senior Housing is of this class. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15(a) of the act to the contrary, the city will hereby provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu thereof as described in this section only to the project known as Clare Castle. The city shall not provide tax exemption to any other multifamily, low income or elderly housing projects financed pursuant to the act or this section. 
(e)  Establishment of annual service charge. The housing development identified as Clare Castle and the property on which it shall be constructed shall be exempt from all ad valorem property taxes from and after the commencement of construction. The city, acknowledging that the sponsor and the authority have established the economic feasibility of the housing development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this section and the qualification of the housing development for exemption from all property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this section, and in consideration of the sponsor's offer, subject to receipt of an allocation under the LIHTC program from the authority, to construct, own and operate the housing development, agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of ad valorem property taxes. The annual service charge shall be equal to four percent of the difference between the annual shelter rents actually collected and utilities for those units whose occupancy is restricted to seniors based upon the authorities regulations (age 55 and older). 
(f)  Limitation on the payment of annual service charge. Notwithstanding subsection (e), the service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for the part of the housing development which is tax exempt and which is occupied by other than low income persons or families shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes which would be paid on that portion of the housing development if the housing development were not tax exempt. 
(g)  Contractual effect of ordinance. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15(a)(5) of the act to the contrary, a contract between the city and the sponsor with the authority as third-party beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by enactment of this section. 
(h)  Payment of service charge. The annual service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under the section shall be payable in the same manner as the summer installment of the general property taxes are payable to the city except that the annual payment shall be paid on or before August 15 of each year. 
(i)  Duration. This section shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as the housing development remains subject to income and rent restrictions pursuant to section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended; and the regulatory agreement of the authority; provided, that construction of the housing development commences within one year from the effective date of this section. 
(j)  Severability. The various sections and provisions of this section shall be deemed to be severable, and should any section or provision of this section be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid the same shall not affect the validity of the section as a whole or any section or provision of this section other than the section or provision so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(k)  Effective date. This section, as amended, shall become effective on October 6, 2009, or as otherwise provided in the Charter. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this section are repealed to the extent of such conflict. 
(Ord. No. 2008-002, §§ 1-9, 11, 8-5-2008; Ord. No. 2009-002, §§ 1-11, 9-21-2009) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2009-002, §§ 1-11, adopted Sept. 21, 2009, changed the title of § 16-66 from "Fourth Street senior housing tax exemption" to "Castle housing tax exemption." 
Secs. 16-67-16-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Downtown development authority, MCL 125.1651 et seq. 

Sec. 16-101. - Created. 
    Pursuant to the authority of Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.), as amended from time to time, the city downtown development authority shall be and is hereby created. 
(Code 1985, ch. 7, § 1) 
Sec. 16-102. - Powers and duties. 
    The downtown development authority shall exercise such powers and duties as provided and in accordance with the terms of Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.), including, but not limited to, the definition of a development area; the origination of the development plan; and the implementation of a development program as provided in the act. 
(Code 1985, ch. 7, § 2) 
Sec. 16-103. - Downtown development district boundaries. 
    Pursuant to the requirements of Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.), the boundaries of the downtown development district are generally described on attached Exhibit "A". 
EXHIBIT "A" 
BOUNDARIES 
BOUNDARIE> 
EXHIBIT "A> 
Development district: 
The legal description of the DDA development district is "the area bounded by First Street, Beech Street, Third Street, Maple Street, Ann Arbor Railroad Right-of-Way, Fifth Street, Beech Street, Seventh Street, Pine Street, Sixth Street, Hemlock Street, Fourth Street, Pine Street and back to First Street of Sections 34 & 35, City of Clare, including all Lots of Blocks 9 & 10, Lots 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 & 14 of Block 14, all Lots of Blocks 15, 16, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 27, 28, 32 & 33, 38 & 39, Original Plat of the Village of Clare. 
Development area (tax increment finance district) is contained within the above DDA boundary and is defined as the area bounded by First Street, Beech Street, Third Street, Maple Street, Ann Arbor Railroad Right-of-Way, Fifth Street, Beech Street, Seventh Street, Pine Street, Sixth Street, Hemlock Street, Fourth Street, Pine Street and back to First Street of Sections 34 & 35, City of Clare, including all Lots of Blocks 9 & 10, Lots 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 & 14 of Block 14, all Lots of Blocks 15, 16, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 27, 28, 32 & 33, 38 & 39, Original Plat of the Village of Clare. 
(Code 1985, ch. 7, § 3; Ord. No. 2018-006 , 10-1-2018) 
Sec. 16-104. - Downtown development plan and tax increment financing plan. 
(a)  Preliminary findings. 
(1)  A public hearing was held on the proposed development plan and tax increment financing plan for the downtown district, following the giving of notice thereof, all in accordance with Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.). 
(2)  The proposed development plan and tax increment financing plan meet the requirements set forth in Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.). 
(3)  The proposed method of financing the proposed development is feasible and the downtown development authority of the city has the ability to arrange the financing. 
(4)  The proposed development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes of Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.). 
(5)  Any land included within the proposed development area which is deemed necessary to be acquired is reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of the plan and Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.) in an efficient and economically satisfactory manner. 
(6)  The proposed development plan is in reasonable accord with the master plan of the city. 
(7)  Public services, such as fire and police protection and utilities, are or will be adequate to service the proposed district. 
(8)  Proposed changes in sidewalks, streets and utilities are reasonably necessary for the proposed project and the city. 
(b)  Determination. 
(1)  Based upon the findings set forth in subsection (a) of this section, it is hereby held and determined that the development plan and tax increment financing plan for the downtown district constitutes a public purpose. 
(2)  The development plan and tax increment financing plan for the downtown development district is hereby approved, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk and is incorporated by reference. 
(Code 1985, ch. 7, § 4) 
Chapter 18 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Elections, ch. 4. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Michigan election law, MCL 168.1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-1. - Precinct boundaries. 
    The city shall have two election precincts. Precinct no. 1 shall include all eligible voters that reside west of McEwan Street and residential areas within Isabella County. Precinct no. 2 shall include all eligible voters that reside east of McEwan Street. 
(Code 1985, § 1.166) 
State Law reference- Election precincts, MCL 168.654 et seq. 
Sec. 18-2. - Qualification of registered electors. 
    Registered electors of the city cannot use a business address as a registration address unless they actually live there. It must be the place at which the person habitually sleeps, keeps his or her personal effects and has a regular place of lodging. Otherwise the registration will be cancelled as a fraudulent registration. 
Chapter 20 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Hazardous materials release, § 2-181 et seq.; animals, ch. 8; buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; removal and rehabilitation of dangerous structures, § 10-121 et seq.; community development, ch. 16; land divisions and subdivisions of land, ch. 24; parks and recreation, ch. 30; solid waste, ch. 36; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40; utilities, ch. 46; waterways, ch. 50; zoning, ch. 52. 
State Law reference- Natural resource and environmental protection act, MCL 324.101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1-20-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Nuisance declared of dogs, § 8-41. 
State Law reference- Public nuisances and abatement, MCL 600.3801 et seq. 

Sec. 20-31. - Definition; prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public nuisance means whatever annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, comfort or repose of the public; offends public decency; interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous any street, highway, navigable lake or stream; or in any way renders the public insecure in life or property. Public nuisances shall include, but not be limited to, whatever is forbidden by any provision of this article. 
(b)  Prohibited. No person shall commit, create or maintain any nuisance. 
(Code 1985, § 9.1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 20-32. - Enumeration. 
    The following acts, services, apparatuses and structures are hereby declared to be public nuisances: 
(1)  Maintenance of any pond, pool of water or vessel holding stagnant water. 
(2)  Throwing, placing, depositing or leaving in any street, highway, lane, alley, public place, square or sidewalk, or in any private place or premises where such throwing, placing, depositing or leaving is, in the opinion of the city manager, dangerous or detrimental to public health, or likely to cause sickness or attract flies, insects, rodents and/or vermin, by any person, of any animal or vegetable substance, dead animal, fish, shell, tin can, bottle, glass or other rubbish, dirt, excrement, filth, rot, unclean or nauseous water, liquid or gaseous fluid, hay, straw, soot, garbage, swill, animal bones, hides or horns, rotten soap, grease or tallow, offal or any other offensive article or substance whatsoever. 
(3)  Pollution of any stream, lake or body of water or the depositing into or upon any highway, street, lane, alley, public street or square, or into any adjacent lot or grounds of, or depositing or permitting to be deposited any refuse, foul, or nauseous liquid or water, creamery or industrial waste, or forcing or discharging into any public or private sewer or drain any steam, vapor or gas. 
(4)  Emission of noxious fumes or gas in such quantities as to render occupancy of property uncomfortable to a person of ordinary sensibilities. 
(5)  Any vehicle used for any immoral or illegal purpose. 
(6)  Betting, bookmaking and all apparatuses used in such occupations. 
(7)  All gambling devices, slot machines and punchboards. 
(8)  All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame and bawdyhouses. 
(9)  Distribution of samples of medicines or drugs, unless such samples are placed in the hands of an adult person. 
(10)  All explosives, inflammable liquids and other dangerous substances stored in any manner or in any amount contrary to the provisions of this Code or statute of the state. 
(11)  Any use of the public streets and/or sidewalks which causes large crowds to gather, obstructing the free use of the streets and/or sidewalks. 
(12)  All buildings, walls and other structures which have been damaged by fire, decay or otherwise and all excavations remaining unfilled or uncovered for a period of 90 days or longer, and which are situated so as to endanger the safety of the public. 
(13)  All dangerous, unguarded excavations or machinery in any public place, or situated, left or operated on private property so as to attract the public. 
(14)  Owning, driving or moving upon the public streets and alleys of trucks or other motor vehicles which are constructed or loaded so as to permit any part of its load or contents to blow, fall or be deposited upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public or private place, or which deposits, from its wheels, tires or other parts onto the street, alley, sidewalk or other public or private place, dirt, grease, sticky substances or foreign matter of any kind; provided, however, that under circumstances determined by the city manager to be in the public interest, he may grant persons temporary exemption from the provisions of this subsection conditioned upon cleaning and correcting the violating condition at least once daily and execution of an agreement by such person to reimburse the city for any extraordinary maintenance expense incurred by the city in connection with such violation. 
(Code 1985, § 9.7) 
Sec. 20-33. - Maintenance of property. 
    No person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any premises shall maintain or keep any nuisance thereon, nor shall any person keep or maintain such premises in a manner causing substantial diminution in the value of other property in the neighborhood in which such premises are located. 
(Code 1985, § 9.8) 
Sec. 20-34. - Dwelling units. 
    Any dwelling unit which shall be found to have any of the following defects shall be considered a nuisance: 
(1)  One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or vermin-infected that it creates a serious hazard to the health or safety of the occupants or the public. 
(2)  One which lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitation facilities adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or the public. 
(3)  One which, because of its general condition or location, is unsanitary or otherwise dangerous to the health or safety of the occupants or the public. 
(Code 1985, § 9.9) 
Sec. 20-35. - Exterior storage of nonoperative vehicles. 
(a)  Unless otherwise permitted, no person, whether he shall be the owner, tenant or manager of private property, or whether he shall be the last registered owner of the vehicle or transferee on the bill of sale covering the vehicle, shall permit the accumulation on private property of one or more motor vehicles which are not in an operating condition and eligible for use in accordance with the requirements of the Michigan vehicle code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq.), provided that any such vehicle may not comply with such regulations for a period not exceeding 14-calendar-days. Such requirements include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  An engine that runs; 
(2)  Four wheels and four pneumatic tires capable of holding air; 
(3)  Current license plates; and 
(4)  A working battery. 
(b)  Any person enumerated in subsection (a) of this section who, under special conditions of hardship or for valid reasons, such as the preservation of an historic or classic vehicle, may request an extension of the 14-calendar-day limitation as set forth in subsection (a) of this section by filing a timely request with the city commission. The city commission may, at its discretion, after review of all the circumstances and after holding any hearing it deems necessary, grant the applicant any reasonable extension of time. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall apply in all areas, except where the storage of such vehicles is in a completely enclosed building or is by a licensed junk dealer. 
(Code 1985, § 9.10) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 44. 
Sec. 20-36. - Motor vehicle repairs. 
    No person shall undertake any extensive or complex motor vehicle repair, except in a completely enclosed building located in an area where such activity is permitted under the provisions of chapter 52, pertaining to zoning. 
(Code 1985, § 9.11) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 44. 
Sec. 20-37. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  First offense. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or fail to comply therewith shall be guilty of a municipal civil infraction and be liable for a civil fine up to $500.00 in accordance with the schedule of fines set by the city, along with any costs and expenses permitted by law. 
(b)  Second offense. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, as noted in subsection (a) of this section, for a second time within a three-year period, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable for a criminal fine of not more than $500.00 and/or up to 90 days' incarceration in the county jail. 
(c)  Continuing violations. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(d)  Immediate threats to public health, safety and welfare. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article in such a way as to create an immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable for a criminal fine of not more than $500.00 and/or up to 90 days' incarceration in the county jail. Whether a particular violation of this article constitutes an immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare shall be a matter within the sole discretion of the city manager. 
(e)  Order of abatement. In addition to the penalties and fines set forth in subsections (a)-(d) of this section, the city, acting through its officials, may petition a court to enter an order of abatement of the nuisance. In addition to the abatement order, the court order may contain a provision to assess the cost of the abatement of the nuisance against the person responsible or against the premises on which the nuisance is located. Any sums realized on the sale of materials removed may be retained by the city to reimburse the city for the cost incurred in the removal and sale, to the extent of such cost. Any balance of sums remaining after such reimbursement shall be returned to the owner of the property. 
(f)  Additional remedies. In addition to any remedies provided for in this section, any equitable or other remedies available may be sought. 
(Code 1985, § 9.2) 
Secs. 20-38-20-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Noise from animals, § 8-8. 
State Law reference- Motor vehicle mufflers, MCL 257.707 et seq. 

Sec. 20-71. - Antinoise regulations. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall cause or create any unreasonable or unnecessarily loud noise or disturbance, injurious to the health, peace or quiet of the residents and property owners of the city. 
(b)  Specific violations. The following noises and disturbances are hereby declared to be a violation of this article; provided, however, that the specification of the violation is not thereby to be construed to exclude other violations of this article not specifically enumerated: 
(1)  The playing of any radio, phonograph, television or other electronic or mechanical sound producing device, including any musical instrument, in such a manner or with such volume as to unreasonably upset or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of other persons. 
(2)  Yelling, shouting, hooting or singing on the public streets between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or other place so as to unreasonably upset or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity. 
(3)  The emission or creation of any excessive noise that unreasonably interferes with the operation of any school, church, hospital or court. 
(4)  The keeping of any animal or bird, which emanates frequent or extended noise which shall unreasonably disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity, such as allowing or permitting any dog to bark repeatedly in an area where such barking can be clearly heard from nearby residential property. 
(5)  The operation of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of repair or so loaded or constructed as to cause loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other unreasonable noise, including the noise resulting from exhaust, which is clearly audible from nearby properties and unreasonably disturbing to the quiet, comfort or repose of other persons. The modification of any noise abatement device on any motor vehicle or engine, or the failure to maintain the motor vehicle or engine so that the noise emitted by such vehicle or engine is increased above that emitted by such vehicle as originally manufactured, shall be a violation of this section. 
(6)  The sounding of any horn or other device on any motor vehicle unless necessary to operate such vehicle safely or as required by the Michigan vehicle code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq.). 
(7)  While operating or in control of a parked or moving vehicle, including motorcycles and mopeds, the operation or permitting the operation of an electronically amplified sound system in or on the vehicle so as to produce sound that is plainly audible more than 50 feet from the vehicle, except when a specific permit is first granted by the city commission. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "plainly audible" shall mean any sound that can be detected by a person using unaided hearing faculties. 
(8)  The discharging, outside of any enclosed building, of the exhaust of any steam engine, internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or motor boat engine, except through a muffler or other similar device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises. 
(9)  The erection, excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or premises in any part of the city, including the streets and highways, in such a manner as to emanate noise or disturbance unreasonably annoying to other persons, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and sundown on any day, except in cases of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety. In such case, a permit shall be obtained from the building inspector or code official, which permit shall limit the periods that the activity may continue. 
(10)  The creation of loud or excessive noise, unreasonably disturbing to other persons in the vicinity, in connection with the operation, loading or unloading of any vehicle, trailer or other carrier, excluding railroad cars, or in connection with the repairing of any such vehicle in residential areas between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
(11)  The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show, sale, display or other commercial purpose which, by the creation of such noise, shall be unreasonably disturbing to other persons in the vicinity. 
(12)  The operation of any loudspeaker or other sound amplifying device upon any vehicle on the streets of the city with the purpose of advertising, where such vehicle, speaker or sound amplifying device emits loud, raucous noises, easily heard from nearby adjoining residential property. 
(13)  The operation of any machinery, equipment or mechanical device so as to emit unreasonably loud noise which is disturbing to the quiet, comfort or repose of any person between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
(14)  The operation of any racetrack, proving ground, testing area or obstacle course for motor vehicles, motorcycles, boats, racers, automobiles or vehicles of any kind or nature in any area of the city where the noise emanating therefrom would be unreasonably disturbing and upsetting to other persons in the vicinity. Under no circumstances shall any racetrack, proving ground, testing area or obstacle course operate after 11:00 p.m. on any evening. 
(c)  Exceptions. None of the prohibitions enumerated in subsection (b) of this section shall apply to the following: 
(1)  Any police vehicle, ambulance, fire engine or emergency vehicle while engaged in necessary emergency activities. 
(2)  Excavation or repair of bridges, streets, highways or other property by or on behalf of the city or county between sundown and 7:00 a.m. when the public welfare, safety and convenience render it impossible to perform such work during other hours. 
(3)  Warning devices emitting sound for warning purposes as authorized by law. 
(Code 1985, § 9.31) 
Sec. 20-72. - Decibel criteria for motor-driven vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Decibel means the sound pressure level, in decibels, measured on the A scale of a standard sound level meter. 
(b)  Measurement of noise from motor-driven vehicles upon public roads. In order to regulate and prove violations occurring under this section, noise emitted from motor-driven vehicles upon public roads shall be measured, whenever possible, at a distance of a least 50 feet (15 meters) from a noise source located within the public right-of-way. If measurement at 50 feet (15 meters) is not feasible, measurement may be made at 25 feet (71/2 meters) and if this is done, six decibels shall be added to the limits provided in this subsection. All such noises in excess of the following decibel limits shall be prima facie evidence that such noise unreasonably disturbs the comfort, quiet and repose of persons in the area and is, therefore, in violation of this article: 
Vehicle Weight Maximum Limitation 
dB(A) Trucks and buses Over 10,000 pounds gross weight 82 Trucks and buses Under 10,000 pounds gross weight 74 Passenger cars Any weight 74 Motorcycles, snowmobiles and minibikes Any weight 82 All other self-propelled motor vehicles Any weight 74  
(Code 1985, § 9.32) 
Sec. 20-73. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  First offense. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or fail to comply therewith shall be guilty of a civil infraction and be liable for a civil fine up to $500.00 in accordance with the schedule of fines set by the city, along with any costs and expenses permitted by law. 
(b)  Second offense. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, as noted in subsection (a) of this section, for a second time within a three-year period shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable for a criminal fine of not more than $500.00 and/or up to 90 days' incarceration in the county jail. 
(c)  Continuing violations. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(d)  Immediate threats to public health, safety and welfare. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article in such a way as to create an immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable for a criminal fine of not more than $500.00 and/or up to 90 days' incarceration in the county jail. Whether a particular violation of this article constitutes an immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare shall be a matter within the sole discretion of the city manager. 
(Code 1985, § 9.33) 
Secs. 20-74-20-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WEED CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Control and eradication of noxious weeds, MCL 247.61 et seq. 

Sec. 20-101. - Noxious weed growth. 
    No person occupying any premises, nor any person owning any unoccupied residential premises, nor any person owning undeveloped property contiguous to or within 200 feet of residential property shall permit or maintain on any such premises any growth of noxious weeds or other rank vegetation to a height greater than ten inches on the average, nor any growth of grass to a height greater than eight inches on the average, nor any accumulation of dead weeds, grass or brush. Noxious weeds shall include Canada thistle (circium arvense), dodders (any species of cuscata), mustards (charlock, black mustard and indian mustard, species of brassica or sinapis), wild carrot (daucus carota), bindweed (concolculus arvensis), perennial sowthistle (sonchus arvensis), hoary alyssum (berteroa incana), ragweed (ambrosia elatior 1), poison ivy (rhus toxicondendron) and poison sumac (toxicondendron vernix). 
    Agricultural property or undeveloped recreational property may be exempted from this requirement if an exemption is in the public interest. Exemptions may be granted by the city manager. Appeals of an exemption or denial of an exemption may be made to the planning commission by letter. 
(Code 1985, § 9.41; Ord. No. 2013-003, 12-16-2013) 
Sec. 20-102. - Responsibility for cutting, removing and destroying noxious weeds and grass. 
    It shall be the duty of the occupant of every premises and the owner of unoccupied premises within the city to cut and remove or destroy by lawful means all noxious weeds and grass as often as may be necessary to comply with the provisions of section 20-101. 
(Code 1985, § 9.42) 
Sec. 20-103. - Notice of noncompliance; removal by city. 
    If the provisions of sections 20-101 and 20-102 are not complied with, the city code enforcement officer, under the supervision of the city manager, shall notify the occupant or owner of unoccupied premises to comply with the provisions of such sections within a time to be specified in the notice, which notice shall be given in accordance with section 2-161. Such notice shall require compliance with this article within three days after service of such notice, and if such notice is not complied with within the time limited, the city code enforcement officer, under the supervision of the city manager, shall cause such weeds, grass and other vegetation to be removed or destroyed and the actual cost of such cutting, removal or destruction, including supervision and overhead costs, shall be a lien against the premises and collected in the manner prescribed in section 2-161. 
(Code 1985, § 9.43) 
Sec. 20-104. - Exemptions. 
    Exempted from the provisions of this article are flower gardens, plots of shrubbery, vegetable gardens and small grain plots. An exemption under the terms of this section cannot be claimed unless the land has been cultivated and cared for in a manner appropriate to such exempt categories. 
(Code 1985, § 9.44) 
Secs. 20-105-20-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LITTER[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 36. 
State Law reference- Littering, MCL 324.8901 et seq. 

Sec. 20-131. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Litter means all rubbish, refuse, waste material, garbage, offal, paper, glass, cans, bottles, trash, debris or other foreign substances, and shall include such materials that are permitted to migrate onto adjacent property from a business or other activity. 
    Public or private property and water includes, but is not limited to, any of the following: 
(1)  The right-of-way of a road or highway, a body of water or watercourse, or the shore or beach of the body of water or watercourse, including the ice above the water. 
(2)  A park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area, residential or farm properties, any privately held property or timberland. 
    Vehicle means every motor vehicle registered under the Michigan vehicle code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq.). 
    Vessel means a vessel registered under marine safety, part 801 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.80101 et seq.). 
(Code 1985, ch. 103, § 1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 20-132. - Littering property or water; removal of injurious substances dropped on highway as result of an accident. 
(a)  A person shall not knowingly, without the consent of the public authority having supervision of public property or the owner of private property, dump, deposit, place, throw or leave, or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on public or private property, or water, other than property designated and set aside for such purposes. 
(b)  A person who removes a vehicle that is wrecked or damaged in an accident on a highway, road or street shall remove all glass and other injurious substances dropped on the highway, road or street as a result of the accident. 
(Code 1985, ch. 103, § 2) 
Sec. 20-133. - Causing litter or object to fall or be thrown into path of or to hit vehicles; evidentiary presumption. 
(a)  A person shall not knowingly cause litter or any object to fall or be thrown into the path of or to hit a vehicle travelling upon a highway. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section involving litter from a leased vehicle or leased vessel, in a proceeding for a violation of this section involving litter from a motor vehicle or vessel, proof that the particular vehicle or vessel described in the citation, complaint or warrant was used in the violation, together with proof that the defendant named in the citation, complaint or warrant was the registered owner of the vehicle or vessel at the time of the violation, constitutes an evidentiary presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle or vessel was the driver of the vehicle or vessel at the time of the violation. 
(c)  The driver of a vehicle or vessel is presumed responsible for litter that is thrown, dumped, deposited, placed or left from the vehicle or vessel on public or private property or water. 
(d)  In a proceeding for a violation of this section involving litter from a leased motor vehicle or leased vessel, proof that the particular vehicle or vessel described in the complaint, citation or warrant was used in the violation, together with proof that the defendant named in the citation, complaint or warrant was the lessee of the vehicle or vessel at the time of the violation, constitutes an evidentiary presumption that the lessee of the vehicle or vessel was the driver of the vehicle or vessel at the time of the violation. 
(Code 1985, ch. 103, § 3) 
Sec. 20-134. - Violations; penalties; community service. 
(a)  A person who violates this article, where the amount of the litter is less than one cubic foot in volume, is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and is subject to a civil fine consistent with the fine schedule as adopted by the city commission from time to time. This subsection applies only to a first offense. Second and subsequent offenses are subject to subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  A person who violates this article, where the amount of litter is one cubic foot or more, but less than three cubic feet in volume, is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as set forth in section 1-13. 
(c)  In addition to any other penalty or sanction provided for in this section, the court shall impose, under the supervision of the court, community service in the form of litter gathering labor, including, but not limited to, litter connected with the particular violation. 
(d)  In addition to any other penalty or sanction provided for in this section for a criminal or civil action brought under this article, the court may require the defendant to pay the following: 
(1)  The cost of removing all litter which is the subject of the violation and the cost of damages to any land, water, wildlife, vegetation or other natural resource, or to any facility damaged by the violation of this article. Money collected under this subsection shall be distributed to the governmental entity bringing the enforcement action. 
(2)  Any other expense reasonably incurred by the governmental agency or other injured party in response to or on account of the violation. 
(Code 1985, ch. 103, § 4) 
Secs. 20-135-20-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BLIGHT 

Sec. 20-161. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Provide for the regulation and control of the storage, accumulation and disposition of junk, trash, rubbish, abandoned vehicles, wrecked, dismantled or unusable vehicles and building materials; 
(2)  Provide for the maintenance of blighted structures and other blighting factors or causes of blight and deterioration thereof; 
(3)  Secure the public health, safety and welfare of the residents and property owners of the city, a municipal corporation, by the regulation of the outdoor parking and storage of motor vehicles, tractor trailer, mobile homes and new or used parts or junk therefrom, junk, trash, rubbish, building materials, blighted structures and other blighting factors within the city; 
(4)  Provide penalties for the violation of this article; and 
(5)  Repeal any ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article. 
(Code 1985, ch. 104) 
Sec. 20-162. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned vehicle includes, without limitation, any vehicle which has remained on private property for a period of 48 continuous hours, or more, without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property, or for a period of 48 continuous hours, or more, after the consent of the owner or occupant of the property has been revoked. 
    Blighted structure includes, without limitation, any dwelling, garage or outbuilding, or any factory, shop, store, office building, warehouse or any other structure, or part of a structure, which, because of fire, wind or other natural disaster or physical deterioration, is no longer habitable as a dwelling, nor useful for the purpose for which it may have been intended. 
    Building material includes, without limitation, lumber, brick, concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete or cement, nails, screws or any other material used in constructing any structure. 
    Junk includes, without limitation, parts of machinery or motor vehicles, broken and unusable furniture, stoves, refrigerators or other appliances, remnants of wood, metal or any other cast-off material of any kind, whether or not such cast-off material could be put to any reasonable use. 
    Person includes all natural persons, firms, copartnerships, corporations and all associations of natural persons, incorporated or unincorporated, whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or employee. All persons who violate any of the provisions of this article, whether as owner, occupant, lessee, agent, servant or employee, shall, except as otherwise provided in this article, be equally liable as principals. 
    Trash and rubbish include any and all forms of debris not otherwise classified in this section. 
(Code 1985, ch. 104) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 20-163. - Regulations. 
(a)  No person shall park, store or place upon any public roadway, public property or upon any premises within the city any junk, junk motor vehicle, abandoned vehicle, used parts or junk therefrom, blighted structure, building materials or trash and rubbish, unless it is wholly contained within a fully enclosed building and does not violate any zoning or building laws of the city, county or state, except for the following: 
(1)  Operable vehicles or trailers, with substantially all main components parts attached, whether licensed or not. 
(2)  Vehicles or trailers that are temporarily inoperable because of minor mechanical failure, but which are not, in any manner, dismantled and have substantially all main component parts attached, which may remain upon such private property for not to exceed 14 days. 
(3)  Not more than one automobile, in full operating condition, which has been redesigned or reconstructed for a purpose other than that for which it was manufactured, provided no building or garage is located upon the premises in which the automobile could be parked or stored. 
(b)  No repairing, redesigning, modifying or dismantling work or operations shall be allowed upon any vehicle or trailer, or parts thereof, upon any public right-of-way, public property or any property, except such as may be accomplished within a fully enclosed building; provided, however, if no fully enclosed building is located on the premises, the repairing, redesigning, modifying or dismantling work or operations may be conducted on the premises for a period of time not to exceed one week. Repairing, redesigning, modifying or dismantling work or operations will not be permitted on any premises where the conduct of such work or operations would constitute a nuisance or annoyance to adjacent property owners or occupants and/or is in violation of any provision of chapter 52. Nothing contained in this subsection shall prohibit such occasional minor repair work as may infrequently be required to maintain a vehicle or trailer, or parts thereof, in normal operating condition; provided, however, such minor work can be completed within a 24-hour period. 
(Code 1985, ch. 104) 
Sec. 20-164. - Nuisance declared. 
    Any parking, storage, placement or operation in violation of the provisions of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be enjoined or may subject the violator to civil damages and the fines and penalties provided for in this article. 
(Code 1985, ch. 104) 
Sec. 20-165. - Operation of licensed certain businesses. 
    This article shall not prevent the operation of any licensed junkyard, salvage yard, garage, or body or paint shop legally operating within a proper zone as may be defined in any city ordinance, and shall be in addition to any other laws or ordinances controlling or regulating rubbish, refuse, litter, trash or junk. 
(Code 1985, ch. 104) 
Sec. 20-166. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  First offense. 
(1)  A first offense under this article shall be deemed to be a municipal civil infraction. 
(2)  The civil fine for a first offense violation shall be $75.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each offense. Such civil fine shall apply in the event of a determination of responsibility for a municipal civil infraction, unless a different fine is specified in connection with a particular article provision. 
(3)  In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and expenses, the judge or magistrate shall be authorized to issue any judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce or enjoin violation of this article. 
(b)  Continuing offense. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Remedies not exclusive. In addition to any remedies provided for in this article, any equitable or other remedies available may be sought. 
(d)  Judge or magistrate. The judge or magistrate shall also be authorized to impose costs, damages and expenses as provided by law. 
(e)  Default in payment of fines and costs. A default in the payment of a civil fine, costs, damages or expenses ordered under subsection (a) of this section or an installment of the fine, costs, damages or expenses as allowed by the court may be collected by the city by a means authorized for the enforcement of a judgment under chapter 40 or 60 of the revised judicature act (MCL 600.101 et seq.). 
(f)  Failure to comply with judgment or order. If a defendant fails to comply with an order or judgment issued pursuant to this section within the time prescribed by the court, the court may proceed under subsection (h) of this section. 
(g)  Failure to appear in court. A defendant who fails to answer a citation or notice to appear in court for a violation of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00, plus costs, and/or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. 
(h)  Civil contempt. 
(1)  If a defendant defaults in the payment of a civil fine, costs, damages, expenses or installments as ordered by the district court, upon motion of the city or upon its own motion, the court may require the defendant to show cause why the defendant should not be held in civil contempt and may issue a summons order to show cause, or bench warrant of arrest for the defendant's appearance. 
(2)  If a corporation or association is ordered to pay a civil fine, costs, damages or expenses, the individuals authorized to make disbursements shall pay the fine, costs, damages or expenses, and their failure to do so shall be civil contempt unless they make the showing required in subsection (h)(1) of this section. 
(3)  Unless the defendant shows that the default was not attributable to an intentional refusal to obey the order of the court or to a failure on his part to make a good faith effort to obtain the funds required for payment, the court shall find that the default constitutes a civil contempt and may order the defendant committed until all or a specified part of the amount due is paid. 
(4)  If it appears that the default in the payment of a civil fine, costs, damages or expenses does not constitute civil contempt, the court may enter an order allowing the defendant additional time for payment, reducing the amount of the payment or each installment, or revoking the fine, costs, damages or expenses. 
(5)  The term of imprisonment on civil contempt for nonpayment of a civil fine, costs, damages or expenses shall be specified in the order of commitment and shall not exceed one day for each $30.00 due. A person committed for nonpayment of a civil fine, costs, damages or expenses shall be given credit toward payment for each day of imprisonment and each day of detention in default of recognizance before judgment at the rate of $30.00 per day. 
(6)  A defendant committed to imprisonment for civil contempt for nonpayment of a civil fine, costs, damages or expenses shall not be discharged from custody until one of the following occurs: 
a.  The defendant is credited with an amount due pursuant to subsection (h)(5) of this section. 
b.  The amount due is collected through execution of process or otherwise. 
c.  The amount due is satisfied pursuant to a combination of subsections (h)(6)a. and (h)(6)b. of this section. 
(7)  The civil contempt shall be purged upon discharge of the defendant pursuant to subsection (h)(6) of this section. 
(i)  Second or subsequent offenses. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article for a second or subsequent time shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, or imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(j)  Removal and sale. In addition to the imposition of the fines and penalties as otherwise set forth in this section, the city/city commission, building and zoning inspector, any city police officer or such other officer as the city/city commission may designate, may petition for a court order to cause any junk, blighted structure, building materials, trash, rubbish, vehicle or trailer, or parts thereof, which violate the provisions of this article to be removed from the premises, impounded and destroyed or sold for junk, and the cost thereof assessed against the owner of such vehicle or trailer, or parts thereof, or of the premises on which such items are located. Any sums realized on the sale thereof may be retained by the city to reimburse the city for the cost incurred in such removal and sale, to the extent of such cost. Any balance of sums remaining after such reimbursement shall be returned to the owner of such vehicle or trailer, or parts thereof. 
(Code 1985, ch. 104) 
Secs. 20-167-20-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MUNICIPAL TREE REGULATIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-006, adopted April 4, 2011, amended Art. VII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VII, §§ 20-200-20-216, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2008-01, adopted March 3, 2008. 

Sec. 20-200. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the Municipal Tree Ordinance for the City of Clare, in Clare County, State of Michigan. 
(Ord. No. 2011-006, 4-4-2011) 
Sec. 20-201. - Purpose/intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety, welfare, and quality of life of the residents of the city through the protection of specified trees located on public property within the city, and the establishment of standards for removal, maintenance, and planting of trees. In establishing these procedures and standards, it is the city's intent to encourage the preservation of trees. 
(Ord. No. 2011-006, 4-4-2011) 
Sec. 20-202. - Applicability/jurisdiction. 
    The city manager, or his or her designee, shall have exclusive jurisdiction, authority, control, supervision and direction over all trees, plants, shrubs, and grassy areas planted or growing in or upon the public highways and public places of the city and the planting, removal, care maintenance and protection thereof, and he or she may promulgate and adopt rules and regulations to effectuate the provisions of this article. The city manager, or his or her designee, shall also have exclusive jurisdiction as to all trees, plants, and shrubs located on private property that constitute a hazard or threat as described herein. 
(Ord. No. 2011-006, 4-4-2011) 
Sec. 20-203. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Diseased tree means any tree with a combination of structural defect and/or a health condition which makes it subject to a high probability of failure. 
    Highway includes all land lying between the property lines on either side of all public streets, boulevards, and alleys. 
    Private trees means any tree not located on property owned or controlled by the municipality. 
    Public place means any public street, public highway, public park, or any property owned or held by the municipality within the boundaries of the municipality. 
    Public tree means any tree located on property owned or controlled by the municipality. 
    Roadway means that part of the highway located within the curb lines which is used for vehicular travel and, where there are no curbs, that part of the highway which is used for vehicular travel, but which also includes the shoulders. 
    Shrub means a low, small plant, the branches of which grow directly from the earth without any supporting trunk or stem. 
    Small tree means those trees attaining a height greater than 15 feet to 30 feet in height at maturity. 
    Street tree means trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways within the municipality. 
    Tree means a woody perennial plant, usually having one dominant vertical trunk and capable of achieving a height greater than 15 feet. 
    Tree advocacy group means a group of people designated by ordinance to advise the director of public works on matters related to an urban and community forestry program. 
(Ord. No. 2011-006, 4-4-2011) 
Sec. 20-204. - Person or department responsible for trees. 
    The director of public works, as designee of the city manager, shall have authority over any and all trees on public right-of-ways or any public property in the City of Clare. 
    The director of public works shall have the following general powers: 
(1)  To direct, manage, supervise, and control the community street tree program to include all planting, removal, maintenance, and protection of all trees and shrubs on public areas and private property, as described in section 20-202. 
(2)  To guard all trees and shrubs within the municipality to prevent the spread of disease or pests and to eliminate dangerous conditions that may affect the life, health, or safety of persons or property. 
(3)  Such other powers and duties as are provided by the laws of Michigan, by ordinance of the community, and the tree advocacy group. 
(Ord. No. 2011-006, 4-4-2011) 
Sec. 20-205. - Tree advocacy group. 
    There is hereby created and established a tree advocacy group of the City of Clare, which shall consist of five members, citizens, and residents of this municipality, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city commission. Members of the tree advocacy group shall serve without compensation. Members may, however, be reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenditures made in connection with their duties. The term of the tree advocacy group shall be three years, except that the term of two members appointed to the first advocacy group shall be only one year and the term of two members appointed to the first tree advocacy group shall be for two years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his or her successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term. The director of public works will serve as an ex-officio, nonvoting, member of the tree advocacy group. The members shall come from different interest groups including homeowners, tree professionals, street department, and municipal government. 
    The tree advocacy group shall have the following general duties: 
(1)  Assist the director of public works in the development of a comprehensive plan for the City of Clare, including but not limited to planning, tree planting, and maintenance programs for all public trees. 
(2)  Promote the goals of the tree program. 
(3)  Participate in and/or coordinate annual Arbor Day celebrations. 
(4)  Coordinate with citizens groups-Tree plantings, volunteer efforts to install or maintain plantings or other beautification projects on public land. 
(5)  Provide a means to involve the public in a community forestry management plan. 
(6)  Promote new and existing tree programs by motivating both local government and the public to support community forestry management. 
(Ord. No. 2011-006, 4-4-2011) 
Sec. 20-206. - Authority to enforce. 
    The city manager, or his or her designee, is hereby given authority to perform site inspections and enforce all provisions of this article on all public property and private property, as described in section 20-202. 
(Ord. No. 2011-006, 4-4-2011) 
Sec. 20-207. - Authority to accept monies. 
    The tree advocacy group may act as trustee for any property, assets, or funds donated to the City of Clare for the care and maintenance of public trees, provided the donor designates or provides for the designation of the tree advocacy group as such trustee. In such an event, the tree advocacy group shall have all those powers and duties necessary to carry out the purpose of the trust. 
(Ord. No. 2011-006, 4-4-2011) 
Sec. 20-208. - Permits. 
    The permit process shall have the following general characteristics: 
(1)  No person, firm or corporation shall plant, trim or remove a tree, shrub, or vine on any property under the control of the City of Clare without first obtaining a permit from the director of public works. No permit, however, shall be required for any public service company or municipal employee doing such work in the pursuit of the public endeavors. 
(2)  An application for a permit shall be made at least 48 hours in advance of the date the work is to be performed and shall describe the work to be done. 
(3)  Each permit shall designate the type of tree and place where such tree is to be planted or removed in accordance with this article. 
(4)  A permit shall be issued without charge and shall expire 30 days after the date of issue. 
(5)  Applications submitted by owners of the abutting property for the planting of trees, shrubs and vines need not be accompanied by a certificate of insurance but all other applicants shall have attached a certificate of insurance in the amount of $1,000,000. 
(6)  Any work done under a written permit must be performed in strict accordance with the terms of this article and under the guidelines provided by the director of public works. 
(7)  If the work described in the application is not completed within 30 days of the date of issue, the applicant shall notify the director of public works upon completion of the work or any major portion of it. 
(Ord. No. 2011-006, 4-4-2011) 
Sec. 20-209. - Standards and specifications manual. 
    The Tree Standards and Specifications Manual that accompanies this article shall contain regulations and standards for planting, maintenance, and removal of trees, shrubs and other plants on municipally owned property. 
(Ord. No. 2011-006, 4-4-2011) 
Editor's note- It should be noted that the Tree Standards and Specifications Manual is not set out herein, but is on file in the offices of the city. 
Sec. 20-210. - Tree protection/preservation. 
(a)  Prohibiting the mutilation of public trees. No person shall break, injure, mutilate, kill, or destroy any tree or shrub, or set any fire within ten feet of any tree, or permit any fire, or the heat thereof, to injure any portion of any tree. No toxic chemicals or other injurious materials shall be allowed to seep, drain or be emptied on, near or about any tree. No person shall use any tree as an anchor except by special written permit from the director of public works, and no material shall be fastened to or hung on any tree. All persons having under their care, custody or control, facilities which may interfere with the trimming or removal of any tree, shall after notice thereof by the director of public works, promptly abate such interference in such manner as shall permit the trimming or removal of such tree by the director of public works. 
(b)  Requiring protection of trees during construction, new developments, sidewalk repair, or utility work below ground. During any construction, repair, alteration or removal of any building or structure, it shall be unlawful for any person to leave any tree, bush or shrub within any public highway or public place without sufficient guard or protection so as to prevent injury thereto by reason of such construction, repair, alteration or removal. No tree or shrub shall be moved or removed from any public highway or public place without the written consent of the director of public works. All such removal or moving shall be done at the expense of the applicant. Any tree or shrub destroyed by reason of removing or moving shall be replaced by the applicant at his or her expense. 
(c)  Requiring protection of trees during utility work above ground. Utility companies are responsible for conducting a courtesy call to the director of public works to review all upcoming utility line clearance work to be performed within the following four to six weeks. All utility line clearance will be performed based upon growth rates specific to individual tree species and in accordance to the International Society of Arboriculture's Proper Pruning Techniques publication, found in Appendix C of the Standards and Specifications Manual accompanying this article. 
(d)  Establishing standards to replace trees removed and protect endangered trees. Whenever any vegetation is removed by any person, including the municipality, for the construction of any public improvement, the director of public works, whenever practicable, shall require the planting of a similar tree or shrub to take the place of those removed. 
(Ord. No. 2011-006, 4-4-2011) 
Editor's note- See editor's note to § 20-209. 
Sec. 20-211. - Obstruction. 
    Any tree or shrub growing on private property, but so located as to extend its branches over an adjoining highway, shall be so trimmed by the owner of the property, or his or her agent, on which the tree, bush or shrub is located so that there shall be a clear height, located within the parameters of the highway, unobstructed by any branches, of eight feet above the surface of any public sidewalk and 15 feet above the surface of the roadway, and such owner, or his or her agent, shall also remove all dead branches or stubs on such trees, brushes, or shrubs which, as determined by the director of public works, have become a menace to any traveler on the adjoining highway. The director of public works is authorized to have removed any part of any trees or shrubs which encroach into the highway as directed above after notifying the property owner in advance, and may bill the property owner for the cost of said work. Failure to pay for said work on the part of the property owner shall cause said charge to become a lien on the property, and said amount shall be added to the tax bill for that property. 
(Ord. No. 2011-006, 4-4-2011) 
Sec. 20-212. - Nuisance and condemnation. 
    The director of public works, or his or her designee, shall have the authority, and it shall be his or her duty, to order the pruning, tree care or removal of trees, shrubs or plants upon private property when such trees, shrubs or plants constitute a public nuisance, or when he or she shall find such action necessary in order to preserve the public health, safety and welfare. 
(1)  Dead, dangerous, or diseased tree defined. Any dead, dangerous or diseased tree on private property, insofar as it affects the public health, safety and welfare, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, dangerous to life and limb. For the purposes of this section: 
 A dead tree is any tree with respect thereto the director of public works, or his or her designee, had determined that no part thereof is living; 
 A dangerous tree is any tree, or part thereof, living or dead, which the director of public works, or his or her designee, shall find in such a condition and is so located as to constitute a potential danger to persons or property on public space in the vicinity of the tree; 
 A diseased tree is any tree, on private property, in such a condition of infection from a major pathogenic disease or from fungus or insect pests as to constitute, in the opinion of the director of public works, or his or her designee, threat to the health of any other tree. 
(2)  Dead or diseased tree removal on private property. The City of Clare shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the municipality, when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitutes a potential threat to other trees within the municipality. The director of public works will notify in writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by said owners at their own expense within 60 days after the date of service of notice. Compliance will be monitored by the director of public works. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the City of Clare shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal on the owner's property tax notice. 
(Ord. No. 2011-006, 4-4-2011) 
Sec. 20-213. - Authorized appeals. 
(a)  Administrative review. The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order, requirement, permit, decision or refusal made by the city manager, director of public works, or by any other official or by the planning commission in administering or enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Interpretation of the chapter. The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide upon requests to: 
(1)  Interpret the provisions of this chapter when it is alleged that certain provisions are not clear or that they could have more than one meaning. In deciding upon such requests, the zoning board of appeals shall ensure that its interpretation is consistent with the intent and purpose of the chapter, the article in which the language in questions is contained and all other relevant provisions in the chapter. 
(2)  Hear and determine the facts and application of this chapter as to particular trees, shrubs or property. 
(c)  Variance. The zoning board of appeals shall have the power to authorize specific variances from the requirements of this chapter's regulations, provided that all the required findings listed below are met and the record of proceedings of the zoning board of appeals contains evidence supporting each conclusion: 
(1)  The strict enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would cause an unnecessary hardship and deprive the owners of rights enjoyed by all other property owners within the city. 
(2)  There are conditions and circumstances unique to the property which are not similarly applicable to other properties. 
(3)  The conditions and circumstances unique to the property were not created by the owner, or his predecessor. 
(4)  The requested variance will not grant special privileges that are denied other properties similarly situated. 
(5)  The requested variance will not be contrary to the spirit and intent of this article. 
(d)  Conditions. The zoning board of appeals may impose conditions on a decision. Conditions imposed shall do all of the following: 
(1)  Be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety, and welfare, as well as social and economic wellbeing of those who will use the land use or activity consideration, residents, and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed land use, or activity, and the community as a whole. 
(2)  Be related to valid exercise of the police power and purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity. 
(3)  Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of these regulations; be related to the standards established in the chapter for the preservation of trees and be necessary to ensure compliance with those standards. 
(4)  The conditions imposed shall be recorded in the record of the approval action and shall remain unchanged except upon the mutual consent of the approving authority and the landowner. The approving authority shall maintain a record of changes granted in conditions. 
(e)  Rehearing. No rehearing on an application denied by the zoning board of appeals shall be considered except upon the grounds of newly discovered evidence of a falsehood previously relied upon which is found upon inspection by the zoning board of appeals to be valid. A rehearing shall be processed in the same manner as the original application, including payment of the required fee. A request for rehearing shall be made on behalf of the applicant by either the city commission, the zoning board of appeals, or the city manager, within 14 days. 
(f)  Reapplication. After 14 days following a decision by the zoning board of appeals have expired, no application for a variance, ordinance interpretation, or appeal shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of the last denial, except upon proof of changed conditions found upon inspection by the zoning board of appeals to be valid. 
(Ord. No. 2011-006, 4-4-2011) 
Sec. 20-214. - Interference. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay, interfere, or cause or authorize any interference or delay with the city manager or any of his or her employees, agents, or servants, while they are engaged in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any trees, plants, or shrubs in or upon any public highway or upon any private grounds, as authorized in this article, or in removing any device attached to such tree, plant or shrub as may be necessary for the protection and care of any such tree, plant or shrub in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-006, 4-4-2011) 
Sec. 20-215. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
    For the purpose of this section, the term "violation of this Code" shall mean any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made to be declared unlawful, an offense or violation by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense or a violation, or by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
    For the purpose of this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
    Except as specifically provided otherwise by state law or city ordinance, all violations of this Code are misdemeanors. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person convicted of a violation of this Code that is a misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. However, unless otherwise provided by law, a person convicted of a violation of this Code which substantially corresponds to a violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of if imprisonment is 93 days, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 93 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, with respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. As to other violations, each violation constitutes a separate offense. Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief or civil or quasi-judicial enforcement. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise, or other administrative sanctions. 
(Ord. No. 2011-006, 4-4-2011) 
Sec. 20-216. - Emergencies. 
    In case of emergencies involving, but not limited to, tornadoes, windstorms, floods, freezes, or other natural disasters, the requirements of this article may be waived by the city manager. This section shall not be used to circumvent the tree ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2011-006, 4-4-2011) 
Secs. 20-217-20-499. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - GROUNDWATER USE RESTRICTIONS IN CERTAIN AREAS OF THE CITY 

Sec. 20-500. - Findings. 
    The city commission finds that the use of certain groundwater wells and water supplies from such wells for human consumption or other purposes may constitute a public health risk and endanger the safety of the residents of the city. The identified public health risk affects premises that are located on or in the vicinity of sites that are the source or location of contaminated groundwater, or where there is a known and identified threat of contaminated groundwater from a release. The city has determined it is in the best interests of the public health, safety and welfare to prohibit certain uses of groundwater from wells at properties located in the vicinity of such contaminated sites. 
( Ord. No. 2014-002 , 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 20-501. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Affected parcel means a parcel of land, any part of which is located within a restricted zone. 
    Applicant means a person who applies or applied for the establishment of a restricted zone pursuant to this article. 
    City means the City of Clare. 
    City property means any interest in real property owned or held by the city and shall include but not limited to the following: (i) real property owned by the city; (ii) real property leased by the city as lessee; and (iii) city streets, alleys or other city rights-of-way or easements. 
    Contaminated groundwater means groundwater in which there is present concentrations of materials that exceed drinking water criteria under the Safe Drinking Water Act, 1976 PA 399, as amended, or residential drinking water criteria established by the State of Michigan in operational memoranda or rules promulgated pursuant to Part 201, Environmental Remediation (MCL 324.10101 et seq.,) or Part 213, Leaking Underground Storage Tanks (MCL 324.21301a et seq.), of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, as amended, MCL 324.101 et seq., dependent upon whether the release is regulated pursuant to Part 210 or Part 213. 
    Domestic Use means the use of water by humans for drinking, cooking, food preparation and other food-related services, cleaning, washing, bathing and similar household-type water uses in any dwelling, or in any building in which commercial/business, governmental/public or industrial activities are conducted. The term does not include water used solely for closed loop heat pumps, noncontact cooling, or production and/or processing purposes of commercial or industrial enterprises. 
    Groundwater means underground water within a zone of saturation. 
    Irrigation use means the use of water for lawn, garden, or landscaping irrigation on a residential parcel of land. The term does not include water used for commercial, agricultural or farm irrigation, except as specifically directed by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ). 
    MDEQ means the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ), its divisions and offices or its successor agency. 
    Part 201 means Part 201, Environmental Remediation (MCL 324.20101 et seq.), of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, as amended, MCL 324.101 et seq. 
    Part 213 means Part 213, Leaking Underground Storage Tanks (MCL 324.21301a et seq.), of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, as amended, MCL 324.101 et seq. 
    Release means a release as defined in Part 201 or Part 213. 
    Restricted zone means an area or areas in which the prohibition of wells and the use of ground water applies pursuant to this ordinance and any amendment thereto. 
    Well means a permanent or temporary opening in the surface of the earth for the purpose of removing fresh water, or as defined in the Michigan Water Well Construction and Pump Installation Code, Part 127, Act 368 of the Public Acts of 1978, as amended, and rules. 
( Ord. No. 2014-002 , 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 20-502. - Established restricted zones. 
    The following described areas in the city shall be restricted zones under this chapter. They may be referred to by reference to the names provided in the caption preceding their descriptions. It will be defined as a restricted zone designated pursuant to conditions created by and in connection with EPA record of decision concerning Clare Water Supply, being ID # MID980002273. 
Beginning at the intersection of Dunlop Street and Maple Street, traveling in a northerly direction to West 1st Street; thence easterly along West 1st Street to McEwan Street; thence northerly along McEwan Street to West 6th Street and the West 6th Street easement; thence westerly along the West 6th Street easement and West 6th Street to Ann Arbor Trail; thence northwesterly along Ann Arbor Trail to the City of Clare city limits; thence southerly along the City of Clare city limits to Dunlop Street; thence easterly along Dunlop Street to the point of beginning. 
Excepting Parcel Identification Numbers (PID): 
PID: 051-034-302-10 
PID: 051-034-301-10 
PID: 051-034-401-11 
    The City well field protection area is hereby designated for the purpose of protecting public health and the environment, and to prevent interference with the implementation of a remedy selected for the city's well field site pursuant to the United States Environmental Protection Agency's (U.S. EPA) record of decision dated September 16, 1992 (ROD). FROM [Code of Ordinances section] 46-322(a). 
    The city well field protection area is located in the southwestern quadrant of the city in Section 34 of Township 17 North, Range 4 West of Grant Township in Clare County. The area is bounded on the north by Wheaton Avenue, to the south by Dunlop Street, to the west 200 feet west of the western boundary of property currently owned by the Mitchell Company of Owosso and to the east by U.S. Route 27. FROM [Code of Ordinances section] 46-322(b). 
( Ord. No. 2014-002 , 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 20-503. - Adding new restrictive zones. 
    The city commission may amend this ordinance to add new restrictive zones in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  An applicant shall first file a request with the city manager advising the city of the applicant's interest in establishing a restricted zone pursuant to this article. The notice shall describe the proposed boundaries of the proposed restricted zone, the reason for the proposed restricted zone, a preliminary map of the proposed restricted zone, the proposed time schedule for implementing the proposed restricted zone, and the proposed groundwater use restrictions to be applicable within the restricted zone. The city manager will, after notifying the city commission of the notice of intent, respond to the applicant with a preliminary and nonbinding indication of the city's willingness to consider the proposed restricted zone. The city manager or other designated city officer may also be an applicant for purposes of initiating this procedure. 
(2)  The applicant shall seek and obtain the MDEQ's approval of the proposed restricted zone and proposed groundwater use restrictions to be applicable therein prior to filing an application with the city. In order to be considered by the city, the restricted zone must minimize or eliminate the need for restrictive covenants on property that is not owned or operated by and is not subject to remediation by a party responsible for the contaminated groundwater. The creation of a restricted zone should have the effect of eliminating the need for nonresponsible parties to impose environmental restrictive covenants on their property or otherwise be beneficial to the owners or occupants of property that was not the site of a release. 
(3)  If any premises which will be subject to the new restricted zone is not already served by city water service, the applicant shall assure such service is, if it is possible from any engineering perspective to do so, served with city water service at no cost to the property owners or occupant. The applicant shall have to assure such service is provided. The applicant shall also provide for the abandonment and plugging of nonconforming wells on any affected premises without cost to the owners or occupants of the premises and in compliance with section 20-506. Proof of the provision of such service and plugging/abandonment of such wells shall be required or an escrow account shall be established therefor in an amount and form acceptable to the city commission. 
(4)  After the MDEQ approves the proposed restricted zone as an alternative to restrictive covenants on property on which no release has occurred, an applicant shall file with the city manager a formal request to the city including, at a minimum, the following information together with an escrow deposit as required under this section. The information can be in the form of a proposed response activity plan or no further action report to be submitted under Part 201, or a final assessment report or closure report to be submitted under Part 213 or other similar document if appropriate cross-references are made for ease of reference. 
a.  The name, address, and phone number of the applicant, as well as each person having an interest as owner, tenant, easement holder or mortgagee in the real property which is the source or site of the contaminated groundwater, if known. 
b.  The street address and legal description of the real property which is a source or site of the contaminated groundwater, if known, and the nature of the applicant's relationship to that property and involvement concerning the contaminated groundwater. 
c.  The nature and extent of the contaminated groundwater and the contamination causing it, both in summary form in plain English, and in detail in technical terms, stating the types and concentrations of contaminants; a map or survey showing their current location; a statement of their likely or anticipated impact on groundwater and the nature of the risks presented by the use of the groundwater, as well as the likely or anticipated path of migration if not remediated or corrected and a detailed statement of any plan to remediate, correct, and/or contain the contamination. 
d.  A detailed map and legal description of the proposed restricted zone. 
e.  The street addresses and legal description of all affected premises. 
f.  The names, addresses (mailing and street), and phone numbers (if readily available) of all persons with an interest as owner, tenant, easement holder or mortgagee of all affected premises. 
g.  The location, current status, and usage characteristics of all existing groundwater wells within the proposed restricted zone. 
h.  A detailed statement or description of the proposed regulation or prohibition of the use of existing and future wells within the restricted zone needed to adequately protect the public from the potential health hazards associated with the contaminated groundwater, including a description of permissible uses of such wells, together with the written consent of the MDEQ to such uses of groundwater. 
i.  A description and time schedule for any actions the applicant will take to implement any remediation plan or corrective action plan, mitigate the adverse impact of the restricted zone (e.g., providing substitute water service), and to properly close and abandon any existing wells subject to the use prohibition within the proposed restricted zone. 
j.  A copy of the information submitted to the MDEQ concerning the proposed restricted zone, along with a written statement from an MDEQ representative with approval authority stating that the proposed restricted zone and use regulations have received MDEQ approval as part of the response actions or corrective actions for the groundwater contamination. The MDEQ approval may be contingent upon the city's establishment of the proposed restricted zone pursuant to this chapter. 
k.  Copies of the notice provided to the Clare County Health Department concerning the restricted zone and accompanying regulations, and the health department's written acknowledgement that it will not issue permits for prohibited wells within the restricted zone. 
l.  Copies of the notices provided to the owners of affected property together with a sworn statement that such notices were provided to all such owners with the details of the manner in which such notices were provided. At minimum, the notice must: 
1.  Identify the sender of the notice including the sender's name, address, contact person and telephone number; 
2.  Identify the owner of the property which is the source of the contamination or who is seeking the restricted zone including the owner's name and the property address; 
3.  State what the effects of the restricted zone will be, i.e. how use of the groundwater will be restricted; 
4.  Who can be contacted at the city, the MDEQ and the applicant for more information; 
5.  A description of the groundwater plume and a brief description of the nature of the contamination; and 
6.  Any other information reasonably requested by the city manager. 
m.  A statement that the applicant agrees to pay all costs incurred by the city in the establishment of the proposed restricted zone, including without limitation, reimbursement for staff time, the fees of environmental consultants and legal counsel, the cost of publication, the cost of recording, any per diem or other amounts paid to public officials for attending any special meetings, etc. This statement shall also consent to the placement of a lien on the applicant's premises if the amounts due under this section are not timely paid (i.e. Paid within 30 days of the issuance by the city of an invoice therefor). That statement shall be in a form acceptable to the city's legal counsel and shall be in a form so as to be recordable in the records of the Clare County Register of Deeds. 
(5)  Along with the application, the applicant shall pay a deposit for escrow of the amount estimated by the city manager to be the costs incurred by the city for the establishment of the proposed restricted zone, including without limitation reimbursement for staff time, the fees of environmental consultants and legal counsel, the cost of publication, any per diem or other amounts paid to public officials for attending any special meetings, etc. The deposit shall not bear interest and the city may use funds from it to pay the costs as they are incurred, requiring the applicant to maintain a minimum balance of $500.00 in that escrow account. Any failure by the applicant to maintain the escrow as required by this provision may result in the city's discontinuance of its processing of the request to establish a restricted zone and can result in the filing of a lien against the premises of the applicant. 
(6)  Once the city manager or his or her designee is satisfied that the application is complete, the city manager shall place the matter on the city commission agenda to set a time, date and place for a public hearing on the application. 
(7)  After the city commission sets the public hearing, the applicant shall cause a written notice of the hearing to be sent by first class mail to all persons having an interest as owner, tenant, easement holder, or mortgagee in any of the affected premises. The notice shall include a brief statement regarding the application fairly designed to inform the recipients of its main features and potential impact on the recipients in general. The notice shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the hearing. The notice of hearing shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least seven days before the hearing. The notice shall also be mailed to the MDEQ representative who gave the approval of the proposed restricted zone and use regulations and the MDEQ district supervisor for the MDEQ regulatory program with jurisdiction over the contaminated site. A copy of the notice, an affidavit of publication and an affidavit of mailing shall be filed with the city manager before the hearing. 
(8)  Upon the establishment of a new restricted zone (i.e., after the second reading and approval of the ordinance amendment) the city clerk shall publish notice of the amendment to this chapter in the manner required by law for ordinance amendments. The applicant shall give notice to the owners and occupants of all property on which wells are located of the need to close and abandon wells under this chapter as amended. 
( Ord. No. 2014-002 , 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 20-504. - Regulations within restricted zones. 
    Except as provided in section 20-505, no person shall install or utilize, or allow, permit, or provide for the installation or utilization of a well in any restricted zone. Except as provided in section 20-505, no person shall use any groundwater from any property located within a restricted zone. 
( Ord. No. 2014-002 , 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 20-505. - Exceptions to prohibition. 
    A person may install or utilize, or allow, permit, or provide for the installation or utilization of a well within the city if any of the following exceptions applies and the requirements of the exception are complied with: 
(1)  Water service unavailable. If city water service is unavailable to a premises in the city, any well on that premises shall be tested annually by a laboratory that is acceptable to and for chemical parameters specified by the MDEQ. The results of that test shall promptly be submitted to the MDEQ or the Clare County Health Department for review. If the MDEQ or the Clare County Health Department determines that the well is safe and suitable for use, and proof of that determination is delivered annually to the city, that well may be used. No split or conveyance of property shall be effective to render city water service unavailable. For purposes of this provision, city water service is unavailable only if it is impractical from an engineering perspective to serve the premises with city water. This subsection shall apply only to wells existing on the effective date of this ordinance. All new wells shall also comply with subsection (2). 
(2)  Proof of no influence. If the MDEQ determines that the use of a well is not influenced or potentially influenced by contaminated groundwater and further determines the use of that well will remain permanently unaffected by the future migration of contaminated groundwater, and proof of those determinations is delivered to the city, the city manager may execute a waiver allowing the use of the well. 
(3)  Groundwater monitoring. A well may be used for groundwater monitoring and/or remediation as part of response activity approved by the MDEQ. 
(4)  Construction de-watering. A well may be used for construction de-watering, if the following conditions are satisfied: (i) the use of the de-watering well will not result in unacceptable exposure to contaminated groundwater, possible cross-contamination between saturated zones, or hydrogeological effects on contaminated groundwater plumes and (ii) the water generated by that activity is properly handled and disposed of in compliance with all applicable laws, rules, regulations, permit and license requirements, orders and directives of any governmental entity or agency of competent jurisdiction. Any exacerbation caused by the use of the well under this exception shall be the responsibility of the person operating the de-watering well, as provided in Part 201 or Part 213. 
(5)  Processing activities. If the MDEQ determines that the use of a well for non-contact heating, cooling or processing activities will not cause the future migration of contaminated groundwater, and proof of that determination is delivered to the city, the city manager may execute a waiver allowing the use of the well for the permitted purposes upon such terms and conditions that the MDEQ identifies. 
(6)  Public emergencies. A well may be used in the event of a public emergency. 
(7)  Surface irrigation. Upon review and approval by the MDEQ, existing wells may be used for surface irrigation in the following restricted zones: 
a.  None are approved at this time. 
( Ord. No. 2014-002 , 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 20-506. - Water sources for human consumption. 
    Except as provided in section 20-505, water supply for human consumption in any restricted zone shall be delivered only from the city water system or by the use of bottled water delivered or purchased in containers under conditions approved by the Michigan Department of Agriculture or other appropriate agency. For the purposes of this section, the term "human consumption" means use in food or drink intended for human ingestion, use in food preparation or food service, use in the interior of a dwelling or dwelling unit for household purposes, and use in any building for personal washing. 
( Ord. No. 2014-002 , 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 20-507. - Nonconforming wells. 
    Any existing well, the use of which is prohibited by section 20-504, shall be plugged or abandoned in conformance with all applicable laws, rules, regulations, permit and license requirements, orders and directives of any governmental entity or agency of competent jurisdiction, or, in the absence of an applicable law, rule, regulation, requirement, order, directive, in conformance with the protocol developed consistent with the American Standards for Testing and Materials standard #D5299-92. 
( Ord. No. 2014-002 , 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 20-508. - Wells affecting contaminated groundwater. 
    Except as provided in section 20-505, no well may be used or installed at any place in the city if the use of the well will have the effect of causing the migration of contaminated groundwater or a contaminated groundwater plume to previously un-impacted groundwater, or adversely impacting any groundwater treatment system, unless the well is part of an MDEQ or United States Environmental Protection Agency approved groundwater monitoring or remediation system. 
( Ord. No. 2014-002 , 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 20-509. - Enforcement. 
    Violations. This article may be enforced by the city manager or his or her designee. The following shall apply to violations of any provision of this chapter: 
(1)  A first violation of any provision of this chapter by any person is a municipal civil infraction which shall, upon a determination of responsibility, be punished by a fine of not less than $75.00. In addition to a fine, a person determined to be responsible for such a violation shall be assessed the cost of prosecution of not less than $9.00 nor more than $500.00. Furthermore, the district court shall have equitable jurisdiction to enforce any judgment, writ, or order necessary to enforce any provision the violation of which is a municipal civil infraction, including, but not limited to, abatement of the violating condition or granting any injunctive relief. 
(2)  A second violation of any provision of this chapter by any person is a municipal civil infraction which shall, upon a determination of responsibility, be punished by a fine of not less than $150.00. In addition to a fine, a person determined to be responsible for such a violation shall be assessed the cost of prosecution of not less than $9.00 nor more than $500.00. Furthermore, the district court shall have equitable jurisdiction to enforce any judgment, writ, or order necessary to enforce any provision the violation of which is a municipal civil infraction, including, but not limited to, abatement of the violating condition or granting any injunctive relief. 
(3)  A third violation of any provision of this chapter by any person is a misdemeanor which upon conviction is punishable by a jail term of up to 90 days, a fine of up to $325.00, or both such jail term and fine. 
(4)  A fourth or any subsequent violation of any provision of this chapter by any person is a misdemeanor which upon conviction is punishable by a jail term of up to 90 days, a fine of up to $500.00, or both such jail term and fine. 
(5)  Each act of violation and each day upon which such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(6)  In addition, the city may seek an order from a court of competent jurisdiction to restrain any person from violating this chapter, including the collection of costs and attorney fees associated with such enforcement action. Any well in violation of this chapter is hereby declared and deemed a nuisance, subject to abatement, and shall be immediately taken out of service and properly and lawfully abandoned. Any person found to be responsible for installing, permitting, maintaining, or using such well is subject to being ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction to properly and lawfully remove or abandon such well. 
(7)  The city commission may amend by resolution from time to time the above referenced fines. 
( Ord. No. 2014-002 , 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 20-510. - Building or improvement permit. 
    No permit for building, alteration or other required permit for a premises or improvement thereon shall be issued by the city for any premises found in violation of this article, or where it is proposed to install or use a well in violation of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2014-002 , 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 20-511. - Notice of modification, lapsing or revocation. 
    At least 30 days prior to adopting a modification to the ordinance, or the lapsing or revocation of the ordinance, the city shall notify the MDEQ of its intent to so act. 
( Ord. No. 2014-002 , 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 20-512. - Publishing and recording. 
    This article or an amendment to this article shall be published or recorded as follows: 
(1)  If the release is regulated pursuant to Part 201, then this article or an amendment to this article adding a restricted zone shall be published and maintained in the same manner as zoning ordinances. 
(2)  If the release is regulated pursuant to Part 213, then this article or an amendment to this article adding a restricted zone shall be filed with the Clare County Register of Deeds as an ordinance affecting multiple properties. 
( Ord. No. 2014-002 , 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 20-513. - Savings provision. 
    If any portion of this chapter is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of remaining portions of the chapter, it being the intent of the city that provisions of this chapter be fully severable. The city shall promptly notify the MDEQ upon the occurrence of any event described in the preceding sentence. 
( Ord. No. 2014-002 , 6-2-2014) 
Chapter 22 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire protection services, § 2-201 et seq.; fire safety at municipal airport, § 4-41; buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; fire chief's certificate, § 12-40; display of fireworks, § 28-162. 
State Law reference- State fire prevention code, MCL 29.1 et seq.; crimes related to fires, MCL 750.240 et seq.; crimes related to explosives and bombs, MCL 750.200 et seq.; explosives act, MCL 29.41 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Obstruction of fire hydrants. 
    No person shall place any obstruction whatsoever, nor shall any person responsible for such an obstruction permit the obstruction to remain, within 15 feet of any fire hydrant. 
(Code 1985, § 9.183) 
Sec. 22-2. - Opening fire hydrants. 
(a)  No person, except authorized city officers and employees, shall use any fire hydrant, except in case of an emergency, without first securing permission from the department of public works for such use, and paying, or agreeing to pay, for the water to be used. 
(b)  In no case shall any wrench or tool be used on any fire hydrant, other than a regulation city hydrant wrench. 
(Code 1985, § 9.184) 
Sec. 22-3. - Burning of trash, leaves and other materials. 
(a)  There shall be no burning of any building materials, dimensional lumber that has been processed for construction purposes or that has been treated with creosote, wolmanized, pressure treated, or otherwise painted or stained. Asphalt or fiberglass roofing material, tires, grass, leaves, trash, garbage, or other household refuse may not be burned (this includes burning in fire pits). 
(b)  Burn barrels, incinerators, or other similar devices for the burning of trash or waste material are not allowed for use within the city. 
(c)  Accumulations of leaves shall not be burned and shall either be left in piles for decomposition (composted on site) or removed to an appropriate site for composting. 
(d)  Highly flammable, toxic, or explosive material shall not be burned in any area within the city. 
(e)  Brush piles may be burned during the course of the year upon receiving permission pursuant to this article, in advance, when weather conditions permit and also from December 1 of any year until prior to or on March 1 of any year, with such burning being done subject to the following specific requirements: 
(1)  A permit for the burning must be obtained, in advance, from the City of Clare Fire Chief or his designee. 
(2)  The City of Clare Fire Chief or his designee shall refuse burning permits at any time or in any case when there exists a reasonable danger to persons or property by reason of drought, high winds, location of the requested permit, or the existence of other circumstances which may create a risk of danger in regard to controlling a fire. 
(3)  Such permits shall be issued for the burning of brush only and shall be issued to a specific person and a specific location. Permits may be issued for the purpose of clearing undeveloped areas of lots or acreage, consistent with this article. 
(4)  The permit shall specifically require that no brush be burned within 100 feet of an occupied dwelling and no brush shall be burned within 50 feet of a public right-of-way. 
(5)  Such permit shall specifically require that any burning which takes place pursuant to the permit shall be attended by a competent person of the age of 16 years or older and that the person receiving the permit shall be responsible for seeing that the fire is completely extinguished prior to leaving the location where the brush was burned. 
(Ord. No. 2008-01, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 22-4. - Burning of wood, coal, corn, etc. within wood stoves or fireplaces; exception. 
    The burning of wood, coal, corn or other combustibles within wood stoves or fireplaces within a residence is excepted from the burning ban contained within this article. The burning of charcoal, wood or gas within a grill, patio fireplace or fire pit specifically designed and used for barbeques or campfires is specifically exempted from the burning ban within this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-01, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 22-5. - Outdoor wood-fired boiler. 
(a)  This section is intended to promote the public health, safety and welfare and to safeguard the health, comfort, living conditions, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Clare by regulating the air pollution and fire hazards of open burning and outdoor burning. 
(b)  Should any portion of this section be declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this section shall not be affected. 
(c)  Fire chief means the chief of the City of Clare Fire Department or other person designated by the fire chief. 
(d)  Municipality means a county, township, city, or village. 
(e)  Outdoor wood-fired boiler means a wood-fired boiler, stove or furnace that is not located within a building intended for habitation by humans or domestic animals. 
(f)  Outdoor wood-fired boilers. No person shall install, use, or maintain an outdoor wood-fired boiler in the City of Clare except within an industrial district with written permission from the municipality's authorized agent. 
(g)  Liability. A person utilizing or maintaining an outdoor wood-fired boiler fire shall be responsible for all fire suppression costs and any other liability resulting from damage caused by the fire. 
(h)  Right of entry and inspection. The fire chief or any authorized officer, agent, employee or representative of the City of Clare who presents credentials may inspect any property for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(i)  Enforcement and penalties. 
(1)  The fire chief and code enforcement officer and any law enforcement officer are authorized to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or governmental entity who violates any of the provisions of this section or fails to comply with a duly authorized order issued pursuant to this section shall be deemed to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction as defined by Michigan Statute which shall be punishable by civil fine determined in accordance with the following schedule: 
Minimum 
Fine Maximum 
Fine First offense within 3-year period* $ 75.00 $500.00 Second offense within 3-year period* 150.00 500.00 Third offense within 3-year period* 325.00 500.00 Fourth or more offense within 3-year period* 500.00 500.00  
*Determined on the basis of the date of commission of the offense(s) 
(3)  The violator shall pay costs which may include all expenses, direct and indirect, which the City of Clare has incurred in connection with the municipal infraction. In no case, however, shall costs of less than $100.00 be ordered. In addition, the city shall have the right to proceed in any court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of obtaining an injunction, restraining order, or other appropriate remedy to compel compliance with this section. Each day that a violation of this section exists shall constitute a separate violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2011-010, 9-6-2011) 
Secs. 22-6-22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE CODE 

Sec. 22-31. - Adopted. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference, the current International Fire Code, as published by the International Code Council, as the fire prevention code of the city for the control of buildings, structures and premises as provided in this article, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of such code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of this article, as if fully set out in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2011-002, 2-7-2011) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Secs. 22-32-22-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIREWORKS 

Sec. 22-50 - Fireworks. 
(a)  Definitions. [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Consumer fireworks means fireworks devices that are designed to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States consumer product safety commission under 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 3.5. Consumer fireworks does not include low-impact fireworks. 
    Display fireworks means large fireworks devices that are explosive materials intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, as provided in 27 CFR 555.11, 49 CFR 172, and APA standard 87-1, 4.1. 
    Firework or fireworks means any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare gun, or a flare, designated for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. Fireworks consist of consumer fireworks, low-impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks, and special effects. 
    Low-impact fireworks means ground and handheld sparkling devices as that phrase is defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8, and 3.5. 
    Novelties means that term as defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.2, 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.2.4, and 3.2.5 and all of the following: 
(1)  Toy plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in sheets, strips, rolls, or individual caps containing not more than twenty-five-hundredths of a grain of explosive content per cap, in packages labeled to indicate the maximum explosive content per cup. 
(2)  Toy pistols toy cannons, toy canes, toy trick noisemakers, and toy guns in which toy caps as described in subparagraph (1) are used, that are constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion, and that are not designed to break apart or be separated so as to form a missile by the explosion. 
(2)  Flitter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding one-eighth-inch in diameter. 
(b)  (1)  Prohibition on use of consumer fireworks. No person shall ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks within the city, except this prohibition shall not preclude any person from the ignition, discharge, and use of consumer fireworks on the day preceding, the day of, or the day after a national holiday consistent with Section 7(2) of Public Act 257 of 2011, and all other applicable local, state, or federal regulations. A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks on a public property, school property, church property, or the property of another person without that organization's or person's express permission. 
Formal fireworks displays for the benefit of the public may be allowed by special events permit. 
(2)  A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to offer for sale, expose for sale, keep with the intent to sell at retail, or sell at retail to any person who has not yet attained the age of 18 years of age any blank cartridge, toy pistol, toy cannon, toy cane or toy gun in which explosives are used; the type of unmanned balloon which requires fire underneath to propel the same; firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, daygo bombs or other fireworks of like construction; or any fireworks containing any explosive or inflammable compound or any tablets or other devices commonly used and sold as fireworks, containing nitrates, chlorates, oxolates, sulfides of lead, barium, antimony, arsenic, mercury, nitroglycerin, phosphorous or any compound containing any of the same or other modern explosives. 
(d)  Not included within the foregoing prohibition are model rockets and model rocket engines designed, sold and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models. Also not included are sparklers containing not more than one hundred twenty-five ten-thousandths pounds of burning portion per sparkler, flitter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding one-eighth-inch in diameter, toy snakes not containing mercury, if packed in cardboard boxes with not more than 12 pieces per box for retail sale and if the manufacturer's name and the quantity contained in each box are printed thereon, toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices manufactured to utilize paper and/or plastic caps containing not more than twenty-five hundredths of a grain of explosive content per cap, or said paper and/or plastic caps themselves, the sale of which shall be permitted at all times. 
(e)  Use while under the influence. No person shall use consumer fireworks or low-impact fireworks while under the influence of alcoholic liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance. 
(f)  Reckless use of fireworks. No person shall ignite, discharge or use any fireworks in reckless disregard for the safety of persons or property. 
(g)  Enforcement. In addition to police officers, the fire chief, his designee, the fire marshal and any fire awareness officer are authorized to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(h)  Penalties for violation. Any person who is found guilty of violating any provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-13 of this Code. 
(i)  Severability. The various parts, sections and clauses of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the article shall not be affected. 
(j)  Repeal. All regulatory fireworks provisions contained in other city ordinances which are inconsistent with the provisions of this article are repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2012-006, 11-5-2012; Ord. No. 2014-007 , 9-15-2014) 
Chapter 24 - LAND DIVISIONS AND SUBDIVISIONS OF LAND[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision saved from repeal, § 1-5(a)(13); buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; community development, ch. 16; environment, ch. 20; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40; utilities, ch. 46; waterways, ch. 50; zoning, ch. 52. 
State Law reference- Land division act, MCL 560.101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1-24-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LAND DIVISIONS 

Sec. 24-31. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to carry out the provisions of the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.), formerly known as the subdivision control act, to prevent the creation of parcels of property which do not comply with applicable ordinances and such act, minimize potential boundary disputes, maintain orderly development of the community and otherwise provide for the health, safety and welfare of the residents and property owners of the city by establishing reasonable standards for prior review and approval of land divisions within the city. 
(Code 1985, § 5.40) 
Sec. 24-32. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means a natural person, firm, association, partnership or corporation, or combination thereof, that holds an ownership interest in land, whether recorded or not. 
    Divided and division mean the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof, or by such proprietor's heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns, for the purpose of sale or lease of more than one year, or of a building development that results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and that satisfies the requirements of sections 108 and 109 of the land division act (MCL 560.108, 560.109). 
    Exempt split and exempt division mean the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof, or by the proprietor's heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns, that does not result in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, provided all resulting parcels are accessible for vehicular travel and utilities from existing public roads through existing adequate roads or easements, or through areas owned by the owner of the parcel that can provide such access. 
    Forty acres or the equivalent means either 40 acres, a quarter-quarter section containing not less than 30 acres or a government lot containing not less than 30 acres. 
    Land division act means Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
    Lot means a measured portion of a parcel or tract of land, which is described and fixed in a recorded plat. 
    Parcel means a continuous area or acreage of land, which can be described as provided for in the land division act. 
    Plat means a map or chart of a subdivision of land. 
    Tract means two or more parcels that share a common property line and are under the same ownership. 
(Code 1985, § 5.41) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 24-33. - Prior review and approval required; exemptions. 
    Land in the city shall not be divided without the prior review and approval of the city assessor, or other official designated by the city commission, in accordance with this article and the land division act, provided that the following shall be exempt from such requirement: 
(1)  A parcel proposed for subdivision through a recorded plat pursuant to article III of this chapter and the land division act. 
(2)  A lot in a recorded plat proposed to be divided in accordance with article IV of this chapter and the land division act. 
(3)  An exempt split. 
(Code 1985, § 5.42) 
Sec. 24-34. - Application for approval. 
(a)  An applicant shall file all of the following with the city clerk or other official designated by the city commission for review and approval of a proposed land division before making any division either by deed, land contract, lease for more than one year or for building development: 
(1)  A completed application form, on such form as may be provided by the city. 
(2)  Proof of fee ownership of the land proposed to be divided. 
(3)  A survey map or equivalent document, in accordance with the following: 
a.  A survey map of the land proposed to be divided, prepared pursuant to the survey map requirements of Public Act No. 132 of 1970 (MCL 54.211) by a land surveyor licensed by the state and showing the dimensions and legal descriptions of the existing parcel and the parcels proposed to be created by the division, the location of all existing structures and other land improvements, and the accessibility of the parcels for vehicular traffic and utilities from existing public roads. 
b.  In lieu of such survey map, at the applicant's option, the applicant may waive the 30-day statutory requirement for a decision on the application until such survey map and legal description are filed with the city, and submit a tentative preliminary parcel map, drawn to a scale of not less than that provided for on the application form, including an accurate legal description of each proposed division, and showing the boundary lines, dimensions and the accessibility of each division from existing or proposed public roads for automobile traffic and public utilities, for preliminary review, approval and/or denial by the locally designated official prior to a final application. 
c.  The city commission or its designated agent may waive the survey map requirement where the tentative parcel map stated in subsection (3)b. of this section is deemed to contain adequate information to approve a proposed land division considering the size, simple nature of the divisions and the undeveloped character of the territory within which the proposed divisions are located. An accurate legal description of all the proposed divisions, however, shall at all times be required. 
(4)  Proof that all standards of the land division act and this article have been met. 
(5)  The history and specifications of any previous divisions of land of which the proposed division was a part, sufficient to establish that the parcel to be divided was lawfully in existence as of March 31, 1997, the effective date of the land division act. 
(6)  Proof that all taxes due and payable or installments of special assessments pertaining to the land proposed to be divided are paid in full. 
(7)  If transfer of division rights are proposed in the land transfer, detailed information about the terms and availability of the proposed division rights transfer. 
(8)  The fee, as may be established from time to time by resolution of the city commission for land division reviews pursuant to this article, to cover the costs of review of the application and administration of this article and the land division act. 
(b)  Unless a division creates a parcel which is acknowledged and declared to be not buildable under section 24-37, all divisions shall result in buildable parcels containing sufficient buildable area outside of unbuildable wetlands, floodplains and other areas where buildings are prohibited therefrom, and with sufficient area to comply with all required setback provisions, minimum floor areas, off-street parking spaces, on-site sewage disposal and water well locations (where public water and sewer service is not available), and maximum allowed area coverage of buildings and structures on the site. 
(Code 1985, § 5.43) 
Sec. 24-35. - Procedure for review of applications for approval. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a land division application package, the city clerk or other official designated by the city commission shall forthwith submit the application package to the city assessor or other designated official for a decision. The city assessor or other designee shall approve, approve with reasonable conditions to ensure compliance with applicable ordinances and the protection of public health, safety and general welfare or disapprove the land division applied for within 30 days after receipt of the application package conforming to requirements of this article, and shall promptly notify the applicant of the decision and the reasons for any denial. If the application package does not conform to the requirements of this article and the land division act, the assessor or other designee shall return the application package to the applicant for completion and refiling in accordance with this article and the land division act. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the assessor or designee may, within 30 days of such decision, appeal the decision to the zoning board of appeals, which shall consider and resolve such appeal by a majority vote of the zoning board of appeals or by the designee at its next regular meeting or session affording sufficient time for a 20-day written notice to the applicant (and appellant where other than the applicant) of the time and date of such meeting and appellate hearing. 
(c)  A decision approving a land division is effective for 90 days, after which it shall be considered revoked unless, within such period, a document is recorded with the county register of deeds' office and filed with the city clerk or other designated official accomplishing the approved land division or transfer. 
(d)  The city assessor or designee shall maintain an official record of all approved and accomplished land divisions or transfers. 
(Code 1985, § 5.44) 
Sec. 24-36. - Approval criteria. 
    A proposed land division shall be approved if the following criteria are met: 
(1)  All the parcels to be created by the proposed land division fully comply with the applicable lot (parcel), yard and area requirements of the applicable zoning ordinance, including, but not limited to, minimum lot (parcel) frontage/width, minimum road frontage, minimum lot (parcel) area, minimum lot width to depth ratio, and maximum lot (parcel) coverage and minimum setbacks for existing buildings/structures. 
(2)  The proposed land division complies with all requirements of the land division act and this article. 
(3)  All parcels created and remaining have existing adequate accessibility, or an area available therefor, to a public road for public utilities and emergency and other vehicles not less than the requirements of the applicable zoning ordinance, major thoroughfare plan, road ordinance or this article. In determining adequacy of accessibility, any ordinance standards applicable to plats shall also apply as a minimum standard whenever a parcel or tract is proposed to be divided to create four or more parcels. 
(4)  Permissible depths and widths of divided parcels conform with the following: 
a.  The ratio of depth to width of any parcel created by the division does not exceed a four to one ratio, exclusive of access roads, easements or nonbuildable parcels created under section 24-37 and parcels added to contiguous parcels that result in all involved parcels complying with such ratio. 
b.  The permissible depth of a parcel created by a land division shall be measured along the median between the side lot lines and shall be the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
c.  The permissible minimum width shall be as defined in the applicable zoning ordinance. 
(5)  All parcels created by a land division shall comply with the following minimum standards: 
a.  Minimum road frontage shall be as specified in chapter 52. 
b.  Minimum width shall be as specified in chapter 52. 
c.  Minimum lot (parcel) area shall be as specified in chapter 52. 
(6)  In the absence of applicable zoning or other ordinances providing a different standard, all parcels created by a land division shall comply with the following minimum standards: 
a.  Where accessibility is to be provided by a proposed new dedicated public road, proof that the city engineer or state department of transportation has approved the proposed layout and construction design of the road, and utility easements and drainage facilities connected therewith. 
b.  Where accessibility by vehicular traffic and for utilities is permitted through other than a dedicated and accepted public road or easement, such accessibility shall comply with the following: 
1.  Where such private road or easement extends for more than 660 feet from a dedicated public road or is serving, or is intended to serve, more than one separate parcel, unit or ownership, it shall not be less than 66 feet in right-of-way width, 24 feet in improved roadbed width, with at least three feet of improved shoulder width on each side and adequate drainage ditches and necessary culverts on both sides to accumulate and contain surface waters from the road area. It shall further be improved with not less than six inches of a processed and stabilized gravel base over six inches of granular soil, have a grade of not more than seven percent and, if dead-ended, shall have a cul-de-sac with a radius of not less than 75 feet (industrial) or 60 feet (residential and others) of improved roadbed for the accommodation of emergency, commercial and other vehicles. 
2.  Where the private road or easement is 660 feet or less in length and is serving, or is intended to serve, not more than four separate parcels, units or ownerships, it shall not be less than 40 feet in right-of-way width, 20 feet in improved roadbed width, with at least two feet of improved shoulder width on each side, and adequate drainage ditches on both sides, with necessary culverts to accommodate and contain surface waters from the road area. It shall further be improved with processed and stabilized gravel and granular soil, have a grade of not more than seven percent and a cul-de-sac, where dead-ended as specified in subsection (6)b.1. of this section. If such private road or easement is serving, or is intended to serve, more than four separate parcels, units or ownerships, the right-of-way and development standards set forth in subsection (6)b.1. of this section shall apply. 
3.  If accessibility is by a private road or easement, a document acceptable to the city shall be recorded with the county register of deeds and filed with the assessor or designee, specifying the method of private financing of all maintenance, improvements and snow removal, the apportionment of the costs among those benefited, and the right of the city to assess such costs against those properties benefited, plus a 25 percent administrative fee, and to perform such improvements in the event of a failure of those benefited to privately perform these duties for the health, safety and general welfare of the area. 
4.  Any intersection between private and public roads shall contain a clear vision triangular area of not less than two feet along each right-of-way line as measured from the intersecting right-of-way lines. 
5.  No private road or easement shall extend for more than 1,000 feet from a public road. 
6.  No private road shall serve more than 15 separate parcels. 
(Code 1985, § 5.45) 
Sec. 24-37. - Allowance for approval of other land divisions. 
    Notwithstanding disqualification from approval pursuant to this article, a proposed land division which does not fully comply with the applicable lot, yard, accessibility and area requirements of the applicable zoning ordinance or this article may be approved in any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Where the applicant executes and records an affidavit or deed restriction with the county register of deeds, in a form acceptable to the city, designating the parcel as not buildable. Any such parcel shall also be designated as not buildable in the city records, and shall not thereafter be the subject of a request to the zoning board of appeals for variance relief from the applicable lot and/or area requirements, and shall not be developed with any building or aboveground structure exceeding four feet in height. 
(2)  Where, in circumstances not covered under subsection (1) of this section, the zoning board of appeals has, previous to this article, granted a variance from the lot, yard, ratio, frontage and/or area requirements with which the parcel failed to comply. 
(3)  Where the proposed land division involves only the minor adjustment of a common boundary line or involves a conveyance between adjoining properties which does not result in either parcel violating this article, any applicable zoning ordinance or the land division act. 
(Code 1985, § 5.46) 
Sec. 24-38. - Consequences of noncompliance. 
    Any parcel created in noncompliance with this article shall not be eligible for any building permit or zoning approval, such as special land use approval or site plan approval, and shall not be recognized as a separate parcel on the assessment roll. In addition, a violation of this article shall subject the violator to the penalties and enforcement actions as may be provided by law. 
(Code 1985, § 5.46.1) 
Secs. 24-39-24-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SUBDIVISION CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-71. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Parking space means an area of not less than 160 square feet, exclusive of drives or aisles, giving access thereto, accessible from streets or alleys, and to be usable for the storage or parking of self-propelled passenger automobiles. 
    Subdivide, and other words, shall have the same meaning as defined in Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(Code 1985, § 5.251) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 24-72. - Sales contrary to requirements. 
    Any sale of, or option or contract to sell, land subdivided contrary to the provisions of this article shall be voidable as provided in Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(Code 1985, § 5.308) 
Secs. 24-73-24-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLATTING 

Sec. 24-91. - Application. 
    An application, in writing, shall be submitted to the city planning commission by the owner or his authorized representative for approval of a preliminary plat of any proposed subdivision lying within the limits of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 5.255) 
Sec. 24-92. - Preliminary plat. 
    Four copies of the preliminary plat, at a scale of not more than 200 feet to the inch, showing the following, shall be submitted with the application for a proposed subdivision: 
(1)  Title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded, a description of land to be platted, and the name and address of the owner and technical author of the plan. 
(2)  Location of the existing property lines, streets, buildings, watercourses, railroads, utilities and other physical features. 
(3)  Location of the adjoining streets, utilities, buildings and other physical features which relate to the development of the subdivision. 
(4)  Location, name and width of proposed streets, alleys, easements and public utilities, parks, plantings, lots and building lines on the property to be subdivided. 
(5)  Any engineering data deemed necessary relative to the topography, street cross sections, sewer elevations, water elevations, etc. 
(6)  Proposed use of property. 
(7)  Areas proposed to be dedicated for public purposes. 
(8)  Proposed grade elevations at street intersections or breaks of grades. 
(9)  Date, north point and graphic scale. 
(Code 1985, § 5.256) 
Sec. 24-93. - Approval of preliminary plat. 
(a)  Preliminary plats shall be subject to the tentative approval of the city planning commission, which shall take into consideration the city's requirements and the most appropriate use of the land. Particular attention will be given to the standards of design, the justification for the development of public improvements and the subdivision's conformity to the existing street plan. The width, location and arrangement of streets, the dimensions of lots, the location of utilities and other features will be studied. 
(b)  If the preliminary plat is approved by the planning commission, it shall be forwarded to the city commission. 
(c)  If the preliminary plat meets the approval of the city commission, then the subdivider may proceed to make an accurate survey of the property and prepare the final plat. Plans tentatively approved by the city commission shall bear the signature of the city clerk and one copy each shall be filed in the offices of the city engineer and the city planning commission, and a third signed copy shall be returned to the subdivider. 
(d)  The approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute an acceptance of the subdivision. The final or record subdivision plat shall be submitted to the city planning commission, in triplicate, within two years after approval of the preliminary plat; otherwise, the approval of the preliminary plat shall become null and void unless an extension of time is applied for and the application is granted by the planning commission. 
(Code 1985, § 5.257) 
Sec. 24-94. - Final plat. 
    The final plat shall be prepared and presented in accordance with the provisions of Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.), and, in addition, shall show the following: 
(1)  Any private restrictions shall be shown on the plat or reference to such restrictions made thereon, and such plats shall contain proper acknowledgments of the owner and mortgagees accepting such platting restrictions. 
(2)  In addition to subsection (1) of this section, the city planning commission will require a statement from each subdivider, indicating the: 
a.  Ownership of the property proposed to be subdivided as evidenced by an abstract of title certified as to the date, or, at the option of the proprietor, a policy of title insurance. 
b.  Improvements and utilities to be installed by the subdivider. 
c.  Restrictions to be imposed upon the property after subdivision. 
d.  Streets, alleys, parks and easements, as agreed upon with the city commission, with a recital that such streets, alleys, parks and easements are dedicated to the use of the public. 
e.  Total area, in acres, of the tract to be subdivided. 
f.  Net area in lots. 
g.  Total lot frontage, in feet, classified as to: 
1.  Residential frontage. 
2.  Business frontage. 
3.  Industrial frontage. 
h.  Area in streets. 
i.  Area in parks. 
(Code 1985, § 5.258) 
Sec. 24-95. - Plat development plan. 
(a)  In addition to section 24-94, the city commission will require from each subdivider a plat development plan, drawn to a scale of not more than 100 feet to one inch. Such plan shall show the following: 
(1)  Streets and names thereof. 
(2)  Lots, numbers and dimensions thereof. 
(3)  Storm sewer system. 
(4)  Sanitary sewers. 
(5)  Proposed elevations at each corner of each lot. 
(6)  Finished grade of each proposed home. 
(7)  House numbers. 
(8)  Approximate setback and side yard clearance. 
(9)  Sidewalk grades. 
(10)  Arrows on each lot, indicating the ultimate direction of flow of the surface water as controlled by the planned grading and layout. 
(b)  The plat development shall be approved by the city planning commission, the city engineer and the city commission. 
(Code 1985, § 5.259) 
Sec. 24-96. - Certificate of compliance. 
    A certificate showing compliance with the plat development plan, issued by the building inspector, shall be required before a certificate of occupancy and compliance shall be issued under the provisions of chapter 52, pertaining to zoning. The city building inspector shall make inspections and enforce compliance with such plat development plan. 
(Code 1985, § 5.260) 
Sec. 24-97. - Surety bond. 
    As a protection for the city's catchbasins and drainage system, and to ensure compliance with the plat development plan, a surety bond may be required to be given by the owner or developer of the subdivision, upon the recommendation of the planning commission, the city engineer or the building inspector, conditioned that such plat development plan will be followed, and that, if the subdivision shall be vacated, in whole or in part, or development thereof postponed, the developer will adopt temporary or permanent measures to protect the surrounding area against water damage and prevent the flow of dirt, earth or debris into catchbasins and the drainage system. The city engineer or building inspector may specify measures to be taken to prevent such damage or injury. The amount of such bond shall be fixed by the city commission and the filing of such bond, when required, shall be a condition precedent to the approval of the plat and the plat development plan by the planning commission. 
(Code 1985, § 5.261) 
Sec. 24-98. - Failure to comply with plan. 
(a)  Failure or refusal to comply with the plat development plan or deviation therefrom shall be a violation of this Code, punishable as provided in section 1-13. 
(b)  The provisions of this division shall not bar any aggrieved party from any remedy existing under the common law and statutes of the state against any subdivider, developer, builder or other person for injury to his person or property, or from any other right of action. 
(Code 1985, § 5.262) 
Sec. 24-99. - Notice and hearing. 
    Any plat submitted to the city planning commission shall contain the name and address of a person to whom notice of a hearing shall be sent, and no plat shall be acted on by the planning commission without affording a hearing thereon. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be sent to such person at such address, by registered mail, not less than five days before the date fixed for such hearing. Similar notice shall be mailed to the owners of land immediately adjoining the platted land, as their names and addresses appear upon the latest city tax record. 
(Code 1985, § 5.263) 
Sec. 24-100. - Compliance examination. 
    The planning commission shall examine the map for compliance with the preliminary plat and required changes thereof, and shall forward the map to the city commission, if it is in compliance with the preliminary plat and this division, within 60 days after submission thereof to the planing commission, provided that the applicant may waive such requirement and consent to an extension to such period. 
(Code 1985, § 5.264) 
Sec. 24-101. - Approval by city commission required. 
    No plat shall be transmitted to any county or state approving authority for official action as required by the state platting procedure until each plat shall have, in the first instance, been approved by the city commission in accordance with the regulations of this division and Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(Code 1985, § 5.305) 
Sec. 24-102. - Recording. 
(a)  No person shall sell or convey any lot in any plat by reference thereto until such plat has been duly recorded in the office of the county register of deeds. 
(b)  Every plat approved by the city commission shall, by virtue of such approval, be deemed to be an amendment of, an addition to or a detail of the city plan and a part thereof. 
(Code 1985, § 5.306) 
Sec. 24-103. - Metes and bounds. 
    The description of any lot or parcel in a filed plat of a subdivision, by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transfer, is a violation of this division. 
(Code 1985, § 5.307) 
Sec. 24-104. - Filing fees. 
    The subdivider shall pay a filing fee to the city treasurer at the time a preliminary plat is filed with the city commission. Such filing fee shall be established by resolution of the city commission and shall cover the costs of advertising and notices, checking statements and recording the approved plat. 
(Code 1985, § 5.310) 
Secs. 24-105-24-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 24-121. - Conformance with master thoroughfare plan. 
    Subdivisions shall be in harmony with the master thoroughfare plan of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 5.271) 
Sec. 24-122. - Relation to adjoining street system. 
(a)  The arrangement of streets in a new subdivision shall make provision for the continuation of principal existing streets in adjoining or adjacent subdivisions, insofar as they may be necessary for public requirements. In general, such streets shall be of a width as great as that of the street so continued or projected. The centerline of such streets shall continue with the centerline of existing streets. In general, the streets shall extend to the boundary of the subdivision to provide the proper access to adjoining property, and provide for proper connection with the highway system for contiguous land. 
(b)  Where the plat submitted covers only a part of the subdivider's tract, a sketch of a proposed future street system of the unsubmitted part shall be considered in the light of adjustments and connections with the street system of the part not submitted. 
(Code 1985, § 5.272) 
Sec. 24-123. - Access; reserve strips. 
(a)  Each residential lot within a subdivision shall be provided with a satisfactory means of access. 
(b)  Building permits shall not be issued for the construction of buildings which do not have access on a public street. 
(c)  There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to a street, except where the control of such strips is definitely placed with the city commission. 
(Code 1985, § 5.273) 
Sec. 24-124. - Large allotments. 
    Where the parcel is subdivided into larger tracts than for building lots, the platting shall not be such as to stop the opening of major streets and the extension of adjacent minor streets, which, in the judgment of the city commission, shall ultimately be opened and extended. 
(Code 1985, § 5.274) 
Sec. 24-125. - Street intersections. 
    Streets shall be required to intersect each other at as nearly right angles as practicable. Streets converging at one point shall be reduced to the least practicable number. 
(Code 1985, § 5.275) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40. 
Sec. 24-126. - Streets in relation to railroads. 
    Whenever a subdivision is to be laid out adjacent to a railroad right-of-way, a street shall be placed parallel to the railroad. The intersection of the centerline of the parallel street with that of any street which crosses the railroad shall not be less than 300 feet from the line of the railroad right-of-way. 
(Code 1985, § 5.276) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40. 
Sec. 24-127. - Dedication of half streets. 
    The dedication of half streets will be permitted where a subdivision adjoins undeveloped property and wherever there already exists a dedicated and recorded half street or alley on an adjoining plat, the other half must be dedicated on the proposed plat to make the street or alley complete. 
(Code 1985, § 5.277) 
Sec. 24-128. - Dead-end streets. 
(a)  Dead-end streets will not be approved if they exceed 400 feet in length. 
(b)  Every permanent dead-end street shall be of such width at the closed end as will permit a turning radius of not less than 45 feet. 
(Code 1985, § 5.278) 
Sec. 24-129. - Building lines; minor street width. 
(a)  Building lines shall conform to the requirements of chapter 52 and the master thoroughfare plan. 
(b)  The minimum width for minor streets shall be 60 feet, except in cases where the topography or special conditions make a street of less width more suitable, the city commission may waive such requirement. 
(Code 1985, § 5.279) 
Sec. 24-130. - Street grades. 
    Profiles may be required of all streets, at the discretion of the city commission. The minimum grade allowed shall be one-half percent. 
(Code 1985, § 5.280) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40. 
Sec. 24-131. - Corner radii. 
    Curb corners shall be rounded with a radius of not less than 25 feet. Intersections, where the interior angle is less than 60 degrees, shall have the curb corners rounded with at least a 30-foot radius and when the interior angle is less than 135 degrees, it is recommended that the corner be rounded with a minimum radius of ten feet. Property lines at such corners shall be rounded or otherwise set back sufficiently to permit such construction. 
(Code 1985, § 5.281) 
Sec. 24-132. - Access to streets across watercourses and ditches. 
    The subdivider shall provide access to all proposed streets across watercourses or ditches in a standard manner approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1985, § 5.282) 
Sec. 24-133. - Street and subdivision names. 
(a)  All proposed streets obviously in alignment with another already existing and named street must bear the same name. New street names shall not duplicate existing street names and all names must be approved by the city commission. 
(b)  Duplication of proposed subdivision names with the names of already existing subdivisions will not be permitted. 
(Code 1985, § 5.283) 
Sec. 24-134. - Alleys. 
    Alleys, having a minimum width of 20 feet, will be required in the rear of all local business and commercial lots. A diagonal cutoff shall be made at all acute and right angle intersections of alleys, sufficient to provide an inside turning radius of 30 feet. At the intersection of alley lines with street lines, a corner cutoff line shall be provided between points established by measuring a distance of five feet in both directions along the alley line and the street line from the point of their intersection. 
(Code 1985, § 5.284) 
Sec. 24-135. - Easements. 
    Where alleys are not provided, easements of not less than six feet in width shall be provided on each side of rear lot lines and side lot lines, where necessary for utilities, and shall be noted on the record plat. Such easements should be direct and continuous from block to block. Easements of greater width may be required along natural watercourses and channels, and such easements are to conform substantially with the lines of such natural waterways. 
(Code 1985, § 5.285) 
Sec. 24-136. - Monuments. 
    Monuments shall conform to and shall be placed as required by Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(Code 1985, § 5.286) 
Sec. 24-137. - Blocks. 
(a)  Residential blocks shall not be less than 200 feet wide, nor less than 660 feet or more than 1,200 feet long. Where blocks are more than 800 feet long, a ten-foot crosswalk shall be provided near the center of the block. 
(b)  Business, commercial and industrial blocks shall not be less than 280 feet wide, nor less than 280 feet long. Where blocks are more than 280 feet long, a ten-foot crosswalk shall be provided near the center of the block. 
(Code 1985, § 5.287) 
Sec. 24-138. - Lots. 
(a)  Size. 
(1)  No lot classified as residential shall be platted that is less than 80 feet in width and less than 10,000 square feet in area. 
(2)  No lot classified as business, commercial or industrial shall be platted that is less than 40 feet in width and less than 5,000 square feet in area. 
(3)  The subdivider and planning commission shall consider the off-street parking provisions as provided in chapter 52, pertaining to zoning, and make adequate allowance for such parking. 
(b)  Lot lines. All side lot lines should be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines, unless a variation from such requirement will give a better street and lot plan. 
(c)  Double frontage lots. Lots with double frontage shall be avoided, but if provided, the corner lots must have sufficient depth so that a reasonable front yard may be provided on both street frontages to protect similar frontages on adjacent lots in each direction. 
(d)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall have extra width, sufficient to permit the maintenance of building lines on both the front and side. In normal cases, the width required will not be less than the amount of the established building line on the side street, plus the irreducible buildable width and such side yard requirements as are provided in chapter 52. 
(Code 1985, § 5.288) 
Sec. 24-139. - Dedication and reservation of suitable sites for future schools, parks and playgrounds; property unsuitable for building purposes. 
(a)  Due consideration shall be given by the subdivider and planning commission to the dedication or reservation of suitable sites for future schools, parks and playgrounds, and the location of such features is to conform as nearly as possible to the master plan of the city. 
(b)  No property shall be subdivided for residential use if such property is considered unsuitable for building purposes by the city commission. 
(Code 1985, § 5.289) 
Sec. 24-140. - Use. 
(a)  Whenever property is subdivided with the intention that it shall have a use more restricted than that designated in chapter 52, such use shall be stated either in an application for amendment to chapter 52 or in a separate statement filed with the city commission. 
(b)  Property use and area restrictions must be in accordance with chapter 52. 
(c)  Business lots, when platted, shall bear a reasonable relation in number to the probable future number of families constituting the purchasing power of the neighborhood. The city commission will reserve the right to allocate business lots in accordance with its master plan and chapter 52. 
(Code 1985, § 5.290) 
Sec. 24-141. - Variances. 
    Whenever it shall appear to the city planning commission that a variance from or relaxation of the requirements of sections 24-122 to 24-126, inclusive, 24-137 or 24-138 is reasonably desirable to permit proper or efficient use of property or promote the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity or general welfare, such variance from or relaxation of such requirements may be granted, provided, such variance or relaxation shall be finally approved by the city commission before such variance or relaxation shall be effective. 
(Code 1985, § 5.291) 
Secs. 24-142-24-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - UTILITIES AND IMPROVEMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 46. 

Sec. 24-161. - Street surfacing, sidewalks, sewer and water. 
(a)  A plat will not be approved or dedication of a street accepted unless the following improvements are installed or a bond furnished to guarantee the improvements: 
(1)  Storm sewers and sanitary sewers; 
(2)  Stormwater inlets; 
(3)  House connections from sewers to beyond the curb location; 
(4)  Water mains with house connections to beyond the curb location; 
(5)  Off-street parking facilities in conjunction with business lots; 
(6)  Sidewalks; and 
(7)  Construction of roadways to the approved grade, together with street curbs, gutters and street pavements of concrete or bituminous concrete. 
(b)  House connections from sewers to beyond the curb location for storm sewers shall be required where soil of poor absorptive capacity exists. Where soil of good absorptive capacity exists, and on recommendation of the city engineer, the city commission may waive the requirement for house connections from sewers to beyond the curb location for storm sewers. Plans and specifications must be approved by the city engineer. The fee for reviewing the plans and specifications will be in the amount of one percent of the estimated cost of construction. Such fees shall be paid by the proprietor to the city treasurer on or before the date of submission of the improvement plans and may be used for the purpose of engaging the aid of engineering consultants. The cost of improvements shall be determined by the city manager. A fee adjustment will be allowed at the determination of the final actual cost of construction, as determined by the city manager. The construction must be carried out under the direction of the office of the city engineer in strict accordance with standard city specifications for the various kinds of improvements, as established by this Code or resolution adopted by the city commission. The city engineer will assign a city inspector to the work for such time as may be necessary to ensure full compliance with specifications, and the fees for the inspection services shall be as established by resolution of the city commission. Such fees shall be paid by the proprietor prior to construction and may be used to defray the costs of day-to-day inspections and the expense of engaging consulting engineers in connection with the inspection of such improvements. Fees will be adjusted upon determination of final actual cost of construction or the number of inspection days, as determined by the city manager. 
(Code 1985, § 5.296) 
Sec. 24-162. - Grades of manholes, water gates, hydrants and shutoff boxes. 
    All manholes, water gates, hydrants and shutoff boxes are to be adjusted to proper grade in relation to curb, sidewalk or easement grade. 
(Code 1985, § 5.297) 
Sec. 24-163. - Monuments. 
    All subdivision monuments are to be checked after all improvements are installed and are to be corrected or replaced as necessary and set to within two inches of finished grade. 
(Code 1985, § 5.298) 
Sec. 24-164. - Street signs. 
    When, in the opinion of the city commission, it appears desirable, the placing of street signs of the same type and design in general use within the community shall be required. 
(Code 1985, § 5.299) 
Sec. 24-165. - Street trees. 
    Wherever the planning commission deems it desirable in order to ensure continuity of purpose, street trees shall be planted in conformance with a planting plan approved by the planning commission. 
(Code 1985, § 5.300) 
Sec. 24-166. - Public sewer and water service. 
    Public sewer or water service shall not be provided for any dwelling or other structure located on a lot or plot subdivided or sold in violation of this article, except that such service may be installed in any structure, when deemed necessary by the health department for the protection of the public health. 
(Code 1985, § 5.309) 
Secs. 24-167-24-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LOT SPLITS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Partition of lots, MCL 560.263. 

Sec. 24-201. - Purpose. 
    The provisions set forth in this article shall govern the partitioning or dividing of lots, outlots or other parcels of land in a recorded plat, subject to the provisions of section 263 of the land division act (MCL 560.263). 
(Code 1985, § 5.311) 
Sec. 24-202. - Detached land. 
    Land may be detached from one lot, outlot or parcel and added to another lot, outlot or parcel upon application to, and approval by, the city assessor. Such a division shall be noted upon the city assessment roll and thereafter the enlarged lot, outlot or parcel shall be considered to be a single lot, outlot or parcel for tax assessment and all other purposes. Such division shall not be permitted unless the remainder of the lot, outlot or parcel from which the part was taken meets the minimum requirements of chapter 52, including requirements as to width, area and open spaces. 
(Code 1985, § 5.312) 
Sec. 24-203. - Lots divided into two new lots, outlots or parcels. 
    An outlot or parcel, not including a platted lot created by a subdivision plat, may be divided into two new lots, outlots or parcels upon application to, and approval by, the planning commission. Such division shall be noted upon the city assessment roll and thereafter each separate parcel shall be considered to be a single lot, outlot or parcel for tax assessment and all other purposes. Such division shall not be permitted unless each separate parcel meets the minimum requirements of chapter 52, including requirements as to width, area and open spaces. If water, sewer or other services have been installed within the plat by special assessment, and the lot, outlot or parcel proposed to be divided has been assessed therefor, division shall not be permitted unless the applicant agrees, in writing, to pay into the special assessment district an additional amount, to be determined by the city treasurer or assessor, representing the increased share of the special assessment district which shall be borne by the lot, outlot or parcel as the result of increased benefit received by such lot, outlot or parcel when divided into two separate lots, outlots or parcels. 
(Code 1985, § 5.313) 
Sec. 24-204. - Lots divided into three or four lots, outlots or parcels. 
    An outlot or parcel, not including a lot created by a subdivision plat, may be divided into more than two, but not more than four separate lots, outlots or parcels upon application and recommendation for approval by the assessor to the city commission. A survey showing such proposed divisions, prepared by a civil engineer or land surveyor, and including a proper legal description of each separate lot, outlot or parcel proposed, shall be submitted with the application. If the city assessor recommends approval of the requested division, notice of such recommendation shall be forwarded to the city commission for review and action upon such recommendation. If approval is granted by the city commission, the city clerk shall notify the city assessor of such division, and the fact of such division shall be noted upon the city assessment roll, and thereafter the divided portions of the lot, outlot or parcel shall be considered to be separate lots, outlots or parcels for tax assessment and all other purposes. Such division shall not be permitted unless each of the parts into which such lot, outlot or parcel is to be divided meets the minimum requirements of chapter 52, including requirements as to width, area and open spaces. Where water, sewer or other public services have been installed, lot divisions shall not alter, hinder, or otherwise adversely affect the continuation of those services to the divided lots or any surrounding lots. 
(Code 1985, § 5.314) 
Chapter 26 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; police regulations for dances and dancehalls, § 6-64; offenses, ch. 28; offenses affecting governmental functions, § 28-31 et seq.; traffic and vehicles, ch. 44. 
State Law reference- Mutual assistance agreements, MCL 123.811 et seq.; uniform crime reports, MCL 28.251 et seq.; commission on law enforcement standards act, MCL 28.601 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Minimum employment standards for law enforcement officers. 
    The minimum employment standards for law enforcement officers as established and adopted by the state law enforcement officers training council in accordance with Public Act No. 203 of 1965 (MCL 28.601 et seq.) are adopted by reference as if set out fully in this section. 
(Code 1985, §§ 1.45, 1.46) 
Secs. 26-2-26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE AUXILIARY CORPS 

Sec. 26-31. - Continued. 
    The police auxiliary corps (referred to in this article as the "corps"), established as a voluntary organization to serve gratuitously, composed of persons appointed by the chief of police (referred to in this article as the "chief"), is continued. 
(Code 1985, § 1.51(1)) 
Sec. 26-32. - Chief. 
    The chief shall have complete authority and control over the corps. He may appoint as members thereof any person whom he deems to be qualified, and he may reject any application for membership. He may provide for the training of candidates for membership and for the further training of members. 
(Code 1985, § 1.51(2)) 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq. 
Sec. 26-33. - Membership requirements. 
    No person shall become a member of the corps until he has taken the training and is able to meet all other requirements prescribed by the chief. When so qualified and selected, such person shall then be sworn in as a member of the corps by the chief or by the chief's representative. 
(Code 1985, § 1.51(3)) 
Sec. 26-34. - Police powers; rules and regulations. 
(a)  Members of the corps shall not be a part of, nor affiliated or connected in any official capacity with the city police department. The corps shall have and exercise such limited police powers as may be delegated to the corps by the chief of police. 
(b)  The chief may, by order, establish rules and regulations to govern the corps, including fixing specific duties of its members and provide for maintenance of discipline. The chief may change such orders from time to time. 
(Code 1985, § 1.51(4)) 
Sec. 26-35. - Identification; surrender of city property. 
(a)  An identification card, badge, cap and such other insignia or evidence of identification as the chief may prescribe shall be issued to each member, who must carry the card at all times. 
(b)  Each member shall surrender all city property issued to him upon the termination of his membership. 
(Code 1985, § 1.51(5)) 
Sec. 26-36. - Termination and resignation of membership. 
    The membership of any person in the corps may be terminated by the chief at any time, and such member may resign from the corps upon notifying the chief in writing of his resignation; provided, however, that the personnel regulation of the city manager applicable to full-time, regular city employees shall not be applicable to the corps. 
(Code 1985, § 1.51(6)) 
Sec. 26-37. - Carrying firearms. 
    No member of the corps shall carry any firearm until he has qualified for and received a gun permit and only then while on duty and in uniform and as determined by the chief of police and the city manager. 
(Code 1985, § 1.51(7)) 
Sec. 26-38. - Powers and authority. 
    A member of the corps, when on duty as assigned by the chief, shall have the authority to direct traffic and shall have the same power of arrest granted a member of the police department, subject to any limitations which the chief may impose. 
(Code 1985, § 1.51(8)) 
Sec. 26-39. - Diminishing and expanding membership. 
    The chief may, by order, diminish or expand the membership of the corps. 
(Code 1985, § 1.51(9)) 
Sec. 26-40. - Workmen's compensation. 
    Each member of the corps, while under the direction of the chief during a regular assigned tour of duty, is an employee of the city and is entitled to receive workmen's compensation from the city in accordance with the provisions of the workmen's compensation law of the state. If any member of the corps sustains any illness or injury covered by worker's compensation laws while he is performing assigned duties for the city under the direct supervision of the chief of police or his designated representative and such illness was not caused by his intoxication, self-infliction, or willful misconduct, he or his dependents shall be entitled to receive worker's compensation from the city in accordance with the provision of the worker's compensation laws of the state. 
(Code 1985, § 1.51(11)) 
Secs. 26-41-26-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS 

Sec. 26-71. - Bureau established and empowered. 
    The city hereby establishes a municipal ordinance violations bureau pursuant to Public Act No. 12 of 1994 (MCL 600.8396). The municipal ordinance violations bureau is empowered to accept admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions for which municipal ordinance violation notices have been issued and served by authorized officials, and to collect and retain civil fines for such admissions as prescribed in this article. 
(Code 1985, ch. 8, § 2) 
Sec. 26-72. - Location, supervision, rules and regulations of bureau. 
    The municipal ordinance violations bureau is located at city hall and shall be under the supervision and control of the city manager. The city manager, subject to the approval of the city commission, shall make such rules and regulations as are advisable and necessary to govern the operations of the bureau and appoint any necessary employees to administer the bureau. 
(Code 1985, ch. 8, § 3) 
Sec. 26-73. - Municipal ordinance violation notice. 
(a)  An action for a violation of a municipal ordinance may be commenced by issuance of a municipal ordinance violation notice. Any person receiving any municipal ordinance violation notice shall be advised on the notice as to all matters required by law, including, at a minimum, the: 
(1)  Offense; 
(2)  Time within which the person must contact the municipal ordinance violations bureau for purposes of admitting or denying responsibility; 
(3)  Consequences for failure to pay the required fine or to contact the bureau within the required time. 
(b)  A person receiving a municipal ordinance violation notice may admit responsibility for such violation before the municipal ordinance violation bureau clerk or the clerk's designee. Upon accepting an admission of responsibility, the clerk shall collect from the person the civil fine for such violation as provided in this article. The clerk and employees of the bureau, if any, shall be city employees and shall be appointed to the bureau by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1985, ch. 8, § 4) 
Sec. 26-74. - Citations. 
(a)  An action for a violation of a municipal ordinance may be commenced by issuance of a citation. 
(b)  If commenced by a municipal ordinance violation notice, an action for violation of a municipal ordinance may be removed from the municipal ordinance violations bureau to the district court by issuance of a citation. With respect to any person who fails to admit responsibility and pay the required civil fine within the designated time period, the clerk shall advise the complainant to issue and file a municipal civil infraction citation for the violation with the applicable district. The citation need not comply in all particulars with the requirements of citations as provided by Public Act No. 12 of 1994 (MCL 600.8705-600.8709), but shall consist of a sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the municipal ordinance violation notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond to the citation. A copy of the citation shall be served by first class mail on the alleged violator at the alleged violator's last known address. The violation shall thereafter be processed as a municipal civil infraction as provided by law. 
(c)  Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served in conformity with applicable sections of Public Act No. 12 of 1994 (MCL 600.8705, 600.8707 and 600.8709). 
(Code 1985, ch. 8, § 5) 
Sec. 26-75. - Retention of municipal ordinance violation notices; accounting of admissions and denials of responsibility and civil fines. 
(a)  The municipal ordinance violations bureau clerk shall retain all municipal ordinance violation notices. 
(b)  The clerk shall account to the city commission on a quarterly basis concerning the number of admissions and denials of responsibility made concerning municipal civil infractions and the sum of fines collected. The amounts collected in civil fines shall be turned over to the city treasurer to be credited to the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1985, ch. 8, § 6) 
Sec. 26-76. - Availability of other enforcement remedies. 
    Nothing in this article shall be deemed to obligate the city to initiate its ordinance enforcement activity through the issuance of a municipal ordinance violation notice. The city shall have the right to proceed directly with the issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation for any municipal civil infraction or to take such other enforcement action as is authorized by law. 
(Code 1985, ch. 8, § 7) 
Sec. 26-77. - Municipal civil infractions designated and Code sections affected. 
    Violations of the following chapters and sections of this Code shall be punishable as municipal civil infractions: 
Common Title Chapter Sections Airport 4 All Amusements and entertainments 6 All Animals 8 All Buildings and building regulations 10 All Businesses 12 All Environment 20 All Fire prevention and protection 22 All Land divisions and subdivisions of land 24 All Parks and recreation 30 30-71(1), (5)-(8) 
30-72(1)-(3) 
30-73 
30-75 Peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants 32 All Secondhand goods 34 All Solid waste 36 All Streets, sidewalks and other public places 40 All Use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers 42 Article III Vehicles for hire 48 All Water system 46 Article II Waterways 50 All Zoning 52 All  
(Code 1985, ch. 8, § 8) 
Sec. 26-78. - Schedule of civil fines. 
(a)  Unless a different schedule of fines or penalty is provided for by any ordinance, the following schedule of civil fines payable to the municipal ordinance violations bureau for admissions of responsibility by persons served with municipal ordinance violation notices shall apply: 
(1)  First offense within a three-year period ..... $ 75.00 
(2)  Second offense within a three-year period ..... 150.00 
(3)  Third offense within a three-year period ..... 325.00 
(4)  Fourth or more offense within a three-year period ..... 500.00 
(b)  Whether a subsequent offense occurs within a three-year period shall be determined based on the date of the commission of the offense. 
(Code 1985, ch. 8, § 9) 
Chapter 27 - MEDICAL MARIJUANA FACILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- It should be noted that Ord. No. 2017-009 shall become effective January 7, 2018. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 27-1. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Purpose . The purpose of this chapter is to implement the provisions of Public Act 281 of 2016, being the Michigan Medical Marijuana Facilities Licensing Act, so as to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents and patients of the city by setting forth the manner in which medical marijuana facilities can be operated in the city. Further, the purpose of this chapter is to: 
(1)  Provide for a means of cultivation, processing, and distribution of marijuana to patients who qualify to obtain, possess, and use marijuana for medical purposes under the Michigan Medical Marijuana Act, (MCL 333.26421 et seq.), the Medical Marijuana Facilities Licensing Act (MCL 333.27101 et seq.) and the Marijuana Tracking Act (MCL 333.27901 et seq.); 
(2)  Protect public health and safety through reasonable limitations on marijuana commercial entity operations as they relate to noise, air and water quality, neighborhood and patient safety, security for the facility and its personnel, and other health and safety concerns; 
(3)  Protect residential neighborhoods by limiting the location and the concentration of types of marijuana commercial entities to specific areas of the city; 
(4)  Impose fees to defray and recover the cost to the city of the administrative and enforcement costs associated with medical marijuana facilities; 
(5)  Coordinate with laws and regulations that may be enacted by the state addressing medical marijuana; and 
(6)  To restrict the issuance of medical marijuana facility licenses only to individuals and entities that have demonstrated an intent and ability to comply with this chapter without monitoring by city officials. 
(b)  Legislative intent . This chapter authorizes the establishment of medical marijuana facilities within the City of Clare consistent with the provisions of the Michigan Medical Marijuana Facilities Act; and subject to the following: 
(1)  Medical marijuana cultivation and processing can have an impact on health, safety, and community resources, and this chapter is intended to permit medical marijuana cultivation and processing where it will have a minimal impact. 
(2)  Use, distribution, cultivation, production, possession, and transportation of medical marijuana remains illegal under federal law and state law, and marijuana remains classified as a "controlled substance" by federal law and state law. 
(3)  The regulations for medical marijuana commercial entities are not adequate at the state level to address the impacts on the city of the commercialization of medical marijuana, making it appropriate for local regulation of the impact of medical marijuana commercial entities on communities. 
(4)  Nothing in this chapter is intended to promote or condone the production, distribution, or possession of marijuana in violation of any application law. 
(5)  This chapter is to be construed to protect the public over medical marijuana facility interests. Operation of a medical marijuana facility is a revocable privilege and not a right in the city. There is no property right for an individual or facility to engage or obtain a license to engage in medical marijuana as a commercial enterprise in the city. 
(6)  Because medical marijuana is a heavily regulated industry in the city, all licensees are assumed to be fully aware of the law; the city shall not therefore be required to issue warnings before issuing citations for violations of this chapter. 
(c)  Relationship to federal law . As of the effective date of this chapter [Dec. 12, 2017], marijuana is classified as a schedule 1 controlled substance under federal law which makes it unlawful to manufacture, distribute, cultivate, produce, possess, dispense or transport marijuana. Nothing in this chapter is intended to grant immunity from any criminal prosecution under federal law. 
(d)  Relationship to state law . 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided by the MMFLA and this chapter, a licensee and its employees and agents who are operating within the scope of a valid state-issued operating license are not subject to criminal or civil prosecution under city ordinances regulating marijuana. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided by the MMFLA and this chapter, a person who owns or leases real property upon which a marijuana facility is located and who has no knowledge that the licensee is violating or violated the MMFLA or a provision of this chapter, is not subject to criminal or civil prosecution under city ordinances regulating marijuana. 
(3)  Nothing in this chapter is intended to grant immunity from criminal or civil prosecution, penalty or sanction for the cultivation, manufacture, possession, use, sale, distribution or transport of marijuana in any form that is not in strict compliance with the Michigan Medical Marijuana Act, the Medical Marijuana Facilities Licensing Act, the Marijuana Tracking Act, and all applicable rules promulgated by the State of Michigan regarding medical marijuana. Strict compliance with any applicable state law or regulation shall be deemed a requirement for the issuance or renewal of any license issued under this chapter, and noncompliance with any applicable state law or regulation shall be grounds for revocation or nonrenewal of any license issued under the terms of this chapter. 
(4)  A registered qualifying patient or registered primary caregiver is not subject to criminal prosecution or sanctions for purchasing marijuana from a provisioning center if the quantity purchased is within the limits established under the Michigan Medical Marijuana Act. A registered primary caregiver is not subject to criminal prosecution or sanctions for any transfer of 2.5 ounces or less of marijuana to a safety compliance facility for testing. 
(5)  In the event of any conflict, the terms of this chapter are preempted and the controlling authority shall be the statutory regulations set forth by the MMFLA or the rules adopted by the board to implement, administer or enforce the MMFLA. 
(e)  City liability and indemnification . 
(1)  By accepting a license issued pursuant to this chapter, the licensee waives and releases the city, its officers, elected officials and employees from any liability for injuries, damages or liabilities of any kind that result from any arrest or prosecution of medical marijuana facility owners, operators, employees, clients or customers for a violation of state or federal laws, rules or regulations. 
(2)  By accepting a license issued pursuant to this chapter, all licensees, agree to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its officers, elected officials, employees, and insurers, against all liability, claims or demands arising on account of bodily injury, sickness, disease, death, property loss or damage or any other loss of any kind, including, but not limited to, any claim of diminution of property value by a property owner whose property is located in proximity to a licensed operating facility, arising out of, claimed to have arisen out of, or in any manner connected with the operation of a medical marijuana facility or use of a product cultivated, processed, distributed or sold that is subject to the license, or any claim based on an alleged injury to business or property by reason of a claimed violation of the Federal Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO), 18 U.S.C. Section 1964(c). 
(3)  By accepting a license issued pursuant to the chapter, a licensee agrees to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its officers, elected officials, employees, and insurers, against all liability, claims, penalties, or demands arising on account of any alleged violation of the Federal Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. Section 801 et seq. or Article 7 of the Michigan Public Health Code, MCL 333.7101 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-2. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this chapter, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Applicant means a person who applies for a state operating license. With respect to disclosures in an application, or for purposes of ineligibility for a license, the term applicant includes an officer, director, and managerial employee of the applicant and a person who holds any direct or indirect ownership interest in the applicant. 
    Board means the medical marijuana licensing board created pursuant to part 3 of the MMFLA. 
    Cultivate or cultivation means (1) all phases of marijuana growth from seed to harvest; and (2) the preparation, packaging, and labeling of harvested usable marijuana. 
    Department means the Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs, or its successor agency. 
    Grower means a licensee that is a commercial entity that cultivates, dries, trims, or cures and packages marijuana for sale to a processor or provisioning center. 
    Licensee means a person holding a state operating license. 
    Marijuana means that term as defined in section 7106 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.7106. 
    Marijuana commercial entity means any and all of the following marijuana facilities: 
(1)  A grower. 
(2)  A processor. 
(3)  A secure transporter. 
(4)  A provisioning center. 
(5)  A safety compliance facility. 
    Marijuana facility means a location at which a licensee is licensed to operate under the MMFLA and this chapter. 
    Marijuana plant means any plant of the species Cannabis sativa L. 
    Marijuana-infused product means a topical formulation, tincture, beverage, edible substance, or similar product containing any usable marijuana that is intended for human consumption in a manner other than smoke inhalation. Marijuana-infused product shall not be considered a food for purposes of the Food Law, 2000 PA 92, MCL 289.1101 et seq. 
    Michigan Medical Marijuana Act or MMMA means 2008 IL 1, MCL 333.26421 et seq., as may be amended. 
    Michigan Medical Marijuana Facilities Licensing Act or MMFLA means Public Act 281 of 2016, MCL 333.27101 et seq., as may be amended. 
    Michigan Marijuana Tracking Act means Public Act 282 of 2016, MCL 333.27901 et seq., as may be amended. 
    Paraphernalia means any equipment, product, or material of any kind that is designed for or used in growing, cultivating, producing, manufacturing, compounding, converting, storing, processing, preparing, transporting, injecting, smoking, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body, marijuana. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, limited liability limited partnership, trust, or other legal entity. 
    Plant means any living organism that produces its own food through photosynthesis and has observable root formation or is in growth material. 
    Processor means a licensee that is a commercial entity that purchases marijuana from a grower and that extracts resin from the marijuana or creates a marijuana-infused product for sale and transfer in packaged form to a provisioning center. 
    Provisioning center means a licensee that is a commercial entity that purchases marijuana from a grower or processor and sells, supplies, or provides marijuana to registered qualifying patients, directly or through the patients' registered primary caregivers. Provisioning center includes any commercial property where marijuana is sold at retail to registered qualifying patients or registered primary caregivers and includes medical cannabis dispensaries. A noncommercial location used by a primary caregiver to assist a qualifying patient connected to the caregiver through the Department's marijuana registration process in accordance with the Michigan Medical Marijuana Act is not a provisioning center for purposes of this chapter. 
    Registered primary caregiver means a primary caregiver who has been issued a current registry identification card under the MMMA. 
    Registered qualifying patient means a qualifying patient who has been issued a current registry identification card under the MMMA or a visiting qualifying patient as that term is defined in the MMMA. 
    Registry identification card means that term as defined in the MMMA. 
    Rules means rules promulgated by the department in consultation with the board to implement this Act. 
    Safety compliance facility means a licensee that is a commercial entity that received marijuana from a marijuana facility or registered primary caregiver, tests it for contaminants and for tetrahydrocannabinol and other cannabinoids, returns the test results, and may return the marijuana to the marijuana facility. 
    Secure transporter means a licensee that is a commercial entity that stores marijuana and transports marijuana between marijuana facilities for a fee. 
    State operating license or, unless the context requires a different meaning, "license" means a license that is issued under the MMFLA and this chapter that allows the licensee to operate as one of the following marijuana commercial entities, as specified in the license: 
(1)  A grower. 
(2)  A processor. 
(3)  A secure transporter. 
(4)  A provisioning center. 
(5)  A safety compliance facility. 
    Statewide monitoring system or, unless the context requires a different meaning, system means an internet-based, statewide database established, implemented, and maintained by the department under the Marijuana Tracking Act, that is available to licensees, law enforcement agencies, and authorized state departments and agencies on a 24-hour basis for all of the following: 
(1)  Verifying registry identification cards. 
(2)  Tracking marijuana transfer and transportation by licensees, including transferee, date, quantity, and price. 
(3)  Verifying in commercially reasonable time that a transfer will not exceed the limit that the patient or caregiver is authorized to receive under section 4 of the Michigan Medical Marijuana Act, MCL 333.26424. 
    True party of interest means: 
(1)  For an individual or sole proprietorship: the proprietor and spouse. 
(2)  For a partnership and limited liability partnership: all partners and their spouses. For a limited partnership and limited liability limited partnership: all general and limited partners and their spouses. For a limited liability company: all members, managers, and their spouses. 
(3)  For a privately held corporation: all corporate officers or persons with equivalent titles and their spouses and all stockholders and their spouses. 
(4)  For a publicly held corporation: all corporate officers or persons with equivalent titles and their spouses. 
(5)  For a multilevel ownership enterprise: any entity or person that receives or has the right to receive a percentage of the gross or net profit from the enterprise during any full or partial calendar or fiscal year. 
(6)  For a nonprofit corporation: all individuals and entities with membership or shareholder rights in accordance with the articles of incorporation or the bylaws and their spouses. 
(7)  For a trust: the names of the settlors, trustees and beneficiaries. 
However, true party of interest does not mean: 
(1)  A person or entity receiving reasonable payment for rent on a fixed basis under a bona fide lease or rental obligation, unless the lessor or property manager exercises control over or participates in the management of the business. 
(2)  A person who receives a bonus as an employee if the employee is on a fixed wage or salary and the bonus is not more than 25 percent of the employee's pre-bonus annual compensation or if the bonus is based on a written incentive or bonus program that is not out of the ordinary for the services rendered. 
    Usable marijuana means the dried leaves, flowers, plant resin, or extract of the marijuana plant, but does not include the seeds, stalks, and roots of the plant. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Secs. 27-3-27-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA FACILITIES 

Sec. 27-31. - License and annual fee required. 
(a)  No person shall establish or operate a medical marijuana commercial entity in the city without first having obtained from the city and the state a license for each such facility to be operated. License certificates shall be kept current and publicly displayed within the facility. Failure to maintain or display a current license certificate shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  A nonrefundable, initial application fee to defray the administrative and enforcement costs associated with medical marijuana facilities located in the city of not more than $5,000.00 per licensed facility; and an annual nonrefundable license renewal fee per licensed facility each year thereafter as set by resolution adopted by the city commission. 
(c)  The annual nonrefundable fee required under this section shall be due and payable with the application for a license and upon the application for renewal of any such license under this chapter. 
(d)  The license fee requirement set forth in this chapter shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other licensing and permitting requirements imposed by any other federal, state or city ordinance, including by way of example any applicable zoning or building permits. 
(e)  The issuance of any license pursuant to this chapter does not create an exception, defense, or immunity to any person in regard to any potential criminal liability the person may have for the production, distribution, or possession of marijuana under federal law. 
(f)  A separate license shall be required for each premise from which a medical marijuana facility is operated. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-32. - General license application requirements. 
(a)  A person seeking a license pursuant to the Medical Marijuana Facilities Licensing Act and the provisions of this chapter shall submit an application to the city on forms provided by the city. At the time of application, each applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application fee to defray the costs incurred by the city for background investigations and inspection of the proposed premises, as well as any other costs associated with the processing of the application. In addition, the applicant shall present a suitable form of identification. 
(b)  The applicant shall also provide the following information, under the penalty of perjury, on the city-issued form approved by or acceptable to, the city clerk and public safety chief. Such information is required for the applicant, the proposed manager of the marijuana commercial entity, and all persons who are true parties of interest in the marijuana commercial entity that is the subject of the application: 
(1)  The name, address, date of birth, business address, business telephone number, social security number, and, if applicable, federal tax identification number; 
(2)  If the applicant is a business entity, information regarding the entity, including, without limitation, the names and address of the entity, its legal status, and proof of registration with, or a certificate of good standing from, the State of Michigan, as applicable; 
(3)  The identity of every person having any ownership interest in the applicant with respect to which the license is sought; 
(4)  If the applicant is not the owner of the proposed licensed premises, a notarized statement from the owner of such property authorizing the use of the property for a marijuana facility; 
(5)  A copy of any deed reflecting the applicant's ownership of, or lease reflecting the right of the applicant to possess, or an option reflecting the applicant's right to purchase or lease, the proposed licensed premises; 
(6)  A "to scale" diagram of the proposed licensed premises, no larger than 11 inches by 17 inches, showing, without limitation, building layout, all entryways and exists to the proposed licensed premises, loading zones and all areas in which medical marijuana will be stored, grown, manufactured or dispensed; 
(7)  A comprehensive facility operation plan for the marijuana commercial entity which shall contain, at a minimum, the following: 
a.  A security plan indicating how the applicant will comply with the requirements of this chapter and any other applicable law, rule, or regulation. The security plan shall include details of security arrangements and will be protected from disclosure as provided under the Michigan Freedom of Information Act, MCL 15.231 et seq. If the city finds that such documents are subject to disclosure, it will attempt to provide at least two business days' notice to the applicant prior to such disclosure. 
b.  For grower and processing facilities, a plan that specifies the methods to be used to prevent the growth of harmful mold and compliance with limitations on discharge into the wastewater system of the city. 
c.  A lighting plan showing the lighting outside of the medical marijuana facility for security purposes and compliance with applicable city requirements. 
d.  A plan for disposal of any medical marijuana or medical marijuana-infused product that is not sold to a patient or primary caregiver in a manner that protects any portion thereof from being possessed or ingested by any person or animal. 
e.  A plan for ventilation of the medical marijuana facility that describes the ventilation systems that will be used to prevent any odor of medical marijuana off the premises of the business. For medical marijuana facilities that grow medical marijuana plants, such plan shall also include all ventilation systems used to control the environment for the plants and describe how such systems operate with the systems preventing any odor leaving the premises. For medical marijuana businesses that produce medical marijuana-infused products, such plan shall also include all ventilation systems used to mitigate noxious gases or other fumes used or created as part of the production process. 
f.  A description of all toxic, flammable, or other materials regulated by a federal, state, or local authority that would have jurisdiction over the business if it was not a marijuana business, that will be used or kept at the medical marijuana business, the location of such materials, and how such materials will be stored. 
g.  A statement of the amount of the projected daily average and peak electric load anticipated to be used by the business and certification from a licensed electrician that the premises are equipped to safely accept and utilize the required or anticipated electric load for the facility. 
(8)  Prior to making a modification to a structure that would require a building permit or which would alter or change items required by this subsection, the licensee shall submit to the city and have approved a completed application for modification of premises in the form provided by the city. 
(9)  Proof of insurance. A licensee shall at all times maintain in full force and effect for the duration of the license, worker's compensation insurance as required by state law, and general liability insurance with minimum limits of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence and a $2,000,000.00 aggregate limit issued from a company licensed to do business in Michigan having an AM Best rating of at least A-. A licensee shall provide proof of insurance to the city clerk in the form of a certificate of insurance evidencing the existence of a valid and effective policy which discloses the limits of each policy, the name of the insurer, the effective date and expiration date of each policy, the policy number, and the names of the additional insureds. The policy shall name the City of Clare and its officials and employees as additional insureds to the limits required by this section. A licensee or its insurance broker shall notify the city of any cancellation or reduction in coverage within seven days of receipt of insurer's notification to that effect. The licensee, permittee, or lessee shall forthwith obtain and submit proof of substitute insurance to the city clerk within five business days in the event of expiration or cancellation of coverage. 
(10)  Whether an applicant has been indicted for, charged with, arrested for, or convicted of, pled guilty or nolo contendere to, forfeited bail concerning any criminal offense under the laws of any jurisdiction, either felony or controlled-substance-related misdemeanor, not including traffic violations, regardless of whether the offense has been reversed on appeal or otherwise, including the date, the name and location of the court, arresting agency, and prosecuting agency, the case caption, the docket number, the offense, the disposition, and the location and length of incarceration. 
(11)  Whether an applicant has ever applied for or has been granted any commercial license or certificate issued by a licensing authority in Michigan or any other jurisdiction that has been denied, restricted, suspended, revoked, or not renewed and a statement describing the facts and circumstances concerning the application, denial, restriction, suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal, including the licensing authority, the date each action was taken, and the reason for each action. 
(12)  Whether an applicant has filed, or been served with a complaint or other notice filed with any public body, regarding the delinquency in the payment of, or a dispute over the filings concerning the payment of, any tax required under federal, state, or local law, including the amount, type of tax, taxing agency, and time periods involved. 
(13)  A description of the type of marijuana facility and the anticipated or actual number of employees. 
(14)  An acknowledgement and consent that the city may conduct a background investigation, including a criminal history check, and that the city will be entitled to full and complete disclosure of all financial records of the marijuana commercial entity, including records of deposit, withdrawals, balances and loans. 
(15)  Any additional information that the city clerk or public safety chief reasonably determines to be necessary in connection with the investigation and review of the application. 
(c)  Consistent with the MMFLA and Freedom of Information Act, MCL 15.231 et seq., the information provided to the city clerk pursuant to this section relative to licensure is exempt from disclosure. 
(d)  All marijuana commercial entities shall obtain all other required permits of licenses related to the operation of the marijuana commercial entity, including, without limitation, any development approvals or building permits required by any applicable code or ordinance. 
(e)  If the city clerk identifies a deficiency in an application, the applicant shall have five business days to correct the deficiency after notification by the city clerk. 
(f)  Upon an applicant's completion of the above-provided form and furnishing of all required information and documentation, the city clerk shall accept the application and assign it an application number by facility type. 
(g)  Upon receipt of a completed application, the city clerk may circulate the application to all affected service areas and departments of the city to determine whether the application is in full compliance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-33. - Denial of application. 
(a)  The city clerk shall reject any application that does not meet the requirements of the Medical Marijuana Facilities Licensing Act or this chapter. The city clerk shall reject any application that contains any false, misleading or incomplete information. 
(b)  An applicant is ineligible to receive a license under this chapter if any of the following circumstances exist regarding a true party of interest of the applicant: 
(1)  Conviction or of release from incarceration for a felony under the laws of this state, any other state, or the United States within the past ten years or conviction of a controlled substance-related felony within the past ten years. 
(2)  Within the past five years, conviction of a misdemeanor involving a controlled substance, theft, dishonestly or fraud in any state or been found responsible for violating a local ordinance in any state involving a controlled substance, dishonesty, theft, or fraud that substantially corresponds to a misdemeanor in that state. 
(3)  The applicant has knowingly submitted an application for a license that contains false, misleading or fraudulent information, or who has intentionally omitted pertinent information on the application for a license. 
(4)  Is a member of the board. 
(5)  The applicant fails to provide and maintain adequate premises liability and casualty insurance for its proposed marijuana facility. 
(6)  Holds an elective office of a governmental unit of this state, another state, or the federal government; is a member of or employed by a regulatory body of a governmental unit in this state, another state, or the federal government; or is employed by a governmental unit of this state. This subdivision does not apply to an elected officer of or employee of a federally recognized Indian tribe or to an elected precinct delegate. 
(7)  The applicant, if an individual, has been a resident of this state for less than a continuous two-year period immediately preceding the date of filing the application. This requirement does not apply after June 30, 2018. 
(8)  The applicant fails to meet other criteria established by state-issued rule. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-34. - Issuance of provisional approval certificate. 
(a)  Complete applications for a marijuana facility license determined to be in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter shall be issued a provisional medical marijuana facility approval certificate in accordance with the procedures specified in this section. 
(b)  The city clerk shall issue a provisional medical marijuana facility approval certificate if the inspection, background checks, and all other information available to the city verify that the applicant as a grower, processor, safety compliance facility, or secure transporter has submitted a full and complete application, has made improvements to the business location consistent with the application, complies with applicable zoning and location requirements, and is prepared to operate the business as set forth in the application, all in compliance with the City Code of Ordinances and any other applicable law, rule, or regulation. 
(c)  A provisional medical marijuana facility approval certificate means only that the applicant has submitted a valid application for a marijuana facility license, and is eligible to receive the appropriate marijuana facility license from the board. The applicant shall not locate or operate a marijuana facility in the city without obtaining a license approved by the board and issued by the state. A provisional certificate issued by the city on or before December 31, 2018, will expire and be void after one year, or will expire and be void after six months for a provisional certificate issued on or after January 1, 2019, if such State approval is not diligently pursued to completion by the applicant or on the date that state approval is denied to the applicant, whichever first occurs. 
(d)  The conditions of an approval of a medical marijuana business license shall include, at a minimum, operation of the business in compliance with all of the plans and information made part of the application. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-35. - Issuance of city marijuana facility operating license. 
(a)  An applicant holding an unexpired provisional certificate issued pursuant to this chapter and for which the board has granted the appropriate marijuana facility state operating license shall provide proof of same to the city clerk. 
(b)  Inspection. An inspection of the proposed medical marijuana facility by the city shall be required prior to issuance of the city operating license. Such inspection shall occur after the premises are ready for operation, but prior to the stocking of the business with any medical marijuana, and prior to the opening of the business to any patients or the public. The inspection is to verify that the business facilities are constructed and can be operated in accordance with the application submitted and the applicable requirements of the code and any other applicable law, rule, or regulation. 
(c)  After verification that the business facilities are constructed and can be operated in accordance with the application submitted and the applicable requirements of the code and any other applicable law, rule, or regulation, the city clerk shall issue a city medical marijuana operating license whose term shall run concurrent with the state operating license for the facility. 
(d)  Maintaining a valid marijuana facility license issued by the state is a condition for the issuance and maintenance of the city marijuana facility operating license issued under this chapter and the continued operation of any marijuana facility. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-36. - License forfeiture. 
    In the event that a medical marijuana facility does not commence operations within one year of issuance of a city operating license, the license shall be deemed forfeited; the business may not commence operations and the license is not eligible for renewal. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-37. - License renewal. 
(a)  A city marijuana facility operating license shall run concurrently with the state operating marijuana license issued for the facility, unless revoked as provided by law. 
(b)  A valid marijuana facility license may be renewed on an annual basis by a renewal application upon a form provided by the city and payment of the annual license fee. An application to renew a marijuana facility license shall be filed at least 30 days prior to the date of its expiration. 
(c)  Prior to the issuance of a renewed marijuana facility license by the city, the premises shall be inspected to assure that it and its systems are in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-38. - Transfer, sale or purchase of license. 
(a)  A medical marijuana business license is valid only for the owner named thereon, the type of business disclosed on the application for the license, and the location for which the license is issued. The licensees of a medical marijuana business license are only those persons disclosed in the application or subsequently disclosed to the city in accordance with this chapter. 
(b)  Each operating license is exclusive to the licensee and a licensee or any other person must submit an application for licensure with the city clerk before a license is transferred, sold, or purchased. The attempted transfer, sale, or other conveyance of an interest in a license without prior application with the city clerk is grounds for suspension or revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-39. - License as revocable privilege. 
    An operating license granted by this chapter is a revocable privilege granted by the city and is not a property right. Granting a license does not create or vest any right, title, franchise, or other property interest. Each license is exclusive to the licensee, and a licensee or any other person must apply for and receive the city's approval before a license is transferred, sold, or purchased. A licensee or any other person shall not lease, pledge, or borrow or loan money against a license. The attempted transfer, sale, or other conveyance of an interest in a license without prior board approval is grounds for suspension or revocation of the license or for other sanction considered appropriate by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-40. - Nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  The city may, after notice and hearing, suspend, revoke or refuse to renew a license for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The applicant or licensee, or his or her agent, manager or employee, has violated, does not meet, or has failed to comply with, any of the terms, requirements, conditions or provisions of this chapter or with any applicable state or local law or regulation. 
(2)  The applicant or licensee, or his or her agent, manager or employee, has failed to comply with any special terms or conditions of its license pursuant to an order of the state or local licensing authority, including those terms and conditions that were established at the time of issuance of the license and those imposed as a result of any disciplinary proceedings held subsequent to the date of issuance of the license; or 
(3)  The marijuana commercial entity has been operated in a manner that adversely affects the public health, safety or welfare. 
(b)  Evidence to support a finding under this section may include, without limitation, a continuing pattern of conduct, a continuing pattern of drug-related criminal conduct within the premises of the marijuana commercial entity or in the immediate area surrounding such business, a continuing pattern of criminal conduct directly related to or arising from the operation of the marijuana commercial entity, or an ongoing nuisance condition emanating from or caused by the marijuana commercial entity. Criminal conduct shall be limited to the violation of a state law or regulation or city ordinance. 
(c)  The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide questions that arise in the administration of this chapter, including appeals of suspension and revocations of city operating licenses. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the zoning board of appeals is necessary to reverse an order, requirement, decision, or determination of an administrative official in the application of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Secs. 27-41-27-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPECIFIC MARIJUANA FACILITY REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 27-61. - Grower license. 
(a)  A grower may not hold more than one class of grower license. 
(b)  A grower shall comply with all of the following: 
(1)  Until December 31, 2021, have as an active employee an individual who has a minimum of two years' experience as a registered primary caregiver. 
(2)  While holding a license as a grower, not be a registered primary caregiver and not employ and individual who is simultaneously a registered primary caregiver. 
(3)  Enter all transactions, current inventory, and other information into the statewide monitoring system as required in this act, rules, and the marijuana tracking act. 
(4)  Sell or transfer marijuana seeds or marijuana plants only to another grower by means of a secure transporter. 
(5)  Sell or transfer marijuana, other than seeds, only to a processor or provisioning center by means of a secure transporter. 
(c)  No pesticides or insecticides which are prohibited by applicable law for fertilization or production of edible produce shall be used on any marijuana cultivated, produced, or distributed by a medical marijuana business. 
(d)  A medical marijuana business shall be ventilated so that the odor of marijuana cannot be detected by a person with a normal sense of smell at the exterior of the medical marijuana business or at any adjoining use or property. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-62. - Processor license. 
(a)  A processor license authorizes the purchase or transfer of marijuana only from a grower and sale or transfer of marijuana-infused products or marijuana only to a provisioning center. 
(b)  A processor shall comply with all of the following: 
(1)  Until December 31, 2021, have as an active employee an individual who has, a minimum of two years' experience as a registered primary caregiver. 
(2)  While holding a license as a processor, not be a registered primary caregiver and not employ an individual who is simultaneously a registered primary caregiver. 
(3)  Enter all transactions, current inventory, and other information into the statewide monitoring system as required in this act, rules, and the marijuana tracking act. 
(4)  Transfer marijuana and marijuana-infused products only by means of a secure transporter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-63. - Secure transporter license. 
(a)  A secure transporter license authorizes the storage and transport of marijuana, marijuana-infused products and money associated with the purchase or sale of marijuana and marijuana-infused products between marijuana facilities at the request of a person with legal custody of the marijuana, marijuana-infused products, or money. It does not authorize transport to a registered qualifying patient or registered primary caregiver who is not a licensee. 
(b)  A secure transporter which operates from a marijuana facility located within the city shall secure a license from the city. A state-licensed secure transporter which does not have a facility located in the city, may, without securing a license from the city operate on public streets and highways within the city. 
(c)  A secure transporter shall comply with all of the following: 
(1)  Each driver transporting marijuana, marijuana-infused products, or money related to the purchase or sale of marijuana or marijuana-infused products must have a chauffeur's license issued by the State of Michigan. 
(2)  Each employee of a secure transporter who has custody of marijuana, marijuana-infused products or money that is related to the purchase or sale of marijuana or marijuana-infused products shall not have been convicted of or released from incarceration for a felony under the laws of this state, any other state, or the United States within the past five years or have been convicted of a misdemeanor involving a controlled substance within the past five years. 
(3)  Each vehicle shall be operated with a two-person crew with at least one individual remaining with the vehicle at all times during the transportation of marijuana or marijuana-infused products. 
(4)  A route plan and manifest shall be entered into the statewide monitoring system, and a copy shall be carried in the transporting vehicle and presented to a law enforcement officer upon request. 
(5)  The marijuana and marijuana-infused products shall be transported in one or more sealed containers and shall not be accessible while in transit. 
(6)  A secure transporting vehicle shall not bear markings or other indication that it is carrying marijuana or a marijuana-infused product. 
(7)  A secure transporter is subject to administrative inspection by a law enforcement officer at any point during the transportation of marijuana or marijuana-infused products to determine compliance with this Act. 
(8)  A secure transporter shall enter all transactions, current inventory, and other information into the statewide monitoring system as required in this Act, rules, and the Marijuana Tracking Act. 
(9)  When determining and reporting the route to take, a secure transporter shall select the most direct route that provides efficiency and safety. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-64. - Provisioning center license. 
(a)  Not more than two licensed provisioning centers are authorized consistent with the terms set forth herein: 
(1)  To purchase or transfer marijuana only from a grower; 
(2)  To purchase or transfer marijuana and marijuana-infused products from a processor; and 
(3)  Sell or transfer marijuana and marijuana-infused products only to registered qualifying patients and registered primary caregivers. 
(b)  All transfers of marijuana and marijuana-infused products to a provisioning center from a separate marijuana facility shall be by means of a secure transporter. 
(c)  A provisioning center license authorizes the provisioning center to transfer marijuana to or from a safety compliance facility for testing by means of a secure transporter. 
(d)  An applicant for a medical marijuana provisioning center shall have been a Michigan resident for at least two years. 
(e)  A provisioning center shall comply with all of the following: 
(1)  Sell or transfer marijuana to a registered qualifying patient or registered primary caregiver only after it has been tested and bears the label required for retail sale. 
(2)  Enter all transactions, current inventory, and other information into the statewide monitoring system as required in this act, rules, and the marijuana tracking act. 
(3)  Before selling or transferring marijuana or marijuana-infused products to a registered qualifying patient or to a registered primary caregiver on behalf of a registered qualifying patient, inquire of the statewide monitoring system to determine whether the patient and, if applicable, the caregiver holds a valid, current, unexpired, and unrevoked registry identification card and that the sale or transfer will not exceed the daily purchasing limit established by the board. 
(4)  Not allow the sale, consumption, or use of alcohol or tobacco products on the premises. 
(5)  Not allow a physician to conduct a medical examination or issue a medical certification document on the premises for the purpose of obtaining a registry identification card. 
(f)  No marijuana plants shall be located in a provisioning center. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-65. - Safety compliance facility license. 
(a)  A licensed safety compliance facility is authorized to: 
(1)  Receive marijuana from, test marijuana for, and return marijuana to a marijuana facility; and 
(2)  Receive from, test for, and return 2.5 ounces or less of marijuana to a registered primary caregiver. 
(b)  A safety compliance facility must be accredited by an entity approved by the board by one year after the date the license is issued or have previously provided drug testing services to this state or this state's court system and be a vendor in good standing in regard to those services. The board may grant a variance from this requirement upon a finding that the variance is necessary to protect and preserve the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(c)  An applicant and each investor with any interest in a safety compliance facility cannot have an interest in a grower, secure transporter, processor, or provisioning center. 
(d)  A safety compliance facility shall comply with all of the following: 
(1)  Perform tests to certify that marijuana is reasonably free of chemical residues such as fungicides and insecticides. 
(2)  Use validated test methods to determine tetrahydrocannabinol, tetrahydrocannabinol acid, cannabidiol, and cannabidiol acid levels. 
(3)  Perform tests that determine whether marijuana complies with the standards the board establishes for microbial and mycotoxin contents. 
(4)  Perform other tests necessary to determine compliance with any other good manufacturing practices as prescribed in rules. 
(5)  Enter all transactions, current inventory, and other information into the statewide monitoring system as required in this act, rules, and the marijuana tracing act. 
(6)  Have a secured laboratory space that cannot be accessed by the general public. 
(7)  Retain and employ at least one staff member with a relevant advanced degree in a medical or laboratory science. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Secs. 27-66-27-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 27-91. - Compliance with rules; inspections. 
(a)  A licensee shall strictly comply with the rules and emergency rules that may from time to time be promulgated by the department. 
(b)  A licensee shall adopt and use the statewide monitoring system of inventory control and tracking authorized by the Marijuana Tracking Act so as to provide the capability for the licensee to comply with the state requirements applicable to the type of license held by the licensee. 
(c)  A marijuana facility and all articles of property in the facility are subject to inspection, search and examination at any time by a member of the Clare Department of Public Safety or the Department of State Police. 
(d)  Any failure by a licensee to comply with department rules or the provisions of this chapter is a violation of this chapter and any infraction or violation, however slight, is sufficient grounds for suspension and revocation of licensure under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-92. - Signage and advertising. 
    All signage and advertising for a medical marijuana facility shall comply with all applicable provisions of this Code and the City Zoning Code. In addition, it shall be unlawful for any licensee to: 
(1)  Use signage or advertising with the word marijuana , marijuana or cannabis or any other word, phrase or symbol commonly understood to refer to marijuana unless such word, phrase or symbol is immediately preceded by the word "medical" in type and font that is at least as readily discernible as all other words, phrases or symbols; 
(2)  Use advertising material that is misleading, deceptive or false or that, as evidenced by the content of the advertising material or by the medium or the manner in which the advertising materials is disseminated, is designed to appeal to minors: 
(3)  Advertise in a manner that is inconsistent with the medicinal use of medical marijuana or use advertisements that promote medical marijuana for recreational or any use other than for medicinal purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-93. - Warning signs. 
    There shall be posted in a conspicuous location in each facility a legible sign containing the content of this section warning that: 
(1)  The possession, use or distribution of marijuana is a violation of federal law; 
(2)  It is illegal under state law to drive a motor vehicle or to operate machinery when under the influence of, or impaired by, marijuana; and 
(3)  No one under the age of 18 years is permitted on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-94. - Security requirements. 
(a)  Security measures at all licensed premises shall comply with the requirements of all applicable rules and regulations promulgated by the department. 
(b)  A description of the security plan shall be submitted with the application for a city operating license. The security system, shall be maintained in good working order and provide 24 hours per day coverage. A separate security system is required for each facility. 
(c)  The security plan must include, at a minimum, the following security measures: 
(1)  Cameras . The medical marijuana business shall install and use security cameras to monitor and record all areas of the premises (except in restrooms) where persons may gain or attempt to gain access to marijuana or cash maintained by the medical marijuana business entity. Cameras shall record operations of the business to the off-site location, as well as all potential areas of ingress or egress to the business with sufficient detail to identify facial features and clothing. Recordings from security cameras shall be maintained for a minimum of 45 days in a secure offsite location in the city or through a service over a network that provides on-demand access, commonly referred to as a "cloud". The offsite location shall be included in the security plan submitted to the city and provided to the department of public safety upon request, and updated within 72 hours of any change of such location. 
(2)  Use of safe for storage . The medical marijuana business shall install and use a safe for storage of any processed marijuana and cash on the premises when a business is closed to the public. The safe shall be incorporated into the building structure or securely attached thereto. For medical marijuana-infused products that must be kept refrigerated or frozen, the business may lock the refrigerated container or freezer in a manner authorized by the city in place of use of a safe so long as the container is affixed to the building structure. 
(3)  Alarm system . The medical marijuana business shall install and use an alarm system that is monitored by a company that is staffed 24 hours a day, seven days a week. The security plan submitted to the city shall identify the company monitoring the alarm, including contact information, and updated within 72 hours of any change of monitoring company. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-95. - Visibility of activities; control of emissions. 
(a)  All activities of marijuana commercial entities, including, without limitation, the cultivating, growing, processing, displaying, manufacturing, selling, and storage of marijuana and marijuana-infused products shall be conducted indoors and out of public view. 
(b)  No medical marijuana or paraphernalia shall be displayed or kept in a business so as to be visible from outside the licensed premises. 
(c)  Sufficient measures and means of preventing smoke, odors, debris, dust, fluids and other substances from exiting a marijuana commercial entity must be provided at all times. In the event that any odors, debris, dust, fluids or other substances exit a marijuana commercial entity, the owner of the subject premises and the licensee shall be jointly and severally liable for such conditions and shall be responsible for immediate, full clean-up and correction of such condition. The licensee shall properly dispose of all such materials, items and other substances in a safe, sanitary and secure manner and in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-96. - Marijuana cultivation. 
(a)  Cultivation, generally: 
(1)  No marijuana cultivation shall be conducted openly or publicly. 
(2)  Marijuana cultivation shall comply with all applicable requirements of the laws and regulations of the city and the state. 
(3)  Marijuana cultivation shall not occur in detached outbuildings. 
(4)  All marijuana cultivation shall take place in a locked and enclosed space. 
(b)  All marijuana products kept on premises where marijuana plants are grown shall be stored in a locked and enclosed space. 
(c)  The use of any lighting for indoor marijuana cultivation shall be limited to light-emitting diodes (LEDs), compact fluorescent lamps (CFLs) or other fluorescent lighting. All high-intensity discharge (HID) lighting, including, but not limited to, mercury vapor lamps, metal-halide (MH) lamps, ceramic MH lamps, sodium-vapor lamps, high-pressure sodium (HPS) lamps and xenon short-arc lamps, is prohibited. 
(d)  No marijuana cultivation activity shall result in the emission of any gas, vapors, odors, smoke, dust, heat or glare that is noticeable at or beyond the property line of the dwelling at which the cultivation occurs. Sufficient measures and means of preventing the escape of such substances from a dwelling must be provided at all times. In the event that any gas, vapors, odors, smoke, dust, heat or glare or other substances exit a dwelling, the owner of the subject premises shall be liable for such conditions and shall be responsible for immediate, full clean-up and correction of such condition. The owner shall properly dispose of all such materials, items and other substances in a safe, sanitary and secure manner and in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. In the event there is a lessee of the subject premises, the owner and the lessee shall be jointly and severally liable for such conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-97. - Odor control. 
(a)  No person, tenant, occupant, or property owner shall permit the emission of marijuana odor from any source to result in detectable odors that leave the premises upon which they originated and interfere with the reasonable and comfortable use and enjoyment of another's property. 
(b)  Whether or not a marijuana odor emission interferes with the reasonable and comfortable use and enjoyment of a property shall be measured against the objective standards of a reasonable person of normal sensitivity. 
(c)  A grower or a processor shall install and maintain in operable condition a system which precludes the emission of marijuana odor from the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-98. - Separation of licensed premises. 
    A grower facility and processor facility are separate medical marijuana commercial entities requiring separate licenses and separate premises, although consistent with the zoning ordinance may occupy one zoning parcel. In addition to all other application requirements for separate premises, each business shall: 
(1)  Have separate operations, ventilation, security, and fire suppression systems, and separate access from a public area. 
(2)  Be divided within a building from floor to roof. Unless higher performance is required by applicable law, there must be a minimum of a one-hour fire separation between a medical marijuana business and any adjacent business. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-99. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit the consumption of alcohol beverages on the licensed premises. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee holding a provisioning center license, or for any agent, manager or employee thereof, to: 
(1)  Sell, give, dispense or otherwise distribute medical marijuana or medical marijuana paraphernalia from any outdoor location; 
(2)  Sell, give, dispense or otherwise distribute to any patient or primary caregiver who is not a licensee more usable form of medical marijuana (including the useable marijuana equivalent of medical marijuana-infused products) within any seven-day period of time than they are allowed by the MMMA to possess. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for retail marijuana establishments to distribute marijuana or marijuana-infused products to a consumer free of charge. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit the consumption of retail marijuana or retail marijuana products on the licensed premises. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell marijuana or marijuana products at a licensed provisioning center at any time other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. daily. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-100. - Reports of crime. 
    Reports of all criminal activities or attempts of violation of any law at the medical marijuana facility or related thereto shall be reported to Clare Department of Public Safety within 12 hours of occurrence, or its discovery, whichever is sooner. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-101. - Inspection of licensed premises. 
(a)  During all business hours and other times when the premises are occupied by the licensee or an employee or agent of the licensee, all licensed premises shall be subject to examination and inspection by department of public safety and all other city departments for the purpose of investigating and determining compliance with the provisions of this chapter and any other applicable state and local laws or regulations. 
(b)  Consent to inspection. Application for a medical marijuana business license or operation of a medical marijuana business, or leasing property to a medical marijuana business, constitutes consent by the applicant, and all owners, managers and employees of the business, and the owner of the property to permit the city manager to conduct routine examinations and inspections of the medical marijuana business to ensure compliance with this chapter or any other applicable law, rule or regulation. For purposes of this chapter, examinations and inspections of medical marijuana businesses and recordings from security cameras in such businesses are part of the routine policy of enforcement of this chapter for the purpose of protecting the public safety, individuals operating and using the services of the medical marijuana business, and the adjoining properties and neighborhood. 
(c)  Application for a medical marijuana business license constitutes consent to the examination and inspection of the business as a public premise without a search warrant, and consent to seizure of any surveillance records, camera recordings, reports, or other materials required as a condition of a medical marijuana license without a search warrant. 
(d)  A licensee, or an employee or agent of the licensee, shall not threaten, hinder or obstruct a law enforcement officer or a city inspector or investigator in the course of making an examination or inspection of the licensed premises and shall not refuse, fail, or neglect to cooperate with a law enforcement officer, inspector, or investigator in the performance of his or her duties to enforce this chapter, the MMFLA, or applicable state administrative rules. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-102. - Financial statements. 
    Within 30 days after the end of the state fiscal year, each licensee shall transmit to the city financial statements of the licensee's total operations. The financial statements shall be reviewed by a certified public accountant licensed in this state. The financial statements shall be in a manner and form prescribed by the board. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-103. - Additional requirements. 
(a)  No medical marijuana business may use metals, butane, propane, or other flammable product, or produce flammable vapors, to process marijuana unless the process used and the premises are verified as safe and in compliance with all applicable codes by a qualified industrial hygienist. 
(b)  The city shall require the business to obtain verification from a qualified industrial hygienist that the manner in which the business is producing medical marijuana complies with all applicable laws and does not produce noxious or dangerous gases or odors or otherwise create a danger to any person or entity in or near the businesses. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-104. - Other laws remain applicable. 
    To the extent the state adopts in the future any additional or stricter law or regulation governing the sale or distribution of medical marijuana, the additional or stricter regulation shall control the establishment or operation of any marijuana commercial entity in the city. Compliance with any applicable state law or regulation shall be deemed an additional requirement for issuance or denial of any license under this article, and noncompliance with any applicable state law or regulation shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of any license issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-105. - Grant of administrative authority. 
    The city clerk is granted the power and duty to fully and effectively implement and administer the license application process and issuance of provisional approval certificates and operating licenses issued by the city under this chapter. The city clerk, after consultation with other city departments, shall promulgate such rules as necessary to implement and administer this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-106. - Violations and penalties. 
    In addition to the possible denial, suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of a license under the provisions of this chapter, any person, including, but not limited to, any licensee, manager or employee of a marijuana commercial entity, or any customer of such business, who violates any of the provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with section 1-7 of this Code unless a different penalty is provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-107. - Repealer. 
    All former ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting or inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 27-108. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, said portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006 , 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-009 , 12-4-2017) 
Chapter 28 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Law enforcement, ch. 26; traffic and vehicles, ch. 44. 
State Law reference- Michigan penal code, MCL 750.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Aiding and abetting. 
    Whenever any act is prohibited by this Code, an amendment thereof or any rule or regulation adopted thereunder, such prohibition shall extend to and include the causing, securing, aiding or abetting of another person to do such act. 
(Code 1985, § 1.7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 767.39. 
Secs. 28-2-28-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AFFECTING GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; law enforcement, ch. 26. 

Sec. 28-31. - False representation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Falsely represent himself to be a city officer or employee; 
(2)  Attempt to impersonate any such officer or employee; or 
(3)  Perform any official act on behalf of any such officer or employee, without authority. 
(Code 1985, § 1.51(1)) 
Sec. 28-32. - Obstructing police and peace officers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, resist, hinder or oppose any member of the police force or any peace officer in the discharge of his duties as such. 
(Code 1985, § 9.102(25)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.479. 
Sec. 28-33. - False alarm of fire. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Raise a false alarm of fire at any gathering or in any public place. 
(2)  Ring any bell or operate any mechanical apparatus, electrical apparatus or combination thereof for the purpose of creating a false alarm of fire. 
(3)  Raise a false alarm of fire orally, by telephone or in person. 
(Code 1985, § 9.181) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.240. 
Sec. 28-34. - False reports of crime. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to summon, as a joke, prank or otherwise, without any good reason therefor, by telephone or otherwise, the police, fire department or any public or private ambulance to go to any address where the service called for is not needed. 
(Code 1985, § 9.102(34)) 
State Law reference- False fire alarms, MCL 750.240; false report of crime, MCL 750.411a. 
Secs. 28-35-28-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 

Sec. 28-61. - Assault and battery. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault or assault and battery on any person. 
(Code 1985, § 9.102(1)) 
State Law reference- Assaults, MCL 750.81 et seq. 
Sec. 28-62. - Harassment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, with the intent to harass, annoy or alarm another person, to: 
(1)  Follow a person in or about a public place; or 
(2)  Engage in a course of conduct or repeatedly commit acts that alarm or seriously annoy another person and that serve no legitimate purpose. 
(Code 1985, § 9.102(14), (30)) 
Sec. 28-63. - Window peeping. 
    No person shall be found looking into the windows or doors of any house, apartment or other residence in the city in such a manner as would be likely to interfere with the occupant's reasonable expectation of privacy and without the occupant's express or implied consent. 
(Code 1985, § 9.102(6)) 
State Law reference- Such person deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(c). 
Sec. 28-64. - Malicious use of service provided by telecommunications service provider. 
    A person is guilty of a misdemeanor who maliciously uses any service provided by a telecommunications service provider with the intent to terrorize, frighten, intimidate, threaten, harass, molest or annoy another person, or to disturb the peace and quiet of another person by any of the following: 
(1)  Threatening physical harm or damage to any person or property in the course of a conversation or message through the use of a telecommunications service or device. 
(2)  Falsely and deliberately reporting by message through the use of a telecommunications service or device that a person has been injured, has suddenly taken ill, has suffered death or has been the victim of a crime or an accident. 
(3)  Deliberately refusing or failing to disengage a connection between a telecommunications device and another telecommunications device or between a telecommunications device and other equipment provided for the transmission of messages through the use of a telecommunications service or device. 
(4)  Using vulgar, indecent, obscene or offensive language or suggesting any lewd or lascivious act in the course of a conversation or message through the use of a telecommunications service or device. 
(5)  Repeatedly initiating a telephone call and, without speaking, deliberately hanging up or breaking the telephone connection as or after the telephone call is answered. 
(6)  Making an unsolicited commercial telephone call that is received between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "an unsolicited commercial telephone call" means a call made by a person or recording device on behalf of a person soliciting business or contributions. 
(7)  Deliberately engaging or causing to engage the use of a telecommunications service or device of another person in a repetitive manner that causes interruption in telecommunications service or prevents the person from utilizing his telecommunications service or device. 
(Code 1985, § 9.105) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.540e. 
Secs. 28-65-28-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 

Sec. 28-91. - Malicious mischief. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully destroy, damage or in any manner deface any property not his own, or any public school building, public building, bridge, fire hydrant, streetlight, street sign or parking meter, or mark or post handbills on or in any manner mar the walls of any public building, or destroy, take or meddle with any property belonging to the city or remove such property from the building or place where it may be kept, placed or stored, without proper authority. 
(Code 1985, § 9.102(13)) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief generally, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 28-92. - Spitting on public property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to spit on any sidewalk, the floor or seat of any public carrier or any floor, wall, seat or equipment of any place of public assemblage. 
(Code 1985, § 9.102(28)) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40. 
Sec. 28-93. - Prowling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to prowl about any alley or the private premises of any other person in the nighttime, without authority or the permission of the owner of such premises. 
(Code 1985, § 9.102(27)) 
State Law reference- Trespassing generally, MCL 750.546 et seq. 
Secs. 28-94-28-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 

Sec. 28-121. - Obstructing public passage. 
    Any person who shall collect or stand in crowds, or arrange, encourage or abet the collection of persons in crowds in any public place for any unlawful or mischievous purpose, or who shall loiter on any street or sidewalk, or any park or public building, or conduct himself in any public place so as to obstruct the free and uninterrupted passage of the public, create a disturbance by which the peace and good order of the neighborhood is disturbed or interfere with the peaceful and lawful conduct of any public or private business, and who shall fail to disperse upon the request of a law enforcement officer of the city, County of Clare or state, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1985, § 9.103) 
State Law reference- Riots and unlawful assemblies, MCL 752.541 et seq. 
Sec. 28-122. - Loitering. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Loitering on private property includes the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking aimlessly, and shall also include knowingly or willingly entering upon the property of another, without the consent of the owner, lessee or other person rightfully in charge or possession thereof, if either of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The premises is fenced or enclosed in a manner to exclude intruders; or 
(2)  Notice against trespass is given by posting the premises in a conspicuous manner. 
(b)  Certain types of loitering prohibited. 
(1)  No person shall loiter in a public place in such manner as to: 
a.  Create, or cause to be created, any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person; 
b.  Create, or cause to be created, a danger of breach of the peace; 
c.  Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; 
d.  Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public place. 
(2)  This subsection (b) shall include the making of any unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or which are calculated to annoy or disturb the person to or in whose hearing such remarks are made. 
(c)  Request to leave. Whenever the presence of any person in any public place is causing any of the conditions enumerated in subsection (b) of this section, the owner, lessee or person rightfully in charge or possession thereof or any police officer may order that person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse to leave after being ordered to do so shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(Code 1985, § 9.104) 
Sec. 28-123. - Begging and soliciting alms by accosting or forcing oneself upon the company of another. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accosting means approaching or speaking to a person in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon the person or property in his immediate possession. 
    Ask, beg or solicit means, without limitation, the spoken, written or printed word or such other acts as are conducted in furtherance of the purpose of obtaining alms. 
    Forcing oneself upon the company of another means continuing to request, beg or solicit alms from a person after that person has made a negative response, blocking the passage of the individual addressed, or otherwise engaging in conduct which could reasonably be construed as intended to compel or force a person to accede to demands. 
(b)  Exceptions. Except when performed in the manner and locations set forth in subsections (c) and (d) of this section, it shall not be unlawful to ask, beg or solicit money or other things of value. 
(c)  Location. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value: 
(1)  On private property if the owner, tenant or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; 
(2)  Within 15 feet of the entrance to, or exit from, any public toilet facility; 
(3)  Within 15 feet of an automatic teller machine, provided that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance to, or exit from, the automated teller machine facility; 
(4)  Within 15 feet of any pay telephone, provided that when a pay telephone is located within a telephone booth or other facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance to, or exit from, the telephone booth or facility; 
(5)  In any public transportation vehicle, bus or subway station, or within 15 feet of any bus stop or taxistand; 
(6)  From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the owner or passenger of such vehicle; 
(7)  From any person who is waiting in line for entry to any building, public or private, including any residence, business or athletic facility; or 
(8)  Within 15 feet of the entrance to, or exit from, a building, public or private, including any residence, business or athletic facility. 
(d)  Manner. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value by: 
(1)  Accosting another; or 
(2)  Forcing oneself upon the company of another. 
(Code 1985, § 9.102(7)) 
Sec. 28-124. - Disorderly intoxication. 
    No person shall be intoxicated in a public place and either endanger directly the safety of themselves, another person or property, or act in a manner that causes a public disturbance. 
(Code 1985, § 9.102(2)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.167(1)(e). 
Sec. 28-125. - Public impairment by controlled substances. 
    No person shall be present in any public place with his ability to walk, talk or see significantly impaired by the use of any controlled substance as defined by article 7 of the Michigan public health code (MCL 333.7101 et seq.); provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to apply to a person whose faculties have been impaired by medication prescribed by a physician and when taken as directed. 
(Code 1985, § 9.102(3)) 
Sec. 28-126. - Language or gestures causing public disorder. 
    A person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor if, with the purpose of causing public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, or if his conduct is likely to cause public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, such person willfully uses abusive or obscene language or makes an obscene gesture to any other person when such words, by their very utterance, inflict injury or tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace and invade the right of others to pursue their lawful activities. 
(Code 1985, § 9.102(9)) 
Sec. 28-127. - Jostling and roughly crowding persons in public places. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to jostle or roughly crowd persons in any street, alley, park or public building. 
(Code 1985, § 9.102(16)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.167(1)(l). 
Sec. 28-128. - Public disturbances. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any disturbance, fight or quarrel in a public place. 
(Code 1985, § 9.102(15)) 
Sec. 28-129. - Loud, boisterous and vulgar conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the public peace and quiet by loud, boisterous or vulgar conduct. 
(Code 1985, § 9.102(23)) 
State Law reference- Disturbing public places, MCL 750.170. 
Sec. 28-130. - Disturbing lawful assemblages. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any school, meeting or congregation lawfully assembled, whether religious, political or otherwise. 
(Code 1985, § 9.102(29)) 
State Law reference- Disturbing public places, MCL 750.170. 
Secs. 28-131-28-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY 

Sec. 28-161. - Discharge of weapons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm, air rifle, air pistol, bow and arrow or crossbow. 
(Code 1985, § 9.102(4)) 
State Law reference- Discharge of weapons, MCL 750.234 et seq. 
Sec. 28-162. - Display of fireworks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fire, discharge, display or possess any fireworks, except of the type and under the conditions permitted by chapter 39 of the Penal Code of the state (MCL 750.243a et seq.). 
(Code 1985, § 9.102(5)) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 22. 
Sec. 28-163. - Loitering in streets and sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to play any ball game in any public street or sidewalk or otherwise obstruct traffic on any street or sidewalk by collecting in groups thereon, for any purpose. 
(Code 1985, § 9.102(17)) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40. 
Sec. 28-164. - Throwing objects from moving automobiles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wrongfully throw or propel any snowball, missile or object from any moving automobile. 
(Code 1985, § 9.102(31)) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 44. 
Sec. 28-165. - Throwing objects at persons and automobiles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wrongfully throw or propel any snowball, missile or object toward any person or automobile. 
(Code 1985, § 9.102(32)) 
Sec. 28-166. - Abandoned refrigerators. 
(a)  No person shall leave outside of any building or dwelling, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended, available or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight door or lock which may not be easily released for opening from the inside of such icebox, refrigerator, container or compartment. 
(b)  No person shall leave outside of any building or dwelling, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any container of any kind, or compartment of any kind, which has a snap lock or other device thereon, without first removing the snap lock or the doors of such icebox, refrigerator, container or compartment, unless the doors thereto are securely fastened by the use of chains, locks or other devices adequate to prevent the opening of such doors. 
(Code 1985, §§ 9.51, 9.52) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.493d. 
Sec. 28-167. - Hunting within city limits. 
    No person shall discharge a firearm, air gun, spring gun, BB gun, pellet gun, bow and arrow, sling-shot, trapping equipment or other dangerous weapon or instrument for the purpose of hunting or trapping within the city limits. Provided, however, that in order to provide for wildlife management and control, specific parcels within the city, including the City of Clare Municipal Airport, may be opened to hunting upon conditions stipulated by the city and the Wildlife Management Authorities of the State of Michigan and conditioned upon issuance of a written permit by the city commission. Every person hunting pursuant to such a permit shall have in his immediate possession the written permit issued by the city manager under the authority of the city commission and shall display the permit upon demand of any city employee, police officer or officer of the state department of natural resources. Nothing contained herein or in any permit issued by the city manager shall be construed to relieve a hunter of the duties and obligations imposed under state law or the rules and regulations promulgated by the state department of natural resources. 
(Ord. No. 2008-01, 3-3-2008; Ord. No. 2017-003 , 9-18-2017) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 8. 
Secs. 28-168-28-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS 

Sec. 28-201. - Indecent exposure. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any indecent exposure of his person or of the person of another. 
(Code 1985, § 9.102(11)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.335a. 
Sec. 28-202. - Public nudity. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public nudity means knowingly or intentionally displaying in a public place, or for payment or promise of payment by any person, including, but not limited to, payment or promise of payment of an admission fee, of any individual's genitals or anus with less than a fully opaque covering. 
(b)  Prohibitions. 
(1)  Public nudity within the city boundaries is hereby prohibited. 
(2)  No person shall aid or abet the knowing or intentional display in a public place, or for payment or promise of payment by any person, including, but not limited to, payment or promise of payment of an admission fee, of any individual's genitals or anus with less than a fully opaque covering, or a female individual's breast with less than a fully opaque covering of the nipple and areola. A mother's breastfeeding of her baby does not under any circumstances constitute nudity, irrespective of whether or not the nipple is covered during or incidental to the feeding. 
(c)  Applicability. This section applies only to live exhibitions and/or film or videotape displays intended for on-premises viewing. 
(d)  Knowledge presumed. The following persons are presumed to know of the display of public nudity with regard to any premises or business: 
(1)  Record land owner or land contract owner or lessee under a written lease; 
(2)  Licensee of any premises licensed by the state liquor control commission; 
(3)  Licensee under any sales tax license issued by the state department of treasury; 
(4)  Manager or operator of any premises or business, who is on or at the premises at the time of the advertising or display of public nudity. 
(Code 1985, § 9.102(8)) 
State Law reference- Authority for this section, MCL 117.5h. 
Sec. 28-203. - Prostitution. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any act of prostitution. 
(Code 1985, § 9.102(18)) 
State Law reference- Prostitution generally, MCL 750.448 et seq. 
Sec. 28-204. - Soliciting and accosting persons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or accost any person for the purpose of inducing the commission of an illegal act. 
(Code 1985, § 9.102(20)) 
State Law reference- Soliciting or accosting, MCL 750.448. 
Sec. 28-205. - Transportation of persons to enable gambling and illegal acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly transport any person to a place where prostitution or gambling is practiced, encouraged or allowed for the purpose of enabling such person to engage in gambling or any illegal or immoral act. 
(Code 1985, § 9.102(21)) 
Sec. 28-206. - Maintaining gaming rooms and devices. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain a gaming room, gaming tables or any policy or pool tickets used for gaming, or knowingly suffer a gaming room, gaming tables or any policy or pool tickets to be kept, maintained, played or sold on any premises occupied or controlled by him. 
(Code 1985, § 9.102(22)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.303. 
Sec. 28-207. - Maintaining place of resort for disorderly persons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or suffer any place occupied or controlled by him to be a resort of noisy, boisterous or disorderly persons. 
(Code 1985, § 9.102(24)) 
Sec. 28-208. - Attending or operating illegal businesses or occupations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to attend, frequent, operate or be an occupant or inmate of any place where prostitution, gambling, the illegal sale of alcoholic liquor or any other illegal business or occupation is permitted or conducted. 
(Code 1985, § 9.102(19)) 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 12. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.167(1)(i), (j). 
Sec. 28-209. - Consumption of alcoholic liquor in public. 
    No alcoholic liquor shall be consumed on the public streets, parks or any other public places, including any store or establishment doing business with the public and not licensed to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises; nor shall any person who owns, operates or controls any such public establishment or store permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor therein. 
(Code 1985, § 9.162) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 436.1915. 
Secs. 28-210-28-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES AFFECTING UNDERAGE PERSONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 28-241-28-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY 

Sec. 28-261. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Delinquent acts means acts which violate the laws of the United States, the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city. In addition, acts which cause, or tend to cause, the minor to come under the jurisdiction of the juvenile division of the probate code as defined by MCL 712A.1 or acts by which the minor intentionally causes physical harm to another or deliberately creates a reasonable risk of physical harm to himself or others. Such term, as used in this division, includes traffic violations. 
    Drugs means any controlled substance as defined by the public health code for the state. Currently, such substances are defined in part 72 of the health code (MCL 333.7201 et seq.). 
    Minor means any unemancipated person under 17 years of age. 
    Parent means a mother, father or legal guardian of a minor who has the responsibility for the health, welfare, care, maintenance and supervision of the minor at the time a delinquent act is alleged to have been committed by the minor. 
(Code 1985, ch. 118, § 1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 28-262. - Enumerated. 
    It is the continuous duty of the parent of any minor to exercise reasonable control to prevent the minor from committing any delinquent act, including, without limitation, the following parental duties: 
(1)  Keep illegal drugs or illegal firearms out of the home and legal firearms locked in places that are inaccessible to the minor, except those used for hunting in accordance with local ordinances and state law, and with the knowledge and supervision of a parent. 
(2)  Know the curfew ordinance of the city and/or state, and require the minor to observe the curfew ordinance. 
(3)  Require the minor to attend regular school sessions and forbid the minor to be absent from class without parental or school permission. 
(4)  Properly supervise the minor and arrange proper supervision for the minor when the parent must be absent. 
(5)  Take the necessary precautions to prevent the minor from maliciously or willfully destroying real, personal or mixed property which belongs to the city or is located in the city. 
(6)  Forbid the minor from keeping stolen property, illegally possessing firearms or illegal drugs, or associating with known juvenile delinquents and seek help from appropriate governmental authorities and private agencies in handling or controlling the minor, when necessary. 
(7)  Prevent the minor from maliciously or willfully damaging, defacing or destroying real or personal property belonging to others, and from intentionally and recklessly taking any action which would directly or indirectly cause injury to others. 
(Code 1985, ch. 118, § 2) 
Sec. 28-263. - Notification of parents of minor child taken into custody; penalty for failing to properly act upon notification. 
    Any parent of a minor child who is notified that his minor child has been taken into custody for a violation of this Code or state law, and who thereafter fails or refuses to collect such minor child from the authorities or make provisions for such collection within a period of three hours after notification, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon conviction for a violation of this section, a parent shall be subject to a fine in the amount of the actual costs of the police department in arresting and detaining the minor child. 
(Code 1985, ch. 118, § 3) 
Sec. 28-264. - Parental violation and penalty. 
(a)  If a minor commits a delinquent act, the parent shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if it is proven that any act, word or nonperformance of the parental duty by the parent encouraged, contributed toward, caused or tended to cause the commission of a delinquent act by the minor. 
(b)  Upon the first conviction of violation of this division, the parents shall be subject to a fine of not less than $75.00, or more than $100.00, and/or 16 hours of community service. 
(c)  Upon the second conviction of a violation of this division, the parent shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100.00, or more than $500.00, and up to 24 hours of community service, and in addition, the parent shall be sentenced to probation with the condition that the parent participate in, through completion, a court-approved community based treatment program, such as parenting skills, family services, employment and training, etc., or, in the discretion of the court, be imprisoned for a period of not less than 14 days, nor more than 30 days. 
(d)  Upon the third or subsequent conviction of a violation of this division, the parent shall be subject to a fine of not less than $250.00, nor more than $500.00, and community service in an amount of not less than 32 hours or more than 64 hours, and, in the discretion of the court, imprisonment for a period of not less than 15 days, nor more than 90 days. 
(Code 1985, ch. 118, § 4) 
Secs. 28-265-28-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CURFEW FOR MINORS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Curfew for minors, MCL 722.751; power of city to regulate by ordinance a curfew for minors, MCL 722.754. 

Sec. 28-291. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Harbor includes the tacit or express permission to a child by the owner, proprietor or occupant, or any of their agents, to remain on or about the premises for a time longer than reasonably necessary for the child to transact such business as he may have on or about such premises. 
    Loiter includes aimlessly driving or riding in or on any automobile, motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or any other motor-driven vehicle on the streets, alleys, highways or public thoroughfares of the city without an immediate and predetermined destination. 
    Other public places includes privately owned places of business, and the premises thereof, serving the public or open to the public, such as restaurants, laundromats, gas stations, theaters and other places of public amusement. 
(Code 1985, § 9.147) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 28-292. - Minors under 17 years of age. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 17 years to loiter or remain in or upon any street, alley or public place in the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday of each week, and between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day on Friday and Saturday of each week. 
(Code 1985, § 9.141) 
Sec. 28-293. - Exemptions. 
    The following activities shall be exempt from the curfew requirements of this division where the minor is: 
(1)  Accompanied by his parent, guardian or any other person 21 years of age or older who is authorized by a parent as the caretaker for the minor; 
(2)  On an errand, without any detour or stop, at the direction of his parent, guardian or caretaker; 
(3)  In a vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)  Engaged in a certain employment activity, or going to or from employment, without any detour or stop; 
(5)  Involved in an emergency; 
(6)  On the sidewalk that abuts the minor's or the nextdoor neighbor's residence, if the neighbor has not complained to the police; 
(7)  In attendance at an official school, religious or other recreational activity sponsored by the city, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or from such an activity, without any detour or stop, and supervised by adults; 
(8)  Exercising First Amendment rights, including free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly. 
(Code 1985, § 9.141) 
Sec. 28-294. - Parental responsibility. 
    It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the legal care and custody of any minor under the age of 17 years to allow or permit any such child, ward or other person under such age, while in his legal custody, to loiter or remain, unaccompanied, upon any of the streets, alleys or other public places in the city, within the time prohibited in section 28-292, unless there exists a reasonable necessity therefor. 
(Code 1985, § 9.142) 
Sec. 28-295. - Powers of police. 
    Each member of the police force, while on duty, is hereby authorized to arrest, without warrant, any person within his presence violating any of the provisions of section 28-292 and detain such person for a reasonable time until complaint can be made and a warrant issued and served. No child or minor person arrested under the provision of this section shall be placed in confinement until the parent's wishes or the wishes of such guardian or legal custodian have been ascertained, and the parent, guardian or legal custodian shall refuse to be held responsible for the observance of such section by the minor person. 
(Code 1985, § 9.143) 
Sec. 28-296. - Adults aiding children under 17 years of age to violate curfew. 
    Any person 17 years of age or older, who shall assist, aid, abet, allow, permit or encourage any minor under the age of 17 years to violate the provisions of section 28-292, or shall harbor any such child in any other public place or on its premises, contrary to the provisions of section 28-292, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1985, § 9.144) 
Sec. 28-297. - Parents, guardians and persons having legal care or custody of minors allowing the minors to violate curfew. 
    Any parent, guardian or other person having the legal care or custody of any minor child under the age of 17 years, who shall allow or permit such minor child, while in his legal custody, to loiter, idle or congregate in or upon any public street, highway, alley, park or other public place, contrary to the provisions of section 28-292, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1985, § 9.145) 
Sec. 28-298. - Arrest and prosecution procedure. 
    Arrests and prosecution of minors under the age of 17 years for a violation of this division shall be in accordance with section 14 and the other provisions of Public Act No. 288 of 1939 (MCL 712A.1 et seq.). 
(Code 1985, § 9.146) 
Secs. 28-299-28-320. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - USE OF TOBACCO[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Youth tobacco act, MCL 722.641 et seq. 

Sec. 28-321. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Chewing tobacco means loose tobacco or a flat, compressed cake of tobacco which is inserted into the mouth to be chewed or sucked. 
    School district means a school district, local act school district or intermediate school district, as defined in the school code of 1976, Public Act No. 451 of 1976 (MCL 380.1 et seq.), or a consortium or cooperative arrangement consisting of any combination thereof. 
    School property means a building, facility, structure or other real estate owned, leased or otherwise controlled by a school district. 
    Smoking and smoke mean the carrying by a person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other lighted smoking device. 
    Tobacco product means a preparation of tobacco to be inhaled, chewed or placed in a person's mouth. 
    Tobacco snuff means shredded, powdered or pulverized tobacco which may be inhaled through the nostrils, chewed or placed against the gums. 
    Use a tobacco product means any of the following: 
(1)  Carrying by a person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other lighted smoking device. 
(2)  Inhaling or chewing of a tobacco product. 
(3)  Placing of a tobacco product in a person's mouth. 
(Code 1985, ch. 117, art. II, § 1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Definitions, MCL 722.644, 750.473. 
Sec. 28-322. - Possession of tobacco by persons under 18 years of age. 
    A person under 18 years of age shall not possess, smoke or chew cigarettes or cigars, or inhale chewing tobacco or tobacco snuff, or possess or use tobacco in any other form while on a public highway, street, alley, park or other lands used for public purposes, in a public place of business or amusement, or on school property. 
(Code 1985, ch. 117, art, II, § 2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 722.642. 
Sec. 28-323. - Use on school property. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this division, a person shall not use a tobacco product on school property. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the part of a school property consisting of outdoor dining areas, including, but not limited to, an open air stadium, during either of the following time periods: 
(1)  Saturdays, Sundays or other days on which there are no regularly scheduled school hours. 
(2)  After 6:00 p.m. on days during which there are regularly scheduled school hours. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to the area created and designated by the school system for the use of its employees who smoke as a smoking lounge or area. 
(Code 1985, ch. 117, art. II, § 3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.473. 
Sec. 28-324. - Selling, giving or furnishing tobacco products to persons under 18 years of age; sign. 
(a)  A person shall not sell, give or furnish any cigarette, cigar, chewing tobacco, tobacco snuff or tobacco in any other form to a person under 18 years of age. A person who violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00 for each offense. 
(b)  Beginning 90 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this subsection is derived, a person who sells tobacco products at retail shall post, in a place close to the point of sale and conspicuous to both employees and customers, a sign that includes the following statement: 
"The purchase of tobacco products by a minor under 18 years of age and the provision of tobacco products to a minor are prohibited by law. A minor unlawfully purchasing or using tobacco products is subject to criminal penalties." 
(c)  If the sign required under subsection (b) of this section is more than six feet from the point of sale, it shall be 51/2 inches by 81/2 inches, and the statement required under subsection (b) of this section shall be printed in 36-point, boldface type. If the sign required under subsection (b) of this section is six feet or less from the point of sale, it shall be two inches by four inches, and the statement required under subsection (b) of this section shall be printed in 20-point, boldface type. For the purposes of this section, the term "person who sells tobacco products at retail" means a person whose ordinary course of business consists, in whole or in part, of the retail sale of tobacco products subject to state sales tax. 
(Code 1985, ch. 117, art. II, § 5) 
Sec. 28-325. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  A person who violates this division is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00 for each offense. 
(b)  In addition to the fine stated in subsection (a) of this section, a minor who violates section 28-322 may be required by the court to participate in a health promotion and risk reduction assessment program, if available. A minor who is ordered to participate in a health promotion and risk reduction assessment program under this section is responsible for the cost of participating in the program. In addition, a minor who violates section 28-322 is subject to the following: 
(1)  For the first violation, the court may order the minor to do one of the following: 
a.  Perform not more than 16 hours of community service in a hospice, nursing home or longterm care facility. 
b.  Participate in a health promotion and risk reduction program, as described in this subsection (b). 
(2)  For a second violation, in addition to participation in a health promotion and risk reduction program, the court may order the minor to perform not more than 32 hours of community service in a hospice, nursing home or longterm care facility. 
(3)  For a third or subsequent violation, in addition to participation in a health promotion and risk reduction program, the court may order the minor to perform not more than 48 hours of community service in a hospice, nursing home or longterm care facility. 
(Code 1985, ch. 117, art. II, § 4) 
Secs. 28-326-28-360. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SCHOOL CODE 

Sec. 28-361. - Entry and use of school buildings and property restricted. 
    No person who is not a regularly enrolled student, or parent or guardian thereof, or a school official, teacher or other public or school employee shall enter or trespass upon or loiter in or upon any public, private or parochial school building or school property in the city for any reason whatsoever unless such person has received written permission from the principal or other person designated by the principal to be in or upon, or remain in or upon, such public, private or parochial school building or school property; provided, however, that such written permission need not be secured by persons engaging in or attending a school or recreation board authorized activity or by persons using a school playground or playground equipment after school hours or when school is not in session unless such entry or use shall have been otherwise prohibited by a rule or regulation of the school board, school principal or other person, board or committee with the authority to prohibit such use or entry. 
(Code 1985, ch. 117, art. I, § 1; Ord. No. 2003-016, 4-21-2003) 
State Law reference- Trespassing, MCL 750.546 et seq. 
Sec. 28-362. - Trespassing on school property. 
    No person shall enter or remain in any public, private or parochial school building in the city, except when in attendance as a regularly enrolled student, teacher, administrator or employee, or when engaged in legitimate school business or pursuits. 
(Code 1985, ch. 117, art. I, § 2; Ord. No. 2003-016, 4-21-2003) 
State Law reference- Trespassing, MCL 750.546 et seq. 
Sec. 28-363. - Disturbing schools. 
    No person shall willfully or maliciously make, or assist in making, any noise, disturbance or improper diversion by which the peace, quietude or good order of any public, private or parochial school is disturbed. 
(Code 1985, ch. 117, art. I, § 3; Ord. No. 2003-016, 4-21-2003) 
State Law reference- Disturbing public places, MCL 750.170. 
Sec. 28-364. - Violator to leave premises. 
    Any person found to be in violation of sections 28-361-28-363 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon direction from the superintendent or any designated person, leave the premises. 
(Code 1985, ch. 117, art. I, § 4; Ord. No. 2003-016, 4-21-2003) 
State Law reference- Trespassing, MCL 750.546 et seq. 
Sec. 28-365. - Extortion. 
    No person shall, by violence, threats of violence or other form of coercion, force, or attempt to force, any public, private or parochial school student or other person to give or lend any money or other thing of value to any person at any time. 
(Code 1985, ch. 117, art. I, § 5; Ord. No. 2003-016, 4-21-2003) 
State Law reference- Extortion, MCL 750.213 et seq. 
Sec. 28-366. - Borrowing money or things of value from students in the school or traveling to or from school. 
    No person shall borrow, or attempt to borrow, any money or thing of value from any student in or upon any public, private or parochial school building or school property in the city or during any time when such student is engaging in, going to or returning from any regularly scheduled session or activity of any such school without first obtaining the written approval of the principal of such school or other person designated by the principal to issue such written approval; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to college students who borrow money or things of value from other college students or adults. 
(Code 1985, ch. 117, art. I, § 6; Ord. No. 2003-016, 4-21-2003) 
Sec. 28-367. - Destruction of school property. 
    No person shall damage, destroy or deface any public, private or parochial school building or the grounds, outbuildings, fences, trees or other appurtenances or fixtures belonging thereto. 
(Code 1985, ch. 117, art. I, § 7; Ord. No. 2003-016, 4-21-2003) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 28-368. - Operation of motor vehicles on school property. 
(a)  No person, other than faculty, administration or employees of the public schools, acting in the course of their employment, shall operate a motor vehicle upon any property owned by the public schools unless the person is presently enrolled in such school and not subject to suspension or exclusion therefrom, or is transporting students to or from school property during regular hours of school opening and closing, or is attending an authorized and properly supervised extracurricular activity, and the person shall operate such motor vehicle upon streets and roadways designated for vehicular traffic. 
(b)  No person shall operate any unlicensed motor vehicle upon any property owned by the public schools. 
(Code 1985, ch. 117, art. I, § 8; Ord. No. 2003-016, 4-21-2003) 
Sec. 28-369. - Authority of superintendent to remove certain persons from school buildings or property. 
    The superintendent, or any person designated by the superintendent, with proper authority, may order or cause the removal from school buildings or school property of any individual whom he knows or has reason to believe to: 
(1)  Have been expelled or suspended from school, provided that such expulsion or suspension is in full force and effect; 
(2)  Be an individual who is not a student at the school and has not been either invited to the school by a proper authority or have legitimate business at the school or on the school property; 
(3)  Be indulging in any criminal activity in or on school property, or to conspire to indulge in such activity; 
(4)  Be a nonstudent and have no purpose or business on school property, if the person shall not be able to state any legitimate purpose or business on school property; 
(5)  Be a person who is instigating, or may instigate, by any means whatsoever, a disturbance of any sort on the school property. 
(Code 1985, ch. 117, art. I, § 9; Ord. No. 2003-016, 4-21-2003) 
Chapter 30 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 20; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40; waterways, ch. 50. 
State Law reference- Authority to operate recreation and playgrounds, MCL 123.51 et seq.; playground equipment safety act, MCL 408.681 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Campground means any park or area within a park licensed by the state and designated for the purpose of public camping. 
    Camping means an overnight residence in a temporary sleeping structure tent, tent trailer, motor home, pickup camper, travel trailer, van or any other vehicle or camping unit. 
    Facility means any structure, road, area or any other recreational oriented entity within a park boundary. 
    Motor vehicle means every self-propelled vehicle, gas, electric or other, requiring registration, licensing and/or a valid driver's license or certificate for operation upon a city street, including all offroad vehicles. 
    Park means any plot of land owned or operated by the city, including all facilities within the boundaries of any park, that is provided for recreational activities and the benefit of the public. 
    Parking means standing a vehicle, occupied or unoccupied, loading or unloading, except when making necessary repairs. 
    Parking lot means any off-street area within a park provided for parking any motor vehicle. 
    Written permission means a written authorization for activities or uses ordinarily prohibited by this Code or parks and recreation department policy. Proper written permission is the responsibility of, and may be obtained from, the recreation director of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 3.1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 30-2-30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions, § 2-91 et seq. 

Sec. 30-31. - Created; qualifications to serve. 
    There is hereby created a parks and recreation advisory board consisting of seven members. The composition of such board shall include six members appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city commission, and one member appointed by the city school system. All appointees shall meet the qualifications set forth in sections 5.1 and 5.8 of the city Charter. 
(Code 1985, § 3.10) 
Sec. 30-32. - Terms of office. 
    The six members of the parks and recreation advisory board appointed by the mayor and city commission shall be appointed for a term of three years. The initial members of the board shall have staggered terms, with subsequent appointment for a three-year period. The city school system appointee shall be appointed by the school board on an annual basis, or as the school board otherwise provides. 
(Code 1985, § 3.11) 
Sec. 30-33. - Compensation. 
    Members of the parks and recreation advisory board shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for any reasonable expenses approved by the city commission and incurred in the performance of their assigned duties. 
(Code 1985, § 3.12) 
Sec. 30-34. - Duties and advisory role. 
    The parks and recreation advisory board shall: 
(1)  Advise the city commission and city manager on matters concerning the parks and recreational programming within the city. 
(2)  Make recommendations to the city commission and city manager for the location of sites for parks, facility improvements and recreational areas. 
(3)  Recommend to the city commission and city manager such measures as it deems necessary and proper for the betterment of city recreation programs. 
(4)  Review and make recommendations regarding the annual parks and recreation operating budget. 
(5)  Maintain and update, on an annual basis, the city's five-year recreation plan. 
(Code 1985, § 3.13) 
Sec. 30-35. - Organization and officials; meetings; quorum. 
(a)  Immediately after their initial appointment and at the first meeting of each year thereafter, the parks and recreation advisory board shall meet and organize by electing from their members a chairperson and vice-chairperson. 
(b)  The members shall determine the time and frequency of their regular meetings in compliance with state open meeting requirements. 
(c)  Four members of the board will constitute a quorum. 
(d)  The city manager and/or his representative shall attend the meetings of the board. The city manager shall serve as a representative of the city commission and may participate in discussions, but shall not vote or be counted toward a quorum. 
(Code 1985, § 3.14) 
Sec. 30-36. - Removal from office. 
    A member from the parks and recreation advisory board may be removed from the board after three consecutive unexcused absences. Members of the board shall serve at the pleasure of the city commission and any member may be removed at any time from membership on the board by a majority vote of the city commission. 
(Code 1985, § 3.15) 
Sec. 30-37. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies occurring on the parks and recreation advisory board other than through expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as original appointments are made. 
(Code 1985, § 3.16) 
Sec. 30-38. - Parks and recreation management; limitation of authority. 
    The parks and recreation department of the city will follow the administrative procedures established by the city and directives of the city manager. No authority is granted to the parks and recreation advisory board to contract or otherwise act as agent of the city commission, other than in an advisory capacity. 
(Code 1985, § 3.17) 
Secs. 30-39-30-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 30-71. - General unlawful acts upon park lands. 
    Upon city park lands, it shall be unlawful to: 
(1)  Curfew. Enter or be present within any park between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Only properly registered campers may be present within Pettit Park during the curfew hours. 
(2)  Vandalism and theft. Remove, damage, destroy or deface any tree, shrub or wildflower, or remove, damage, destroy or deface any park facility without written permission. 
(3)  Disorderly conduct. Engage in violent, abusive, loud, vulgar, lewd, obscene or any other disorderly conduct that constitutes a breach of the peace, or disturb or annoy others in their activities. 
(4)  Alcoholic liquors and controlled substances. Possess or consume any alcoholic liquors or other controlled substances within any park. 
(5)  Fires. Burn a ground fire for any reason, except in designated fire pits, grills, fireplaces or units authorized by the city parks and recreation department and the city fire chief. Personal grills are authorized. No fire is to be left unattended at any time. 
(6)  Waste and refuse. Deposit waste or refuse any place except in the authorized containers provided by the parks and recreation department, and deposit waste or refuse in any park container that was generated outside the park boundaries. 
(7)  Peddle or solicit. Peddle or solicit, or post bills or advertisements upon any park lands or facilities without written permission. There shall be no commercial for profit activity within the city parks unless expressly sanctioned by the city. Whether such activities shall be approved within city park land shall be within the sole discretion of the city commission. 
(8)  Overnight storage. Leave any personal property overnight, such as vehicles, camping units, personal grills, tables and other items without written permission. 
(9)  Smoke-free areas. Smoke any substance in or within 25 feet of the boundaries of any area designated as smoke-free. 
(10)  Unsafe playground equipment. Use any park facilities, apparatus, playground equipment or other municipal property in a manner that it is not designed or, or in a manner that may result in injury to self or others, or misuse any park facilities, apparatus, playground equipment or other municipal property, i.e. adults using equipment designed for children, climbing upon fences. 
(Code 1985, § 3.2; Ord. No. 2007-01, 2-20-2007; Ord. No. 2008-01, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 30-72. - Motor vehicle restrictions. 
    It shall be unlawful to do any of the following acts upon any city park lands: 
(1)  Speed limit. Operate any motor vehicle in excess of 15 miles per hour (24 kilometers per hour), except emergency vehicles. 
(2)  Parking. Park any motor vehicle, except authorized service vehicles, any place, except within designated parking areas without written permission. 
(3)  Designated roadways. Operate any motor vehicle any place within a park, except on designated roadways without written permission. 
(4)  Operation. Operate any motor vehicle in an unsafe or destructive manner so as to endanger public or private property or public safety. 
(Code 1985, § 3.3) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 44. 
Sec. 30-73. - Animals and pets. 
    It shall be unlawful to do any of the following acts upon city park lands: 
(1)  Wildlife. Take from the park, disturb, injure or kill any wildlife within park boundaries without written permission. 
(2)  Pets. Possess any animal considered a pet, unless such pet is on a leash no longer than six feet, or allow a pet to disturb or annoy other park users, or fail to clean all droppings and other messes created by a pet in such person's possession. Running a pet for the purpose of relieving itself is unlawful, except in designated pet runs. 
(3)  Horses. Ride horses any place upon park lands, except on designated roadways, without permission, or fail to clean up all droppings of the horse within the park. Every horse must be under the control of the rider at all times. 
(4)  [Sporting events.] To allow or bring any animal to a sporting event overseen by the city upon city property. All animals or pets, apart from service animals, are banned from sporting events overseen by the city held on city property. 
(Code 1985, § 3.4; Ord. No. 2009-006, 1-4-2010) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 8. 
Sec. 30-74. - Firearms, hunting, trapping, fishing and fireworks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to do any of the following acts upon city park lands: 
(1)  Hunting and trapping . Hunt or trap any wildlife within a park boundary without proper written permission of the city. 
(2)  Fireworks . Ignite an explosive powder or fireworks within park boundaries without proper written permission. 
(b)  All state and federal laws pertaining to the hunting of game and nongame animals, and fishing will be enforced within the city park lands and adjacent waters. 
(Code 1985, § 3.5; Ord. No. 2017-003 , 9-18-2017) 
Sec. 30-75. - Camping in Pettit Park. 
    It shall be unlawful to do any of the following acts upon city park lands: 
(1)  Designated camping areas. Camp in any city park on city owned lands without written permission. Pettit Park is a state licensed campground and camping is permitted only in a designated number of campsites. 
(2)  Permit and receipt. Camp in any designated campsite without a valid camping receipt showing payment and the dates for which payment was made. The camping permit receipt must be filled out completely with all information requested. The camping receipt (white copy) is the camper's written permission to camp. 
(3)  Visitors. Be in Pettit Park after curfew 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. without a proper receipt of payment for camping. The camping receipt (white copy) visibly displayed on the vehicle or camping unit window is written permission for campers to be within the park boundaries after curfew. 
(4)  Registration. Fail to properly register for each night's camping. 
(5)  Quiet hours. Be involved in any activity or action that will constitute a breach of the peace or that will disturb or annoy other campers during the designated quiet hours of 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 
(Code 1985, § 3.6; Ord. No. 2008-01, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 30-76. - Concession stands. 
    The operator and any person duly authorized to operate a concession stand in any park shall be responsible for maintaining the area around such stand free from litter of any type. 
(Code 1985, § 3.7; Ord. No. 2008-01, 3-3-2008) 
Chapter 32 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 12; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40. 
State Law reference- Home solicitation sales, MCL 445.111 et seq.; transient merchants, MCL 445.371 et seq.; charitable organizations and solicitations act, MCL 400.271 et seq.; public safety solicitation act, MCL 14.301 et seq.; veteran's license for peddlers, MCL 35.441 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 32-1-32-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PEDDLERS 

Sec. 32-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Peddler includes any person traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or other conveyance, from place to place, house to house or street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden trucks, farm products or provisions, offering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer such items or services for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, other vehicle or conveyance. Any person who solicits orders, and, as a separate transaction, makes deliveries to purchasers as part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this article shall be deemed a peddler. The term "peddler" includes the terms "hawker" and "huckster." 
    The definition of "peddler" set forth herein shall not include any business that offers or delivers goods from a fixed place of business within the City of Clare. 
(Code 1985, § 7.61; Ord. No. 2011-001, 1-17-2011) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 32-32. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of a peddler without first obtaining a license. No such license shall be granted, except upon certification of the chief of police. 
(Code 1985, § 7.62) 
Sec. 32-33. - Fixed stands. 
    No licensee shall stop or remain in any one place upon any street, alley or public place for a period of time longer than necessary to make a sale to a customer wishing to buy. Any peddler using a vehicle, when stopped, shall place his vehicle parallel to and within 12 inches of the curb and shall depart from such place as soon as he has completed sales with customers actually present. 
(Code 1985, § 7.63) 
Sec. 32-34. - Prohibited areas. 
(a)  No peddler, in the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk or driveway, except as may be necessary and reasonable to consummate a sale, nor remain, barter, sell, offer or expose for sale any goods, wares or merchandise in front of or at the side of any property against the wish or desire of the property owner or the tenant or occupant of such property. 
(b)  No peddler shall engage in peddling on any street, alley or public place after having been requested to desist by any police officer of the city because of congested or dangerous traffic conditions. 
(Code 1985, § 7.64) 
Sec. 32-35. - Attracting public attention. 
    No peddler shall shout or cry out his goods or merchandise, nor blow any horn, ring any bell or use any other similar device to attract the attention of the public. 
(Code 1985, § 7.65) 
Sec. 32-36. - Curb service. 
(a)  No person shall operate or maintain any stand, vehicle, store or place of business on or near to any highway in such a manner that the customers of or traders with such person occupy or congregate within the limits of any street, lane, highway or public place within the city. 
(b)  No person shall be permitted to use the streets, alley, lanes or public places of the city for the service of customers or the transaction of business, or to use any stands, stores or other places of business in any manner that shall require the customer, when transacting such business, to stand within the limits of the streets, highways, alleys or public places of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 7.66) 
Sec. 32-37. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following shall be exempt from the licensing requirements of this article, but shall be subject to the other provisions of this article: 
(1)  Farmers or truck gardeners selling or offering for sale any products grown, raised or produced by them, the sale of which is not otherwise prohibited or regulated. 
(2)  Any person under 18 years of age, when engaged in peddling on foot in the neighborhood of his residence, under the direct supervision of any school or recognized charitable or religious organization. 
(b)  Veterans are exempt from paying the fee as required by Public Act No. 359 of 1921 (MCL 35.441 et seq.). 
(Code 1985, § 7.67) 
Sec. 32-38. - Prohibited hours for peddling. 
    No person shall peddle goods door-to-door except during the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. There shall be no peddling of goods door-to door on Sundays or federal holidays. 
( Ord. No. 2014-006 , 9-15-2014) 
Secs. 32-39-32-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOLICITORS 

Sec. 32-71. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Soliciting means and includes any one or more of the following activities: 
(1)  Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs or services of any kind, character or description whatsoever, for any kind of consideration whatsoever; 
(2)  Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of insurance of any type, kind or publication; 
(3)  Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind of publication; or 
(4)  Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit association, organization, corporation or project. 
    Solicitor includes the term "canvasser." 
(Code 1985, § 7.81) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 32-72. - License required. 
(a)  Every person desiring to engage in soliciting from persons in residences within the city is hereby required to make written application for a license as provided in this article, which license shall not be granted, except upon approval of the chief of police. Such license shall be carried by the solicitor. 
(b)  No license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the state or any other state, or federal laws of the United States, within five years of the date of the application; nor to any person who has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article; nor to any person whose license issued under this article has previously been revoked. 
(Code 1985, § 7.82) 
Sec. 32-73. - Application for license. 
(a)  Application for a license shall be made upon a form provided by the city. The applicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested on the application. 
(b)  Each person shall carry the license upon his person at all times while soliciting or canvassing in the city, and the license shall be exhibited by such licensee whenever he is required to exhibit the license by any police officer or any person solicited. 
(Code 1985, § 7.83) 
Sec. 32-74. - Fees. 
    Any person engaged in soliciting on behalf of and solely for the benefit of any recognized charitable, educational, religious, governmental or nonprofit purpose, after meeting all other requirements, shall be granted a license without payment of a fee as required by section 12-43. Veterans shall also be exempt from payment of a license fee under this article as required by Public Act No. 359 of 1921 (MCL 35.441 et seq.). 
(Code 1985, § 7.84) 
Sec. 32-75. - Revocation of license. 
    Any license may be revoked by the city manager or chief of police because of any violation by the licensee of this article or any other ordinance, or if the licensee has made a false material statement in the application, or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a license under the terms of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 7.86) 
Secs. 32-76-32-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRANSIENT MERCHANTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Transient merchants, MCL 445.371 et seq. 

Sec. 32-101. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the temporary business of selling goods, wares or merchandise at retail within the city from any lot, premises, building, room or structure, including railroad cars, without first obtaining a license. No such license shall be granted, except upon certification of the chief of police and city clerk. 
(Code 1985, § 7.111) 
Sec. 32-102. - Temporary business. 
    Every person engaged in the retail sale and delivery of goods, wares or merchandise shall be deemed to be engaged in carrying on a temporary business unless his goods, wares or merchandise shall have been assessed for taxation in the city during the current year. 
(Code 1985, § 7.112) 
Sec. 32-103. - Indebtedness to the city. 
    No license shall be granted to any person owing any personal property taxes or other indebtedness to the city, or who contemplates using any personal property on which personal property taxes are owing in the operation of such business. 
(Code 1985, § 7.113) 
Sec. 32-104. - Benefit sales. 
    Any person selling or offering for sale any goods, wares or merchandise on behalf of and solely for the benefit of any recognized charitable or religious purpose shall, after meeting all other requirements, be granted a license without payment of the fee required by section 12-43. 
(Code 1985, § 7.114) 
Sec. 32-105. - Exemptions. 
    Farmers and truck gardeners who sell farm products and produce of their own raising exclusively shall be exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 7.115) 
Chapter 34 - SECONDHAND GOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 12; businesses, ch. 12. 
State Law reference- Licensing of secondhand and junk dealers, MCL 445.401 et seq., 445.471 et seq.; junkyards near highways, MCL 252.201 et seq.; pawnbrokers licensing, MCL 446.201 et seq., 445.471 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Donation boxes. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    Donation box means any enclosed receptacle or container, located outside of a building, designed and intended for the donation and temporary storage of clothing or other materials. 
(b)  Regulations. 
(1)  No person or other legal entity shall cause or permit the installation or placement of a donation box upon any property within the city, whether public or private, except in accordance with this section. 
(2)  Donation boxes are permitted within the city upon compliance with all of the following: 
a.  All proceeds are dedicated to the use of an entity which is qualified by the Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) charitable institution, or is a governmental entity. 
b.  The donation box is placed upon the premises of an entity which is located in the C2 (General Commercial) Zoning District or is qualified by the Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) charitable institution, or is a governmental entity. 
c.  The donation box is no more than six feet high, with a ground footprint of not more than 25 square feet. 
d.  No more than two donation boxes shall be located on any parcel. 
e.  The donation box shall be located so as not to interfere with any sight triangles and on-site circulation. The donation box shall be located at least 15 feet from any building, 20 feet from the front property line, and five feet from the side and rear property lines. The donation box shall not be located so as to block the view of any business signage on any parcel. 
f.  The donation box shall be placed upon a concrete or asphalt surface. 
g.  The donation box shall be emptied with such frequency and regularity as to ensure that it does not overflow, and materials do not accumulate outside the donation box. 
h.  The donation box shall not be used as a receptacle for any hazardous or potentially hazardous waste. 
i.  The issuance of a permit pursuant to subsection (3) below. 
(3)  The zoning administrator shall issue a permit, annually, for a compliant donation box upon receipt of an annual permit fee in an amount to be established from time to time by resolution of the city commission; and of an application containing all of the following: 
a.  Proof of the applicant's status as a charitable institution or as a governmental entity. 
b.  A site plan indicating the placement of the donation box, in compliance with all the above siting requirements. 
c.  The name, address, telephone number and e-mail address of the applicant and of the owner of the donation box, if different than the applicant. 
d.  The name, address, telephone number and e-mail address of the person who will be available during regular business hours and will be responsible for compliance. 
e.  A photograph of the donation box to be installed. 
f.  The signed and dated consent of the property owner, consenting to the location of the box. 
(Ord. No. 2018-004 , 5-7-2018) 
Secs. 34-2-34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GARAGE SALES 

Sec. 34-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Garage sale, yard sale, lawn sale, attic sale, rummage sale and flea market sale mean any sale of tangible personal property not otherwise regulated in this Code, advertised by any means whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of such sale. 
    Goods means any goods, warehouse merchandise or other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated under this article. 
(Code 1985, § 7.131) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-32. - Permit required. 
    A permit issued by the city clerk shall be obtained by any person before selling or offering to sell any goods at a sale to be advertised or held out by any means to be one of the types of sales enumerated in section 34-31. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, advertise or promote any sale subject to this article without obtaining such permit. 
(Code 1985, § 7.132) 
Sec. 34-33. - Application for permit. 
    An application for a permit for any of the sales regulated under this article shall be made at the office of the city clerk on a form to be provided therefor, which application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name of the person conducting the sale; 
(2)  Location at which the sale is to be conducted; 
(3)  Number of days which the sale is to be conducted within the limits prescribed in this article; 
(4)  Date and nature of any past sale held by the applicant subject to any regulation under this article; 
(5)  Relationship or connection the applicant may have had with any other person conducting any such sale and the dates of such sale; 
(6)  Whether or not the applicant has been issued a sales tax license by the state, and if so, the number of licenses and the dates on which the licenses were issued. 
(Code 1985, § 7.133) 
Sec. 34-34. - Restrictions. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued authorizing any sale under this article to be conducted for a period of longer than three consecutive days. 
(b)  No person shall be issued more than two permits in any calendar year. 
(c)  No location shall be issued more than two permits within a calendar year. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for an individual to obtain a permit for another person to sell items belonging to another person. 
(Code 1985, § 7.134; Ord. No. 2012-008, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 34-35. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following persons or sales: 
(1)  Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials. 
(3)  Any sale regulated under any other provisions of this Code. 
(4)  Any sale conducted by any merchant, mercantile or other business establishment from or at a place of business wherein such sale would be permitted by chapter 52 pertaining to zoning, or under the protection of the presently nonconforming section thereof, or any other sale conducted by a manufacturer, dealer or vendor and which sale would be conducted from a properly zoned premises and not otherwise prohibited in this Code. 
(5)  Any bona fide charitable, educational, cultural or governmental institution or organization; provided, however, that the burden of establishing the exemption under this subsection shall be on the organization or institution claiming such exemption. 
(Code 1985, § 7.135) 
Sec. 34-36. - Permit fee. 
    The permit fee for any of the sales regulated under this article shall be as prescribed by resolution of the city commission from time to time. The permit fee shall accompany the application. 
(Code 1985, § 7.136) 
Sec. 34-37. - Violations. 
    Violations of this act[article] are hereby declared a public nuisance, subject to abatement in accordance with the applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 2012-008, 11-5-2012) 
Secs. 34-38-34-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SECONDHAND AND JUNK DEALERS 

Sec. 34-71. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Secondhand dealer and junk dealer mean any person whose principal business is that of purchasing, selling, exchanging, storing or receiving secondhand articles of any kind, cast iron, old iron, old steel, tool steel, aluminum, copper, brass, lead pipe or tools, and lighting and plumbing fixtures. 
(Code 1985, § 7.142) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 445.403. 
Sec. 34-72. - License required. 
    No person shall carry on the business of a dealer in secondhand goods or junk dealer in the city without having first obtained from the mayor a license, subject to the provisions of this article, authorizing such person to carry on such business. 
(Code 1985, §§ 7.141, 7.142) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 445.401. 
Sec. 34-73. - Issuance of license. 
    The mayor may from time to time grant under his hand and the official seal of his office to any suitable person a license authorizing such person to carry on the business of a secondhand dealer or junk dealer, subject to the provisions of this article. Such license shall designate the particular place in the city where such person shall carry on such business, and no person receiving such license shall carry on the business in any place other than as designated in the license; provided, however, that, in case any person shall have no regular place of business, a license shall be issued to such person to carry on the business of a secondhand dealer or junk dealer either by horse and wagon, cart, automobile or pack. The license shall be for the period of one year from the date of issuance unless sooner revoked for cause, and shall not be transferable. It shall be within the power of the city commission to fix the amount to be paid as an annual license fee at any amount not more than $50.00. 
(Code 1985, § 7.142) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 7.142. 
Sec. 34-74. - Sign; transaction records. 
    Each secondhand dealer or junk dealer shall post in a conspicuous place in or upon his shop, store, wagon, boat or other place of business, a sign having his name and occupation legibly inscribed thereon, and shall keep a separate book, open to inspection by members of the police department or other person, in which shall be written in the English language at the time of the purchase or exchange of such articles, a description thereof, the name, description and residence of the person from whom the article was purchased and received, and the day and hour when such purchase or exchange was made. Each entry shall be numbered consecutively, commencing with number 1. 
(Code 1985, § 7.142) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 445.404. 
Sec. 34-75. - Retention of purchased articles, record. 
(a)  Articles that are purchased or exchanged shall be retained by the purchaser thereof, for at least 15 days before disposing of such articles, in an accessible place in the building where such articles are purchased and received. A tag shall be attached to such articles in a visible and convenient place, with the number written thereupon that corresponds with the entry number in the transaction book. Such purchaser shall prepare and deliver to the chief of police on Monday of each week, before 12:00 noon, a legible and correct copy, written in the English language, from such book, containing a description of each article purchased or received during the preceding week, the hour and day when the purchase was made, and the description of the person from which it was purchased. Such statement shall be verified by the affidavit of the person subscribing his name thereto. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to old rags, waste paper and household goods, except radios, televisions, record players and electrical appliances. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall make it necessary for the purchaser to retain articles purchased from individuals having a fixed place of business after such articles shall have been reported. 
(Code 1985, § 7.142) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 445.405. 
Sec. 34-76. - Purchasers and receivers without places of business in a building. 
    If the purchaser or receiver, by exchange or otherwise, as defined in section 34-71, is a peddler or goes about with a wagon to purchase or obtain, by exchange or otherwise, any of such articles, and does not have a place of business in a building, he need not retain such articles for 15 days before selling the articles, provided, on Monday of each week, he files with the chief of police a report showing the place of business of the person to whom such sale was made, and a copy of the record required by section 34-75 to be kept in a separate book of the articles purchased or received during the preceding week, including a description of such articles sold, to whom sold and his place of business. 
(Code 1985, § 7.142) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 445.406. 
Sec. 34-77. - Unlawful purchases. 
    No person shall purchase or receiver, by sale, barter, exchange or otherwise, any article referred to in this article from: 
(1)  Any person between the hours of 9:00 p.m.-7:00 a.m.; 
(2)  Any person who is at the time intoxicated or an habitual drunkard; or 
(3)  Any person known by such secondhand dealer or junk dealer to be a thief, an associate of thieves or receiver of stolen property, or any person he has reason to suspect of being such. 
(Code 1985, § 7.142) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 445.407. 
Sec. 34-78. - Fingerprints of seller. 
    At the same time any secondhand dealer or junk dealer shall receive any article of personal property or other valuable thing, by way of pledge or pawn, or shall acquire or purchase any article of personal property or other valuable thing, except new articles, wares or merchandise purchased at wholesale from manufacturers, wholesale distributors or jobbers for retail sale to customers, except motor vehicles, old rags, wastepaper, books, magazines, tapestries, antiques and household furniture, he shall take, in duplicate, the legible imprint of the right thumb of the person from whom such property was received, or if not possible, of the left thumb or another finger of such person. Such fingerprint shall be taken under such rules and regulations as prescribed by the commissioner of the state police. One copy shall be forwarded within 48 hours, together with a statement of the nature of the property received, to the chief of police, together with a statement of the nature of the property received. The second copy shall be forwarded within 48 hours, together with a statement of the nature of the property received, to the commissioner of the state police. 
(Code 1985, § 7.142) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 445.472. 
Chapter 36 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Sanitary disposal of feces and solid waste, § 8-13; buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; environment, ch. 20; litter, § 20-131 et seq.; utilities, ch. 46; hauled waste, § 46-241 et seq. 
State Law reference- Garbage disposal act, MCL 123.361 et seq.; solid waste facilities, MCL 324.4301 et seq.; hazardous waste management act, MCL 324.11101 et seq.; hazardous materials transportation act, MCL 29.417 et seq.; solid waste management act, MCL 324.11501 et seq.; waste reduction assistance act, MCL 324.14501 et seq.; clean Michigan fund act, MCL 324.19101 et seq.; low-level radioactive waste authority act, MCL 333.26201 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 36-1-36-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION 

Sec. 36-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Garbage means rejected food wastes, including waste accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter used or intended for food or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetable matter. 
    Nonburnable rubbish means waste of domestic or commercial origin that is incapable of being burned or incinerated, including tin cans, tin ware, bed springs, automobile parts and other metallic substances, bottles, glassware, earthenware, grass, leaves, ashes, etc. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste, including paper, cardboard, metal containers, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, demolished building materials or litter of any kind that may be a detriment to the public health and safety. 
(Code 1985, § 2.3) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, MCL 324.11503, 324.11505. 
Sec. 36-32. - Service to customers. 
(a)  The city may operate a garbage and trash collection service for the residents and the businesses of the city and the city shall appropriate such monies and employ such persons as may be reasonably necessary to carry out the terms of this article. 
(b)  All residents and businesses of the city are required to utilize the collection service method authorized or contracted for by the city and to pay any fees established by city commission resolution which are required to finance the collection services. 
(Code 1985, § 2.1) 
Sec. 36-33. - Collector's license. 
    No person shall collect any garbage, ashes, trash or rubbish within the city for disposal unless and until they have been duly licensed as provided in this article. 
(Code 1985, § 2.2) 
Sec. 36-34. - Receptacles. 
    The occupants of every building where wastes accumulate shall provide, keep clean and in place, proper receptacles as set forth in this section. The receptacles for garbage must be of a portable type and not over 30 gallons' capacity, and shall be of substantial metal construction, provided with handles or bails and a tight fitting cover, and no single receptacle shall weigh more than 50 pounds when filled. All garbage shall be drained and wrapped to prevent freezing of the receptacles. No garbage or food wastes of any description shall be placed in an uncovered receptacle. As an alternative, plastic bags or cans designed as containers for garbage or rubbish may be used. Containers shall not be placed curbside more than 24 hours prior to the scheduled pick-up. Containers shall be retrieved from the curbside within 24 hours after pick-up. 
(Code 1985, § 2.4; Ord. No. 2017-005 , 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 36-35. - Placement of receptacles. 
    All receptacles shall be located so that the regularly employed municipal collectors will not have to trespass on private property in order to pick up such receptacles. The point of collection will be either the alley line or the curb. Receptacles shall not be placed under the eaves of a building in such a manner that water from roof will enter the receptacles, and any receptacle filled with ice or water will not be emptied. 
(Code 1985, § 2.5) 
Sec. 36-36. - Schedule. 
    The collector shall pick up garbage, trash, rubbish and ashes in accordance with a collection schedule fixed by the city manager. Each customer shall be notified at the time application is made for service as to the day and time, within reasonable limits, that the collector will service his premises, and any changes made thereafter by the collector shall be communicated by him to the customer. 
(Code 1985, § 2.6) 
Sec. 36-37. - License applications. 
    No license shall be granted to an applicant for any collection service in which a contract for such service is in existence. All applicants for licenses to pick up and transport garbage, trash or rubbish shall be made to the city clerk. The applicant shall give his name, address, description of the service to be provided, description of the equipment to be used, names and locations of disposal sites, insurance coverages and any other information which may be requested by the city commission to adequately review the application. The applicant shall pay to the city clerk, with such application, the license fee as established by ordinance or resolution of the city commission. All applications for licenses shall be referred to the city commission. The authorization of all applications for licenses shall be subject to city commission approval; and, if such license is denied, the fee so deposited shall be returned to the applicant. Applications may be rejected by the city for good cause. All licenses shall comply with this Code, the terms of the licensing permit and such rules and/or regulations relating to garbage and trash disposal as may be adopted by the city commission from time to time. 
(Code 1985, § 2.7) 
Sec. 36-38. - Report of violations. 
    All violations of sections 36-34 and 36-35 shall be reported to the city clerk by the collector; and, at the option of the city, such services may be discontinued for such violation. 
(Code 1985, § 2.8) 
Sec. 36-39. - Unlawful deposits. 
(a)  No person shall deposit, or cause to be deposited, scatter, burn, sort or leave any garbage, rubbish, empty barrel or carton, ashes, cinders, earth, glass, paper, ice, dirt, filth, manure or other offensive material in any public street or alley or on any public property in the city, except as provided in this article or on approved private or public dumps, and except certain of such materials if used in a normal manner for improving property by grading, surfacing or fertilizing. 
(b)  No person shall deposit or leave in any public street, alley or public place, or in any private place or premises, any glass (broken or unbroken), metal, stone, earth, dirt, earthenware, tacks, cinders or other substance of a nature likely to cause injury to travelers, pedestrians, horses or other animals, or which might injure, cut or puncture any pneumatic tire. 
(Code 1985, § 2.9) 
State Law reference- Littering, MCL 324.8901 et seq. 
Chapter 38 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Special assessments, ch. 11; detailed procedure to be fixed by ordinance, § 11.2. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance levying or imposing any special assessments saved from repeal, § 1-5(a)(10); administration, ch. 2; community development, ch. 16; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40. 
State Law reference- Special assessments for public improvements, MCL 68.31 et seq.; higher interest rates permitted when there are obligations in anticipation of special assessments, MCL 133.9; public improvement or public building, MCL 141.261 et seq.; notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq.; deferment of special assessment for homesteads, MCL 211.761 et seq. 

Sec. 38-1. - Initiation. 
(a)  Proceedings for the making of public improvements within the city may be commenced by resolution of the city commission, on its own initiative, or by an initiatory petition signed by property owners whose aggregate property in the special assessment district was assessed for more than 50 percent of the total assessed value of the privately owned real property located therein, in accordance with the last preceding general assessment roll; provided, however, that in the case of special assessments for paving or similar improvements which are normally assessed on a frontage basis against abutting property, such petitions shall be signed by the owners of more than 50 percent of the frontage of property to be assessed. In addition to the signatures of the owners, the petitions shall contain a brief description of the property owned by the respective signers thereof. Such petitions shall be verified by the affidavit of one or more of the owners or by a person with knowledge that the signers are such owners and that such signatures are genuine. 
(b)  Petitions shall be addressed to the city commission and filed with the city clerk. Petitions shall in no event be mandatory upon the city commission. All petitions shall be circulated and signed on blank forms furnished by the city. All petitions shall be referred by the city clerk to the city manager. The city manager shall check the petitions to determine whether they conform to the requirements of this section and shall report his findings to the city commission. 
(c)  The city manager shall inform the person filing the petition as to how many petitions for the improvement sought are pending and how long it will be before the improvement requested can reasonably be expected to be commenced. 
(Code 1985, § 1.131) 
Sec. 38-2. - Report of city manager. 
    Before the city commission shall consider the making of any local or public improvement, the improvement shall be referred by resolution to the city manager, directing him to prepare a report, which shall include necessary plans, profiles, specifications and detailed estimates of the cost, an estimate of the life of the improvement, a description of the assessment districts and such other pertinent information as will permit the city commission to decide the cost, extent and necessity of the improvement proposed and what part or proportion thereof shall be paid by special assessments upon the property especially benefited and what part, if any, should be paid by the city at large. The city commission shall not determine to proceed with the making of any local or special improvement until such report of the city manager has been filed, nor until after a public hearing has been held by the city commission for the purpose of hearing objections to the making of such public improvement. 
(Code 1985, § 1.132) 
Sec. 38-3. - Cost of condemned property added. 
    Whenever any property is acquired by condemnation or otherwise, for the purpose of any special improvement, the cost thereof, and of the proceedings required to acquire such property, may be added to the cost of such special improvement. 
(Code 1985, § 1.133) 
Sec. 38-4. - Determination of necessity of project, notice. 
(a)  After the city manager has presented the report required in section 38-2 for making any local or public improvement as requested in the resolution of the city commission and the city commission has reviewed the report, a resolution may be passed determining the necessity of the improvement; setting forth the nature thereof; prescribing what part or proportion of the cost of such improvement shall be paid by special assessment upon property especially benefited, a determination of benefits received by affected properties and what part, if any, shall be paid by the city at large; designating the limits of the special assessment district to be affected; designating whether it is to be assessed according to frontage or other benefits; placing the complete information on file in the office of the city clerk where the information may be found for examination; and directing the city clerk to publish a notice of public hearing on the proposed improvement, at which time and place an opportunity will be given to interested persons to be heard. Such notice shall be made by one publication in a newspaper published or circulated within the city at least one week prior to the holding of the hearing. The hearing required by this section may be held at any regular, adjourned or special meeting of the city commission. 
(b)  In all cases where special assessments are made against property, notice of all hearings in the special assessment proceedings are to be given as provided in Public Act No. 162 of 1962 (MCL 211.741 et seq.), in addition to any notice of such hearing to be given by publication or posting as required in this chapter, such statutory notice being as follows: 
Notice of a hearing in special assessment proceedings shall be given to each owner of or party in interest in property to be assessed whose name appears upon the last local tax assessment record, by mailing by first class mail, addressed to such owner or party at the address shown on the tax records, at least ten days before the date of such hearing. The term "last local tax assessment record" means the last assessment roll for ad valorem tax purposes which has been reviewed by the local board of review as supplemented by any subsequent changes in the names or addresses of such owner or parties listed thereon. 
(Code 1985, § 1.134) 
Sec. 38-5. - Hearing on necessity. 
    At the public hearing on the proposed improvement, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard, by personal appearance or letter, after which, the city commission may modify the scope of the public improvements in such a manner as they shall deem to be in the best interest of the city as a whole; provided that, if the amount of work is increased or additions are made to the district, then another hearing shall be held pursuant to the notice prescribed in section 38-4. If the determination of the city commission shall be to proceed with the improvement, a resolution shall be passed approving the necessary profiles, plans, specifications, assessment district and detailed estimates of cost, and directing the assessor to prepare a special assessment roll in accordance with the city commission's determination and to report the special assessment roll to the city commission for confirmation. 
(Code 1985, § 1.135) 
Sec. 38-6. - Objection to improvements. 
    If, at or prior to final confirmation of any special assessment, more than 50 percent of the number of owners of privately owned real property to be assessed for any improvement, or in case of paving or similar improvements more than 50 percent of the number of owners of frontage to be assessed for any such improvement, shall object, in writing, to the proposed improvement, the improvement shall not be made by the proceedings authorized by this chapter without a four-fifths vote of the members-elect of the city commission, provided that this section shall not apply to sidewalk construction. 
Charter reference- Similar provisions, § 11.5. 
Sec. 38-7. - Deviation from original plans and specifications. 
    No deviation from original plans or specifications as adopted shall be permitted by any officer or employee of the city without authority of the city commission by resolution. A copy of the resolution authorizing such change or deviation shall be certified by the city clerk and attached to the original plans and specifications on file in his office. 
(Code 1985, § 1.136) 
Sec. 38-8. - Assessor to make special assessment roll. 
    The assessor shall make a special assessment roll of all lots and parcels of land within the designated district benefited by the proposed improvement and assess to each lot or parcel of land the amount benefited thereby. The amount spread in each case shall be based upon the detailed estimate of the city manager as approved by the city commission. 
(Code 1985, § 1.137) 
Sec. 38-9. - Filing, review and certification of special assessment roll. 
    When the assessor shall have completed the special assessment roll, he shall file it with the city clerk for presentation to the city commission for review and certification by the city commission. 
(Code 1985, § 1.138) 
Sec. 38-10. - Meeting to review special assessment roll. 
    Upon receipt of the special assessment roll, the city commission by resolution shall accept such special assessment roll and order it to be filed in the office of the city clerk for public examination; fix the time and place the city commission will meet to review such special assessment roll; and direct the city clerk to publish a notice of a public hearing for the purpose of giving an opportunity for interested persons to be heard. Such notice shall be made by one publication at least one week prior to the holding of the hearing and by mail as prescribed in section 38-4. The hearing required by this section may be held at any regular, adjourned or special meeting of the city commission. At the meeting, all interested persons or parties shall present, in writing, their objections, if any, to the assessments against them. 
(Code 1985, § 1.139; Ord. No. 2011-005, 3-21-2011) 
Sec. 38-11. - Changes and corrections to special assessment roll. 
    The city commission shall meet at the time and placed designated for the review of such special assessment roll, and hear objections thereto submitted in writing. The city commission may correct the special assessment roll as to any special assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land or other errors appearing therein, or it may, by resolution, annul such special assessment roll and the same proceedings shall be followed in making a new special assessment roll as in the making of the original special assessment roll. If, after hearing all objections and making a record of such changes as the city commission deems justified, the city commission determines that it is satisfied with the special assessment roll, and that assessments are in proportion to benefits received, it shall thereupon pass a resolution reciting such determinations, confirming such roll, placing it on file in the office of the city clerk and directing the city clerk to attach his warrant to a certified copy within ten days, therein commanding the assessor to spread the various sums and amounts appearing thereon on a special assessment roll or upon the tax rolls of the city for the full amounts or in annual installments as directed by the city commission. Such special assessment roll shall have the date of confirmation endorsed thereon and shall from that date be final and conclusive for the purpose of the improvement to which it applied, subject only to adjustment to conform to the actual cost of the improvement as provided in section 38-17. 
(Code 1985, § 1.140) 
Sec. 38-12. - When due and payable. 
    All special assessments, except such installments thereof as the city commission shall make payable at a future time as provided in this chapter, shall be due and payable upon confirmation of the special assessment roll. 
(Code 1985, § 1.141) 
Sec. 38-13. - Installment payments. 
    The city commission may provide for the payment of special assessments in annual installments, not to exceed 15 in number, with the first installment being due upon confirmation of the special assessment roll and the deferred installments being due annually thereafter or, in the discretion of the city commission, may be spread upon and made a part of each annual city tax roll thereafter, until all are paid. Interest may be charged upon deferred installments at a rate not to exceed six percent per year, payable annually. Under any installment plan adopted, the whole or any deferred installments with accrued interest to date of payment may be paid in advance of the due dates established. 
(Code 1985, § 1.142) 
Charter reference- Similar provisions, § 11.6. 
Sec. 38-14. - Collection from special assessment roll. 
    When any special assessment shall be confirmed and be payable as provided in this chapter, the city commission shall direct the assessment so made on the special assessment roll to be collected directly therefrom or from the general tax rolls and, thereupon, the city clerk shall attach his warrant to a certified copy of the special assessment roll, therein commanding the city treasurer to collect from each of the persons assessed in the special assessment roll the amount of money assessed to and set opposite his name therein and, in case any person named in the special assessment roll shall neglect or refuse to pay his assessment upon demand, then to levy and collect the assessment by distress and sale of the goods and chattels of such person and return the special assessment roll and warrant, together with his doings thereon, within 60 days from the date of such warrant. 
(Code 1985, § 1.143) 
Sec. 38-15. - Collection by treasurer. 
    Upon receiving the special assessment roll and warrant as set forth in section 38-14, the city treasurer shall proceed to collect the amounts assessed therein. The treasurer shall have the same powers in collecting special assessments as in the collection of taxes, as provided in section 11.11 of the Charter. 
(Code 1985, § 1.144) 
Sec. 38-16. - Delinquent special assessments. 
    Special assessments and all interest and charges thereon, from the date of confirmation of the roll, shall be and remain a lien upon the property assessed of the same character and effect as the lien created by general law for state and county taxes, and by the Charter for city taxes, until paid. From such date and after confirmation, as shall be fixed by the city commission, the same collection fees shall be collected on delinquent special assessments and delinquent installments of such special assessments beginning on the following August 15 of each year, as are provided by the Charter to be collected on delinquent city taxes. Such delinquent special assessments shall be subject to the same penalties, and the lands upon which the special assessments are a lien shall be subject to sale therefor, the same as are delinquent city taxes and the lands upon which they constitute a lien. 
(Code 1985, § 1.145) 
Charter reference- Similar provisions, § 11.11. 
Sec. 38-17. - Additional assessments and refunds. 
    When any special assessment roll shall prove insufficient to meet the costs of the improvements for which it was made, the city commission may make an additional pro rata assessment, but the total amount assessed against any lot or parcel of land shall not exceed the value of benefits received by such lot or parcel of land. Should the assessment prove larger than necessary by five percent or less, the city commission may place the excess in the city treasury or make a pro rata refund. Should the assessment exceed the amount necessary by more than five percent, the entire excess shall be refunded to owners of property upon which payments have been made, in full, on a pro rata basis. No refunds of special assessments may be made which impair or contravene the provisions of any outstanding obligation or bonds secured, in whole or part, by such special assessments. The city commission may provide by resolution that the amount of any such excess, whether in excess of five percent or not, may be allowed as a credit on the last installment of the special assessment. 
(Code 1985, § 1.146) 
Charter reference- Similar provisions, § 11.7. 
Sec. 38-18. - Additional steps and procedures. 
    In any case where the provisions of this chapter may prove to be insufficient to carry into full effect the making of any special assessment, the city commission shall provide by ordinance any additional steps or procedures required. 
(Code 1985, § 1.147) 
Sec. 38-19. - Special assessment accounts. 
    Moneys raised by special assessment to pay the cost of any local improvement shall be held in a special fund to pay such cost or repay any money borrowed therefor. Each special assessment account must be used only for the improvement project for which the assessment was levied, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 1.148) 
Charter reference- Similar provisions, § 11.8. 
Sec. 38-20. - Contested and enjoined assessments. 
    Except and unless notice is given to the city commission, in writing, of an intention to contest or enjoin the collection of any special assessment within 30 days after the date of the meeting of the city commission at which it is finally determined to proceed with the making of the improvement in question, which notice shall state the grounds on which the proceedings are to be contested, no suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of such special assessment, and, regardless of whether or not any public improvement is completed in any special assessment district, no owner of real property located in such district shall be entitled to commence any suit or action for the purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of any such special assessment after he has received a benefit from the substantial completion of that portion of such public improvement for which he is assessed. 
(Code 1985, § 1.149) 
Charter reference- Similar provisions, § 11.9. 
Sec. 38-21. - Reassessment for benefits. 
    Whenever the city commission shall deem any special assessment invalid or defective for any reason whatsoever, or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall have adjudged such assessment to be illegal for any reason whatsoever, in whole or in part, the city commission shall have power to cause the new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made, whether the improvement or any part thereof has been completed or not, and whether any part of the assessment has been collected or not. All proceedings on such reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be made in the same manner as provided for the original assessment. If any portion of the original assessment shall have been collected and not refunded, it shall be applied upon the reassessment, and the reassessment shall, to that extent, be deemed satisfied. If more than the amount reassessed shall have been collected, the balance shall be refunded to the person making such payment. 
(Code 1985, § 1.150) 
Charter reference- Similar provisions, § 11.10. 
Sec. 38-22. - Combination of projects. 
    The city commission may combine several districts into one project for the purpose of effecting a savings in the costs; provided, however, for each district there shall be established separate funds and accounts to cover the cost thereof. 
(Code 1985, § 1.151) 
Sec. 38-23. - Lien not destroyed by judgment or decree. 
    No judgment or decree, or any act of the city commission vacating a special assessment shall destroy or impair the lien of the city upon the premises assessed for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the premises, or as might have been lawfully assessed thereon by a regular vote or proceeding. 
Charter reference- Similar provisions, § 11.12. 
Chapter 40 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Streets and alleys, § 7.9; sidewalks, § 11.4. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance levying or imposing any special assessments saved from repeal, § 1-5(a)(10); any ordinance dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, rep, § 1-5(a)(11); any ordinance establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk saved from repeal, § 1-5(a)(12); airport, ch. 4; buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; street sales, § 12-99; cemeteries, ch. 14; community development, ch. 16; environment, ch. 20; land divisions and subdivisions of land, ch. 24; design standards for street intersections in subdivisions, § 24-125; design standards for street in relation to railroads in subdivisions, § 24-126; street grades in subdivisions, § 24-130; spitting on public property, § 28-92; loitering in streets and sidewalks, § 28-163; consumption of alcoholic liquor in public, § 28-209; parks and recreation, ch. 30; peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants, ch. 32; special assessments, ch. 38; telecommunications, ch. 42; traffic and vehicles, ch. 44; utilities, ch. 46; vehicles for hire, ch. 48; waterways, ch. 50; zoning, ch. 52. 
State Law reference- City control of highways, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 29; city authority to acquire, own, establish and maintain boulevards, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 23; obstructions and encroachments on public highways, MCL 247.171 et seq.; closing of highway for repairs, MCL 247.291 et seq.; driveways, banners, events and parades, MCL 247.321 et seq.; liability of local government for injury from the result of not keeping highway in reasonable repair, MCL 691.1402. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 40-1-40-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREETS 

Sec. 40-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Street means all of the land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, alleys and boulevards in the city, and includes lawn extensions and sidewalks, and the area reserved for lawn extensions and sidewalks where they are not yet constructed. 
(Code 1985, § 4.1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 40-32. - Damage and obstruction. 
(a)  No person shall make any excavation in or cause any damage to any street in the city, except under the conditions and in the manner permitted in this article. 
(b)  No person shall place any article, thing, leaves or obstruction in any street, except under the conditions and in the manner permitted in this article, but this subsection shall not be deemed to prohibit the following: 
(1)  Such temporary obstructions as may be incidental to the expeditious movement of articles and things to and from abutting premises. 
(2)  The lawful parking of vehicles within the part of the street reserved for vehicular traffic. 
(3)  The planting of trees and shrubs as permitted by this Code. 
(4)  Any sign or other material object erected or maintained for public health and safety by the city or other governmental agencies. 
(c)  No person shall suspend anything above any sidewalk or street area unless expressly authorized by this Code, provided that the city commission, when, in its opinion, public safety requires, may authorize the erection of fire escapes or similar devices by resolution. This subsection shall not apply to awnings or marquees when no part thereof is less than seven feet above the sidewalk grade. 
(Code 1985, § 4.2) 
Sec. 40-33. - Permits; insurance; cash deposits. 
(a)  Where permits are authorized in this article, they shall be obtained upon application to the city clerk upon such forms as he shall prescribe, and there shall be a charge as established by resolution of the city commission for each such permit, except as otherwise provided by resolution of the city commission. Such permit shall be revocable by the city manager for failure to comply with this article, rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this article and the lawful orders of the city manager, and shall be valid only for the period of time endorsed thereon. Application for a permit under the provisions of this article shall be deemed an agreement by the applicant to promptly complete the work permitted, observe all pertinent laws and regulations of the city in connection therewith, repair all damage done to the street surface and installations on, over or within such street, including trees, and protect and save harmless the city from all damages or actions at law that may arise or may be brought on account of injury to persons or property resulting from the work done under the permit or in connection therewith. Where liability insurance policies are required to be filed in making application for a permit, they shall comply with the following, except as otherwise specified in this article: 
(1)  Every such insurance policy shall name the city as an additional insured. 
(2)  A duplicate executed copy or photostatic copy of the original of such insurance policy, approved as to form by the city attorney, shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(b)  Where cash deposits are required with the application for any permit under this article, such deposit shall be as established by resolution of the city commission, except as otherwise specified in this article, and such deposit shall be used to defray all expenses to the city arising out of the granting of the permit and work done under the permit or in connection therewith. Six months after the completion of the work done under the permit, any balance of such cash deposit unexpended shall be refunded. In any case where the deposit does not cover all costs and expenses of the city, the deficit shall be paid by the applicant. 
(Code 1985, § 4.3) 
Sec. 40-34. - Openings. 
    No person shall make any excavation or opening in or under any street without first obtaining a written permit from the street administrator. No permit shall be granted until the applicant shall post a cash deposit and file a liability insurance policy as required by section 40-33. 
(Code 1985, § 4.4) 
Sec. 40-35. - Emergency openings. 
    The city manager may, if the public safety requires immediate action, grant permission to make a necessary street opening in an emergency, provided that a permit shall be obtained on the following business day and the provisions of this article shall be complied with. 
(Code 1985, § 4.5) 
Sec. 40-36. - Backfilling trenches. 
    All trenches in a public street or other public place, except by special permission, shall be backfilled in accordance with regulations adopted pursuant to this article. Any settlement shall be corrected within eight hours after notification to do so. 
(Code 1985, § 4.6) 
Sec. 40-37. - Sidewalk vaults. 
    Openings through the sidewalk for the delivery of fuel, when lawfully in existence, shall not be greater than 30 inches in diameter, shall be circular in form, and shall be effectually closed when not in actual use by an iron cover set flush within the surface of the sidewalk, level with the sidewalk, and securely locked in place. All openings in the sidewalk for the admission of light and air shall be closed and protected either by substantial iron grating or illuminating pavement of a design and placed so as to be satisfactory to the city manager. 
(Code 1985, § 4.7) 
Sec. 40-38. - Utility poles. 
    Utility poles may be placed in such streets as the city manager shall prescribe and shall be located thereon in accordance with the directions of the city manager. Such poles shall be removed or relocated as the city manager shall direct from time to time. 
(Code 1985, § 4.8) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 46. 
Sec. 40-39. - Maintenance of installations. 
    Every owner and person in control of any estate maintaining a sidewalk vault, coal hole, manhole or any other excavation, or any post, pole, sign, awning, wire, pipe, conduit or other structure in, under, over or upon any street which is adjacent to or a part of his estate, shall do so only on condition that such maintenance shall be considered as an agreement on his part with the city to keep the installation and the covers thereof, and any gas and electric boxes and tubes thereon, in good repair and condition at all times during his ownership or control thereof, and to indemnify and save harmless the city against all damages or actions at law that may arise or be brought by reason of such excavation or structure being under, over, in or upon the street, or being unfastened, out of repair or defective during such ownership or control. 
(Code 1985, § 4.9) 
Sec. 40-40. - Curb cuts. 
    No opening in or through any curb or street shall be made without first obtaining a written permit from the street administrator. A permit fee shall be set by resolution of the city commission from time to time. Curb cuts and sidewalk driveway crossings to provide access to private property shall comply with the following: 
(1)  No single curb cut shall be less than ten feet. 
(2)  The minimum distance between any curb cut and a public crosswalk shall be five feet. 
(3)  The minimum distance between curb cuts, except those serving residential property, shall be 25 feet. 
(4)  The maximum number of lineal feet of sidewalk driveway crossings permitted for any lot, parcel of land, business or enterprise shall be 45 percent of the total abutting street frontage up to and including 200 lineal feet of street frontage, plus 20 percent of the lineal feet of street frontage in excess of 200 feet. 
(5)  The necessary adjustments to utility poles, light standards, fire hydrants, catchbasins, street or railway signs, signals or other public improvements or installations shall be accomplished without cost to the city. 
(6)  All construction shall be in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the street administrator. 
(Code 1985, § 4.18) 
Sec. 40-41. - Sidewalk obstructions. 
    No person shall occupy any street with any materials or machinery incidental to the construction, demolition or repair of any building adjacent to the street, or for any other purpose, without first obtaining a permit from the city manager and posting a cash deposit and filing an insurance policy as required by section 40-33. 
(Code 1985, § 4.20) 
Sec. 40-42. - Pedestrian passage. 
    At least five feet of sidewalk space shall be kept clean and clear for the free passage of pedestrians; and, if the building operations are such that such free passageway is impracticable, a temporary plank sidewalk, with substantial railings or sidewalk shelter built in accordance with chapter 10, article II, shall be provided around such obstruction. 
(Code 1985, § 4.21) 
Sec. 40-43. - Safeguards. 
    All openings, excavations and obstructions shall be properly and substantially barricaded and railed off, and, at night, shall be provided with prescribed warning lights. Warning lights perpendicular to the flow of traffic shall not be more than three feet apart, and not over 15 feet apartment when parallel to the flow of traffic. 
(Code 1985, § 4.23) 
Sec. 40-44. - Shoring excavations. 
    All openings and excavations shall, where necessary, be properly and substantially sheeted and braced as a safeguard to workmen and to prevent cave-ins or washouts which would tend to injure the thoroughfare or subsurface structure of the street. 
(Code 1985, § 4.24) 
Sec. 40-45. - Moving buildings, etc. 
    No person shall move, transport or convey any building, machinery, truck or trailer that is more than eight feet, eight inches wide or higher than 13 feet, six inches above the surface of the roadway into, across or along any street or other public place in the city, without first obtaining a permit from the city manager. The applicant shall file written clearances from the light, telephone, gas and water utilities, stating that all connections have been properly cut off and, where necessary, all obstructions along the proposed route of moving will be removed without delaying moving operations. In addition, clearance shall be obtained from the police department, approving the proposed route through the city streets and the time of moving, together with an estimated cost to the police department due to the moving operations. The applicant shall deposit with the city the total estimated cost to the police department and other city departments, plus a cash deposit as required by section 40-33, and shall file with the city an insurance policy in the amount as set by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1985, § 4.26) 
Sec. 40-46. - Placing snow on streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove snow from private property and deposit it upon any roadway, alley or sidewalk of the city, except when such person shall have contracted with the city for the removal of such snow and has paid the city the cost of such removal. The contracting, supervision, cost and method of removal shall be determined from time to time by the city manager. 
(b)  The existence of any deposit of snow or ice deposited by artificial means in the traveled portion of any street or sidewalk, or within any ditch or gutter in any public street shall be prima facie evidence that the occupant of the abutting property closest thereto placed or deposited the ice or snow therein. 
(Code 1985, § 4.31) 
Sec. 40-47. - Additional regulations. 
(a)  Public roads shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of standards and specifications for public and private roads as adopted in 2016 and as amended from time to time. 
(b)  The city manager may make additional regulations pertaining to openings and excavations in the streets, curb cuts, street openings and house moving, which regulations shall be subject to the approval of the city commission. No person shall fail to comply with any such regulations. 
(Code 1985, § 4.37; Ord. No. 2016-001 , 6-6-2016) 
Sec. 40-48. - Costs of removal of encroachments and obstructions, and filling of excavations. 
    Encroachments and obstructions in streets may be removed and excavations refilled, and the expense of such removal or refilling charged to the abutting land owner when made or permitted by him or suffered to remain by him, other than in accordance with the terms and conditions of this article. The procedure for collection of such expense shall be as prescribed in section 2-161. 
(Code 1985, § 4.38) 
Sec. 40-49. - Temporary closings. 
(a)  The city manager shall have authority to temporarily close any street, or portion thereof, when he shall deem such street to be unsafe or temporarily unsuitable for use for any reason. He shall cause suitable barriers and signs to be erected on the street, indicating that the street is closed to public travel. 
(b)  When any street, or portion thereof, shall have been closed to public travel, no person shall drive any vehicle upon or over the street, except as may be necessary incidental to any street repair or construction work being done in the area closed to public travel. 
(c)  No person shall move or interfere with any sign or barrier erected pursuant to this section, without authority from the city manager. 
(Code 1985, § 4.39) 
Sec. 40-50. - Road naming and address numbering. 
(a)  Title. There is hereby created, and this section shall be known and cited as the "City of Clare Road Naming and Address Numbering Ordinance." 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a city road naming and address numbering system in cooperation with the county road naming and address numbering system such that properties are numbered and named in a uniform and consistent manner, and to provide enforcement thereof. 
(c)  Authority. This section is adopted under the authority and provision of the applicable statutes of the State of Michigan including, but not limited to, MCL 117.4 et seq. 
(d)  Definitions. Unless a contrary definition is contained in this section, all words and phrases used in this section shall be understood and construed in accordance with their commonly accepted and understood meaning and definition. 
(1)  Address numbering. 
a.  Agent refers to a property owner's attorney, trustee, realtor, purchaser, broker, receiver, or tenant. 
b.  Diagonal roads refers to roads that do not run in an East-West or North-South direction. 
c.  House number shall refer to the number assigned to consecutive intervals along a road pursuant to the number assignment formula contained herein. 
d.  Interval refers to the distance along a roadway, covered by this section, of 10.56 feet, there being 500 intervals per mile. Intervals of greater or lesser in length than 10.56 feet may be determined by dividing the actual distance of the mile section by 500. 
e.  Number assignment formula as found herein is defined as follows: 
Beginning from the point of origin, two house numbers shall be assigned for each interval on the right hand side of the road as one leaves the point of origin being assigned an even number and each interval on the left hand side as one leaves the point of origin assigned an odd number. The numbers assigned shall increase consecutively by equal intervals. Intervals shall run North, South, East, and West or diagonally from the point of origin. 
f.  Point of origin refers to the intersection of an East-West base line and a North-South base line from where all intervals begin. The North-South, East-West intersection in Clare County shall be the section corner that is common to section 36 of Greenwood Township, section 31 of Hayes Township, section 6 of Hatton Township and section 1 of Lincoln Township. 
g.  Primary structure refers to, but not limited to: residential building, mobile home park, commercial building, industrial building, office building, public building, utility facility, billboard, storage facility, lighted outdoor display, well and field pump. 
(2)  Road naming. 
a.  Driveway refers to the portion of the premise accessible to motor vehicle traffic and which provides the principal means of ingress/egress to a single lot or premise from street or road. 
b.  Premise shall mean any lot or single parcel of land owned by any person, entity, firm, or corporation, public or private, improved with any building(s), whether occupied or not. 
c.  Private road refers to any thoroughfare that is not a public road and is accessible to motor vehicle traffic and affords the principal means of ingress/egress of abutting property and from which driveway access is thereby gained to more than one premise, not under the jurisdiction of any governmental unit. 
d.  Road is an interchangeable term in this section and they each refer to any thoroughfare, including both public and private roads, accessible to motor vehicle traffic and which affords the principal means of access to abutting property; and these terms shall also include, but not limited to, street, lane, trail, drive, avenue, court, way, and the like. 
e.  Road name shall refer to any official name as recognized by the government authority. 
(e)  Road naming. The provisions of this section shall apply to public and private road names. Any road, public or private, that exists in the city on or after the effective date of this section shall be, have, and be posted or signed with, a name that shall be registered with and approved by the city. 
(f)  Duplicate road names. Upon the effective date of this section, and thereafter, no road name will be assigned that duplicates an existing named road. The city shall be the sole authority for road naming. 
(g)  Public and private road signs. A private entity that has requested a private road name is responsible for posting signs for that road and must follow any laws, regulations, or statutes governing the placement of road name sign as enacted from time to time by the city. Public authorities shall be responsible for placement of signs on publicly-created roads. 
(h)  Addressing. The city shall assign a house number that is numerically and sequentially correct. The city shall coordinate with Clare County in furtherance of its overall scheme of numbering and labeling. 
(i)  Existing road names and addresses. Addresses and road names that were created prior to the date of this section may remain the same. In some instances the city may elect and decide that addresses and road names be adjusted in order to created coherence with numbers or sequences. It is not the objective of this section to change all previously addressed structures or to change all previously named duplicate road names. Changes to existing addresses and road names will only be made when a nonconformity interferes with the accurate dispatch of emergency vehicles or postal delivery. 
(j)  Procedure for calculating proper house numbers. Beginning from the point of origin, two house numbers shall be assigned for each interval on the right hand side of the road as one leaves the point of origin being assigned an even number and each interval on the left hand side as one leaves the point of origin assigned an odd number. The numbers assigned shall increase consecutively by equal intervals. Intervals shall run North, South, East, and West as diagonally from the point of origin. 
    Fractions shall not be used in assigning house numbers. 
    For standard mile sections (5,280 feet), an interval of 10.56 shall be used. Using the city record map, the house number will be assigned by first determining the nearest mile road or section line between the structure and the transacting base line. The distance between the front door of the primary structure and the mile road/section line will be measured and the corresponding house number as given in table one will be assigned. 
    The corresponding odd or even number in the table will be added to the mile section range number and issued to the property owner. 
    For mile sections that are longer or shorter than the standard length of 5,280 feet, the interval footage shall be determined by dividing the actual distance of the mile section by 500. 
(k)  Pre-numbered recorded subdivision plats. As a general principle, single family residential subdivision plats of record may be pre-numbered by the city in accordance with these rules. 
(l)  Corner lots. The rule to apply when assigning a number to a building on a corner lot is to assign a number from the street upon which the front entrance faces. Dual addresses shall be avoided. 
(m)  Procedure for issuing house numbers along diagonal, meandering, and curvilinear roads. Where the road does not turn directly North-South or East-West, the general course of the road is to be used in determining the house numbering direction. A footage more or less than the 10.56-foot figure must be used in determining the proper house number interval. The correct base interval is obtained by dividing the actual distance of the road by 500. 
    A house number interval will be determined by dividing the feet a house is from the point of origin by the base interval for a particular road. 
(n)  Numbering along roads starting from different points on the same cross roads. When a road does not begin at the same location as a parallel road, the house number shall begin with the same house number measured from the baseline as on the parallel road. 
(o)  Numbering on circle roads and horseshoe shaped roads. Properties along circles roads, loop roads, and horseshoe-shaped roads shall be numbered in consecutive order, pursuant to the procedure for calculating proper house numbers with even numbers on the inside of the circle and the odd numbers on the outside of the circle. 
(p)  Numbering when the roads change direction. If a road changes direction at a 60-degree angle or more and for a length of 300 feet or more, the numbering along the street shall be changed to reflect the orientation with a different baseline. 
(q)  Numbering apartments and condominiums. Individual apartment buildings and group housing projects shall have one address number. Individual dwellings within the apartment complex shall be assigned suffix letters or numerals by the apartment complex management. House numbers shall be assigned to the buildings where a driveway or court joins the road and a number shall be the street address of all of the units, which face upon the driveway of an interior court. 
(r)  Numbering buildings in business and industrial districts. In a business and industrial district, each building facing the roadway, court, or plaza shall have its own designated address number. 
(s)  Numbering duplex buildings. Separate house numbers shall be assigned to the entrances of a duplex house, for an upstairs dwelling, which has an outside entrance, and for separate duplex buildings in the rear of the other buildings. 
(t)  Numbering mobile home parks. Mobile home parks shall have one address number. Individual mobile home lots within the park shall be assigned lot numbers by the mobile home park management. The management shall cause to be displayed, the lot number of each lot as defined in these rules and regulation. 
(u)  Numbering landlocked property. The procedure for calculating proper house numbers shall be used for numbering houses and buildings on landlocked properties. Private driveways and unparallel roads that service landlocked properties shall be given a name that is registered within and approved by the city. 
(v)  Numbering office suites. Office suite buildings shall have one address number. Individual suites within the office building shall be assigned suffix letters or numbers by the office building management. 
(Ord. No. 2009-003, §§ 1-22, 10-5-2009) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2009-003, §§ 1-22, adopted Oct. 5, 2009, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion as § 40-50 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 40-51-40-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 40-81. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Sidewalk means the portion of the street right-of-way designed for pedestrian travel. 
(Code 1985, § 4.51) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 40-82. - Compliance with specifications and permit required. 
    No person shall construct, rebuild or repair any sidewalk, except in accordance with the line, grade, slope and specifications established by the city manager, and by obtaining a written permit from the city clerk, except that sidewalk repairs of less than 50 square feet of sidewalk may be made without a permit. The written permit shall be prominently displayed on the construction site. The fee for such permit shall be as established by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1985, § 4.52) 
Sec. 40-83. - Line and grade stakes. 
    The city manager shall furnish line and grade stakes as may be necessary for proper control of the sidewalk work, but this shall not relieve the owner of responsibility for making careful and accurate measurements in constructing the work to the lines furnished by the city manager. Where it is necessary to replace an engineer's stakes disturbed or destroyed without fault on the part of the city or its employees, a charge as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time shall be paid. 
(Code 1985, § 4.53) 
Sec. 40-84. - Specifications. 
    Sidewalks shall not be less than four inches in thickness and bituminous expansion paper three-eighths inch thick shall be placed in the joints and where other sidewalks, drives and curbs join. All concrete used in sidewalk construction shall, 28 days after placement, be capable of resisting a pressure of 2,500 pounds per square inch without failure. The concrete shall be a five-bag mix, with grade A aggregate or equal. The subbase shall be of four-inch tamped sand. Residential sidewalks shall be five feet wide, with a slope of .25 inch per foot toward the street unless otherwise authorized by the city manager. 
(Code 1985, § 4.54) 
Sec. 40-85. - Permit revocation. 
    The city manager may revoke any permit issued under the terms of this article for incompetency or failure to comply with the terms of this article or the rules, regulations, plans and specifications established by the city. 
(Code 1985, § 4.55) 
Sec. 40-86. - Ordering construction by owners of lots and premises. 
    Pursuant to section 11.4 of the city Charter, the city commission may by resolution require the owners of lots and premises to build sidewalks in the public streets adjacent to and abutting upon such lots and premises. When such resolution shall be adopted, the city clerk shall give notice thereof, in accordance with section 2-161 of this Code, to the owner of such lot or premises, requiring him to construct or rebuild such sidewalk within 30 days from the date of such notice. 
(Code 1985, § 4.56) 
Sec. 40-87. - Construction by city. 
    If the owner of any lot or premises shall fail to build any particular sidewalk as described in the notice as set forth in section 40-86 and within the time and in the manner required thereby, the city manager is hereby authorized and required, immediately after the expiration of the time limited for the construction or rebuilding by the owner, to cause such sidewalk to be constructed and the expense thereof shall be charged to such premises and the owner thereof, and collected as provided in chapter 4 of this Code. 
(Code 1985, § 4.57) 
Sec. 40-88. - Responsibility for clearing. 
    The occupant of every lot or premises adjoining any street, or the owner of such lot or premises if the lot or premises is not occupied, shall clear and keep cleared all sidewalks adjoining such lot or premises from snow, ice, filth and other obstructions. 
(Code 1985, § 4.65) 
Sec. 40-89. - Failure to clear. 
    If any occupant or owner shall neglect or fail to clear ice, snow, filth or other obstructions from the sidewalk adjoining his premises, for a period of 24 consecutive hours or more, he shall be guilty of a violation of this article; and, in addition, the city manager may cause such sidewalk to be cleared and the expense of clearing shall become a debt to the city from the occupant or owner of such premises and shall be collected as a single lot assessment in accordance with section 2-161. 
(Code 1985, § 4.66) 
Secs. 40-90-40-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARADES 

Sec. 40-121. - License required. 
    No person shall form, conduct, promote or organize any parade on the highways, streets and/or alleys or any other public grounds of the city, without first securing a license. 
(Code 1985, § 9.121) 
Sec. 40-122. - License application; fees. 
    Any person desiring a license for any such parade shall make written application to the city clerk, which application shall be in writing and shall be signed by the person responsible for such parade. Such application shall give the names and permanent addresses of the organization desiring the license; the name, address and telephone number of the three highest officials in the organization; the purpose of the licensee in parading; and shall be accompanied by a license fee as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time, to be used to defray the cost of policing the parade. Should the parade require extraordinary policing, the licensee shall pay to the city clerk the cost thereof. 
(Code 1985, § 9.122) 
Sec. 40-123. - Bond. 
    Before any parade license is issued by the city clerk, a corporate surety bond, in an amount as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time, shall be posted with the city clerk to ensure payment of any and all damages to any property, public or private, done in the course of such parade, by either the licensee, his supporters or other person opposing the parade, and the licensee shall be personally responsible for all such damages. 
(Code 1985, § 9.123) 
Sec. 40-124. - Reduction or waiver of license fee or bond. 
    The city shall have the right to reduce and/or waive the license fee and/or surety bond for parades, etc., provided the applicant appears personally at the city commission meeting or before the official to be delegated by the city commission, and shows, to the satisfaction of the city commission or such official, that the applicant's parade would require only minimal policing. The city maintains that principled standards shall be used in determining exemptions. 
(Code 1985, § 9.124) 
Sec. 40-125. - Conduct. 
    Every licensee shall conduct such parade in a manner as shall comply with the rules and regulations set forth by the city commission or delegated official granting the license for the parade; namely, the city is concerned with the time, place, manner and route of the parade. 
(Code 1985, § 9.125) 
Sec. 40-126. - Responsibility. 
    Any person securing a license under this article must set forth in the application the name of the person who will be in charge of the parade, and that such person shall be available at all times during the course of the parade. 
(Code 1985, § 9.126) 
Secs. 40-127-40-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DEMONSTRATIONS 

Sec. 40-161. - Registration. 
(a)  Required. The city ordains that any person, group or organization desiring or planning to hold any public assembly or demonstration on the highways, streets, sidewalks, alleys and/or any other public grounds of the city shall first register their organization at city hall. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose for such registration is to simply allow the city to know who will be responsible for the subsequent activities. In this matter, the city shall protect itself from the responsibility of any harmful activity engaged in or any injury sustained during the demonstration or assembly. The full responsibility will belong in the hands of the organization designated on the registration form. 
(Code 1985, §§ 9.117, 9.118) 
Sec. 40-162. - Regulation. 
(a)  Any person, group or organization holding any public assembly on the streets, highways, sidewalks, alleys, and other public grounds in the City of Clare shall not while doing so possess any of the following items: 
(1)  Wooden planks more than two inches wide and a quarter inch thick. 
(2)  Pepper spray or other similar self-defense spray. 
(3)  Water cannons. 
(4)  Tasers or similar electrical devices. 
(5)  Bricks, stones or rocks. 
(6)  Hammers, crowbars or similar implements. 
(7)  Cans of spray paint or hair spray. 
(8)  Gas masks. 
(9)  Drones. 
(10)  Improvised shields made of metal, plastic or wood. 
(11)  Glass or plastic bottles that are filled with liquids that are alcoholic or not consumable as well as any toxic waste, caustic or flammable material in any kind of container. 
(12)  Tiki torches or other similar items meant to carry fire. 
(13)  Any container containing human or other animal waste products. 
(14)  Metal signs. 
(15)  Metal or plastic pipe longer than 12 inches. 
(16)  Balloons that are not filled with air, oxygen or helium. 
(17)  Projectile launchers, including water cannons. 
(b)  The city shall retain the right, and is obligated under its police powers, to regulate the demonstration, if circumstances deem it necessary. The city's primary concern is the time, place and manner of the demonstration. The city retains the right to discuss these matters of interest with the demonstrators after reviewing the registration form. 
(Code 1985, § 9.119; Ord. No. 2017-007 , 12-4-2017) 
Chapter 41 - SPECIAL EVENTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- In order to preserve the format of the Code and at the discretion of the editor, Art. I was added. 

Sec. 41-1. - Purpose. 
    It is determined by the city that the right of all citizens to make reasonable use of the streets and sidewalks must be preserved to the greatest extent possible. 
    It is further found that certain areas of the city suffer from serious traffic congestion, both vehicular and pedestrian, and that in order to assure essential movement of persons and vehicles and to protect the rights of all members of the public, traffic laws and regulations have been enacted and must be enforced uniformly. 
    It is further found that, during rush hours, areas of the city suffer from extreme traffic congestion, requiring the strict enforcement of traffic laws and regulations in order to protect the rights of all persons to move upon the city streets. 
    It is further found that various groups, associations and organizations desirous of holding public parades, marches and processions wish to be exempted from complying with the laws and regulations relating to traffic controls, including but not limited to, traffic lights, traffic signals and signs, and various standard rules for the operation of persons and motor vehicles. 
    It is further found that such organizations, groups or associations often desire and/or require police escorts to assure clear and safe passage for the parade, march or procession. 
    It is further found that it is the policy of the city to permit waiver of enforcement of traffic laws and regulations relating to vehicular and pedestrian traffic in certain instances and under certain conditions where such a waiver or variance in normal procedures would not unreasonably obstruct or interfere with free ingress and egress to and from public and private property or to and from various areas of the city and will not present an unreasonable hazard to the public. It is also found that a reasonable, short-term obstruction of ingress and egress may be required for public safety on certain occasions. 
    It is further found that the planning for, scheduling of personnel for, and the carrying out of all the necessary preparations for, and executions of, parades, marches and processions in regard to which requests are made for waiver or variance of laws or regulations relating to pedestrian or vehicular traffic restriction of parking on the parade route, change of traffic patterns, or provision of police escorts, require advance notice to the city and require the expenditure of public funds. 
    It is further found that unless adequate advance preparation is made and adequate personnel are provided, it is both unsafe and impractical for parades, marches or processions to move in or about the city's streets and sidewalks unless in strict compliance with all laws and regulations relating to the movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2011-007, 7-18-2011) 
Sec. 41-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Assembly shall mean any event designed, promoted or conducted in order to encourage the gathering of people upon public property at a specified location and shall include any, ceremony, show, demonstration, exhibition, street dance, pageant, party, circus, concert, sporting event, game or similar activity, except that a residential block party shall not be considered an assembly for the purposes of this article, nor shall any event taking place entirely on property designated as a city park. 
    Chief of police includes any representative designated by the chief of police. 
    Exempt gathering mean any gathering for any reason involving 12 people or less. 
    Exempted property shall mean public property where no special event permit is required. In the city, exempted property means: the exterior of city hall and the city-owned land adjacent to city hall; and the police/public safety building, but not including any public park. Such use shall avoid, to the degree possible, disruption of other normal or scheduled activities at those facilities. 
    Parade shall mean a procession of any kind, having a common purpose or goal, which moves from place to place upon public property along a specified route and shall include any march, race, walk-a-thon, bike-a-thon, demonstration, or similar activity. The following processions are not included in the definition of "parade": 
(1)  Processions composed wholly of the military or naval forces of the United States or the state; 
(2)  Processions incidental to a funeral; 
(3)  Processions composed of one or more governmental officials or candidates accompanied by security personnel to which such officials or candidates are entitled by virtue of their office or candidacy. 
    Public property shall mean any street, alley, sidewalk, park, or parking lot owned, controlled or managed by the city. 
    Special event shall mean any assembly, or parade held on public property as defined in this article. "Special event" shall not include events for which all participants use sidewalks, observe traffic safety and safety regulations and do not interfere with the safe and orderly movement of pedestrians, vehicles and funeral processions. 
    Sponsor shall mean the person who has applied for a permit under this article. The sponsor shall be the person to whom the permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 2011-007, 7-18-2011) 
Sec. 41-3. - Permit required; procedure. 
(a)  Any person desiring to sponsor a special event on any street of the city shall first obtain a permit therefore from the city. Applications shall be submitted to the city manager or his designee. 
(1)  Written application for such permit should be made to the chief of police at least 30 days in advance in order to insure timely appeal of a denial of the application. 
(2)  All applications for permits shall be processed, so long as they are received at least 15 working days in advance of the proposed date of the event, unless time frames are waived by the city. 
(3)  However, when the proposed event designates a route which passes through a business district, extends over an area which involves more than five intersections (not including alleys) anticipates a number of participants exceeding 250, the applicant shall apply at least 30 days in advance of the proposed date. 
(4)  The city may grant a permit to an applicant who applies less than 15 working days in advance if the city determines that the permit application requires no substantial investigation or preparation of the route. 
(b)  Application shall be made on a form provided by the clerk and shall include: 
(1)  The name, business address, home address, business phone number and home phone number of the applicant (who shall be a natural person), the sponsor of the event, and the event organizer (the person responsible for managing and organizing the details of the special event); 
(2)  The relationship of the applicant to the sponsor; 
(3)  Proof of the applicant's authority to act on behalf of the sponsor; 
(4)  A description of the route of the event; 
(5)  The names of all of the streets to be used; 
(6)  The number of participants anticipated; 
(7)  The starting time and expected finishing time of the event; and 
(8)  Any other information requested in order to enable the city to verify the information required in the subsection. 
(c)  Application for a permit shall be accompanied by an application fee, as set by the city commission by resolution from time to time. 
(d)  The city may issue a permit immediately upon approval of the permit application and execution and receipt of the indemnification agreement required by section 41-8. 
(e)  The city manager shall, as appropriate, transmit copies of any special event permit issued to the mayor's office, the fire department, the department of public works, the finance department, the legal department, and any other effected departments. 
(Ord. No. 2011-007, 7-18-2011) 
Sec. 41-4. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The time limitations prescribed above for the filing of a permit application may be waived by the city if the applicant can show that the proposed special event is for the purpose of spontaneous communication of topical ideas that could not have been foreseen in advance of the required application period or that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant prevented timely filing of the application. 
(b)  No permit shall be required if a special event occurs on exempted property as defined in this article. 
(c)  First amendment protected or electoral related activities are exempt form the permit requirement and restrictions imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-007, 7-18-2011) 
Sec. 41-5. - Criteria for issuance. 
    The city shall issue a special event permit when, from consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, it appears that: 
(1)  The conduct of the special event will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to the special event; 
(2)  The conduct of the special event will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers to properly police the special event and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city; 
(3)  The conduct of the special event will not prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the special event and contiguous areas; 
(4)  The conduct of the special event will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment; 
(5)  The conduct of the special event is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or to create a disturbance; 
(6)  The special event is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route; 
(7)  The applicant for a permit, the sponsor of the event, and the event organizer have not violated the terms of any previous special event permit, have not caused undue traffic congestion and/or police problems under any previous special event permit, and are current on any fees charged in conjunction with any previous special event permit; and 
(8)  The applicant for a permit, the sponsor of the event, and the event organizer have provided the evidence of sufficient insurance to meet the standard set by the city, by resolution, from time-to-time. 
(Ord. No. 2011-007, 7-18-2011) 
Sec. 41-6. - Notice of denial; appeal. 
(a)  If the city manager denies an application for a special event permit, notice of denial shall be mailed to the applicant. Such notice shall state the reasons for denial of the permit. 
(b)  Denial of an application for a special event permit may be appealed to the city commission. The appeal shall be filed within five business days after the notice of denial is received. The city commission shall consider such appeal and may either concur in the action of the city manager or overrule such action and order that the permit be approved. If the city orders that a permit be approved, it shall have the authority to impose only such conditions as are recommended by the city department heads. 
(Ord. No. 2011-007, 7-18-2011) 
Sec. 41-7. - Payment of city services. 
(a)  The sponsor of a special event who accepts a permit thereby consents to the formation of a contract between the sponsor and the city for payment of costs for city services and equipment as set forth in this section. 
(b)  Within 21 days of the conclusion of the special event, the city will send the sponsor a bill for the actual amount of the direct and reasonable costs incurred by the city to provide additional police and public works services for the special event. 
(c)  Within 14 days after the date of the bill, the sponsor shall pay to the city the direct and reasonable costs incurred by the city to provide additional police and public works services for the special event. 
(d)  The fees under this section shall not apply to parades conducted for the primary purpose of public-issue speech protected by the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 2011-007, 7-18-2011) 
Sec. 41-8. - Indemnification agreement. 
    The applicant, the sponsor of the event, and the event organizer shall sign an indemnification agreement with terms established by the legal department. 
(Ord. No. 2011-007, 7-18-2011) 
Sec. 41-9. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  The city manager may revoke a special event permit if an emergency arises which makes it impossible to assign the necessary personnel to the event and still provide the personnel required elsewhere to protect the public, or if information is received after the permit is issued from which the chief of police reasonably concludes that the permit should not have been approved. 
(b)  If participants violate any conditions contained in a special event permit, the city manager, chief of police or the police officer assigned by the chief of police as the officer in charge of overseeing personnel necessary to police the event may, after warning the participants and providing them with an opportunity to follow the permit conditions, revoke the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2011-007, 7-18-2011) 
Sec. 41-10. - Unlawful to sponsor or participate in a special event without a permit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sponsor a special event unless a permit has been issued for the event, or for any person to participate in such an event with the knowledge that the sponsors of the event have not been issued the required permit or with the knowledge that a permit has been issued and subsequently revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2011-007, 7-18-2011) 
Sec. 41-11. - Penalty. 
    A violation of this article shall be prosecuted as a misdemeanor offense. 
(Ord. No. 2011-007, 7-18-2011) 
Secs. 41-12-41-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC EVENTS INVOLVING ALCOHOL 

Sec. 41-20. - Purpose. 
(a)  Scope of regulation. This section applies to all public gatherings in the city located both on any public property, including exempted property, pursuant to section 41-2. 
(b)  Required. The city ordains that any person, group or organization which has sought a permit or permission to hold any public assembly, event, demonstration, parade or other gathering may make application to the city for permission to have or serve alcohol in connection with the event. The application shall be made to the city manager, and shall include documentation reflecting an applicable Liquor License from the Michigan Liquor Control Commission that will permit such service. 
(c)  Purpose. The purpose for such permit and registration is to simply allow the city to make reasonable regulations for the presence of alcohol in connection with the event. The permit, if granted, will allow the city to implement public safety measures, such as allocation of public safety personnel and equipment to assure the safety of the public. The city shall protect itself from all responsibility of any harmful activity engaged in or any injury sustained during the event permitted. The full responsibility for the event and the use of alcohol at the event and its consequences shall belong in the hands of the organization designated on the registration form. 
(d)  Fee. The city shall set a fee for this permit by resolution from time to time. 
(e)  The city shall retain the right and is obligated under its police powers to impose reasonable regulations for the safety of the public if circumstances make it necessary. The city's primary concern is the time, place and safety of the public. The city retains the right to take whatever actions are necessary to protect the public. 
(f)  Any costs incurred by the city may be billed to the event consistent with section 41-7. 
(Ord. No. 2011-007, 7-18-2011) 
Chapter 42 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 12; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40; utilities, ch. 46; zoning, ch. 52. 
State Law reference- Michigan telecommunications act, MCL 484.2101 et seq.; metropolitan extension telecommunications right-of-way oversight act, MCL 484.3101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1-42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS 

Sec. 42-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Access channel means any program or signal channel available for nonprofit use by government agencies, educational institutions, city groups and individual members of the public under terms established by the franchise agreement. 
    Administrator means the chief administrative officer of the grantor or the person designated or provided with the authority to execute this article. 
    Application means any proposal seeking authority from the grantor to construct, develop, reconstruct or redevelop and operate a cable system within the jurisdiction of the grantor pursuant to this article. Such term shall include any initial proposal, as well as all amendments and informal correspondence related thereto, all subsequent renewal proposals and, in each and every instance, such term means the inclusion of all information requested in this article. 
    Basic service means at least all of the following: 
(1)  The retransmission to all subscribers of all broadcast television channel signals authorized by the Federal Communications Commission and provided for in the franchise agreement; 
(2)  The cablecasting to all subscribers of programming on the local origination channel and all public, educational, governmental and community access channels. 
    Broadcast signal means a television or radio signal that is transmitted over the air and is received by a cable communications system off the air through a microwave or satellite link, and retransmitted to cable system subscribers. 
    Cable communications system and system mean a system of antennas, cables, amplifiers, towers, microwave links, cablecasting studios and any other conductors, converters, equipment or facilities designed and constructed for the purpose of distributing video programming to home subscribers and for producing, receiving, amplifying, storing, processing or distributing audio, video, digital or other forms of electronic or electric signals. 
    Cable facility means a nonbroadcast signal that originates within the facilities of the cable communications system. 
    Cablecast means to distribute programs originating locally to subscribers to the cable system. 
    Channel means a frequency band, which is capable of carrying either one standard video signal, a number of audio, digital or other nonvideo signals or some combination of such signals. 
    Community access group means any nonprofit group or organization designated as eligible to utilize access channels and facilities. 
    Converter means an electronic device which converts signals transmitted as cable service to a frequency which permits their reception on subscribers' television receivers. 
    Drop means the cable and related hardware, including grounding materials, which connect a subscriber's premises to the cable system. 
    Easement means the right to occupy and use public rights-of-way, including public utility easements, for the operation of a cable system. 
    Education access channel means any channel where local educational institutions are the primary designated programmers. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications commission and any legally appointed designee, agent or successor. 
    Franchise means the rights granted pursuant to this article to construct, own, operate and maintain a system, as defined in this section, within the jurisdiction of the grantor. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean, nor include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the jurisdiction of the grantor as required by other ordinances and laws of the grantor. 
    Franchise agreement means a written agreement between the grantor and grantee, including the specifications, franchise applications and other related material establishing the grantee's rights and responsibilities relating to construction, operation and maintenance of a cable communications system. 
    Government access channel means any channel where local governmental agencies are the designated programmer. 
    Grantee means the franchisee, its successors or delegates acting within the scope of its franchise. 
    Grantor means the city or its designee. 
    Gross receipts means all revenues derived directly or indirectly by a grantee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parents and any person in which a grantee owns any interest from or in connection with the operation of the cable system for the delivery of cable service, including, but not limited to, all monthly and subscriber fees for basic service and any premium services, installation and reconnection charges, equipment rental charges for converters, videocassette recorders, video production equipment and videotape programming, advertising revenue and leased channel revenue; provided, however, that such term does not include revenues generated from the sale or lease of capital assets unrelated to the operation of the cable system within the city or to the delivery of cable service outside of the city. 
    Headend means any location which houses the electronic equipment that transmits the necessary signal and services for the cable system, and includes subheadends and similar facilities. 
    Installation means the complete process of constructing a subscriber drop which connects a television receiver to the cable system. 
    Leased access and leased access channel mean any channel, or portion of a channel, available for lease and programming by persons or entities other than the grantee. 
    Local origination channel means any channel where the grantee is the primary designated programmer and provides local programs to subscribers. 
    Parental control lock-out device means a special electronic circuit or other appropriate device designed to permit a subscriber to scramble, block or trap temporarily any signal that cannot be viewed without the use of a code or physical "key" apparatus. 
    Pay cable and pay television mean the delivery of television signals over the cable communications system for a fee or charge to subscribers, over and above the charge for basic service on a per program, per channel or other subscription basis. 
    Public access channel, community access channel and community channel mean any channel where any member of the general public or any noncommercial organization may be a programmer, without charge, on a nondiscriminatory basis. 
    Street means the surface of, as well as the space above and below, any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way or place, alley, court, sidewalk, boulevard, parkway, drive or any easement or extension held by the grantor for any public purpose and includes any other easements or rights-of-way or extensions as may be later held by the grantor which shall, within their proper use and meaning, entitle the grantor and its grantee to their use. 
    Theft of service means the unauthorized reception of cable service, and includes the action of any person who shall intercept or receive, or assist in intercepting or receiving, any cable service offered over a cable system, unless such actions are specifically or otherwise authorized by a grantee or by law. 
(Code 1985, § 2.172) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-32. - Findings; purpose; goals. 
    The grantor finds that the development of the cable communications system has the potential of having great benefit and impact upon its citizens. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the grantor further finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the grantor or such persons as the grantor shall designate. It is the purpose of this article and subsequent amendments to provide for and specify the means to attain the best possible public interest and public purpose in these matters and any franchise issued pursuant to this article shall be deemed to include this finding as an internal part. Further, it is recognized that cable communications systems have the capacity to provide not only entertainment and information services to the city residents, but can provide a variety of interactive communication services to institutions and individuals. Many of these services involve municipal agencies and other public institutions, by providing governmental, educational or health care communications. For such purposes, to the extent practicable, the following goals underlie the regulations contained in this article: 
(1)  The cable communications system should be capable of accommodating both the present and reasonably foreseeable future communications needs of the city. 
(2)  The cable communications system should be improved and upgraded, if necessary, during the franchise term so that the new facilities necessary for the operation of this system shall be integrated, to the maximum extent possible, with existing facilities. 
(3)  The cable communications system authorized by this article shall be responsive to the needs and interests of the city, and shall provide a wide diversity of information sources and services to the public. 
(4)  The public, educational and governmental needs for access to the cable communications system should be met. 
(Code 1985, § 2.173) 
Sec. 42-33. - Franchise required. 
    No person shall own or operate a cable communications system in the jurisdiction without first making application and receiving approval for a franchise in the form of a franchise agreement between the grantor and the grantee, which shall comply with all of the terms and specifications contained in this article. Franchise agreements shall authorize the use of public easements for the construction and operation of cable communication systems, but they shall not convey any property rights to any grantee. No franchise agreement shall either expressly or impliedly be deemed to restrict the granting of subsequent agreements, nor shall any franchise agreement create any right to renewal. The failure to obtain a franchise agreement as required by this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1985, § 2.174) 
Sec. 42-34. - Franchise application process. 
    Applications for a franchise shall be reviewed in accordance with the procedures of this section. Persons seeking to obtain a franchise may at any time file a written application with the grantor's administrator or designee in conformity with the following minimum requirements. The grantor reserves the right to issue more specific requests for proposals (RFP) from time to time as circumstances may require, in which case, all information specified must be supplied. 
(1)  Basic information. In order to be reviewed in accordance with this section, all applications must include an application fee as set by the grantor or the grantor's designee and present the following detailed information: 
a.  The applicant's legal name and principal business address. 
b.  A listing of the applicant's officers, directors and/or other principals, with sufficient biographical information to permit the grantor to evaluate the expertise of the applicant. 
c.  A listing of stockholders or other equity investors or owners having a minimum of two percent interest at the time of the application and an indication of the person having control of the application, together with conformed copies of any articles of incorporation and bylaws. 
d.  A complete set of financial statements prepared by an independent firm of certified public accountants, with certification by a financial officer of the applicant, which include a profit and loss statement and balance sheet covering the operation of the current system for the past two years in the case of a renewal application, or covering any other cable communication system which the applicant has owned for the past two fiscal years of operation in the case of an initial application. 
e.  A consolidated statement of net worth containing sufficient detailed information so that, when reviewed together with the required financial statements, the grantor would be able to readily determine the financial responsibility of the applicant. 
f.  A general description of the status of the current system or proposed design for any planned new system, with detailed maps for construction or reconstruction showing where the applicant has used or will use the public right-of-way, antenna/tower locations, trunk and feeder design, channel capacity, extent of two-way capability, addressability and microwave facilities. 
g.  A detailed description of currently existing or proposed video production capability, together with the proposed plans for developing the usage of such capability. 
h.  A description of the cable services to be provided over the system and, where service is to be offered in packages or tiers, some designation of the services available on each tier, as well as any technical devices required to receive such services. 
i.  A detailed discussion of the specific plans which the applicant intends to pursue in order to meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the city. 
j.  In the case of renewal applications, a detailed statement of the activities of the grantee which meet or exceed the requirements of any current franchise. 
k.  A sworn statement by the chief executive officer of the applicant, certifying the truth of all information contained in the application. 
(2)  Review procedure. 
a.  Upon receipt, the application shall be reviewed. If the application does not appear to be complete, it shall be returned to the applicant with an indication of what additional information is required. 
b.  The review shall consider the relevant strengths and weaknesses of every applicant on its own merits. The service record of the applicant in other communities, as well as the past service record within the jurisdiction, in the case of a renewal application, shall be relevant criteria, among others. In particular, the review may focus upon the demonstrated ability of an applicant to develop new and advanced uses of its technology, its plans to develop city interest and usage of the technology, the price/value relationship between current or proposed services and the satisfaction of the subscribers or probable subscribers, the strength of on-site management, as well as any other criteria which the grantor deems relevant. 
(3)  Public hearings. The grantor shall not execute a franchise agreement for a term of years in compliance with this article, unless legal, financial, technical and operational qualifications of the grantee are established, as well as the adequacy and feasibility of the proposed contractual arrangements. Where an applicant demonstrates that it can provide cable services deemed to be in the best interest of the city, the application may be approved. Following a preliminary determination that an application appears to be in the best interest of the city, the grantor shall notify the applicant of the date and time set for a public hearing on the proposed contractual arrangements and the findings of the grantor to date. The hearing shall be preceded by public notice published at least ten days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. If the grantor approves the findings made at the public hearing, it may grant a franchise to the applicant in the form of a franchise agreement, which shall constitute a contract between the grantor and the grantee. 
(4)  Negotiated conditions or provisions of the franchise agreement. The franchise agreement shall contain such further conditions or provisions as may be negotiated between the grantor and the grantee. 
(5)  Acknowledgement of grantee. A grantee shall acknowledge its acceptance of a franchise agreement by written affidavit, in a form approved by the grantor, wherein it shall be recited that the grantee has reviewed, in detail, the terms and conditions contained therein with legal counsel of its choice and that it is satisfied and accepts such terms as its negotiated agreement to provide cable service and that it knowingly accepts all business risks. 
(Code 1985, § 2.175) 
Sec. 42-35. - Franchise requirements. 
    A franchise agreement executed pursuant to this article shall incorporate the terms and conditions set forth in this article, whether or not such terms and conditions are fully reproduced therein, which incorporation shall commit a grantee to be bound by the rules and regulations established in accordance with the following provisions and all other sections of this article: 
(1)  Term. The maximum term for any franchise agreement between the grantor and a grantee shall be 15 years and the minimum term shall be one year. The grantor shall approve the term which it deems to be in the best interest of the city and in furtherance of the public health, safety and convenience according to all of the facts and circumstances of each application. 
(2)  Initial service area; construction time line. 
a.  Each applicant for a franchise to provide cable service shall, in its application, define the initial service area and provide a line extension and drop policy for extending areas outside of the initial service area. 
b.  Upon execution of a franchise agreement, the grantee shall proceed as soon as may be practical to construct or reconstruct the cable system so as to be in compliance with this article and any franchise agreement. The failure or neglect to complete construction, reconstruction or maintenance within the allotted time or any extension shall render any franchise agreement voidable upon written notice from the grantor of its intention to cancel the contract. 
(3)  Fee. 
a.  As compensation for the use of the streets, public ways and places, and other facilities for the construction, operation, maintenance, modification or reconstruction of a cable system, and for the grantor's costs of maintenance, improvement and supervision thereof, and for the grantor's costs of establishing and conducting the regulatory activities required by virtue of the granting of a franchise pursuant to this article, the grantee shall pay to the grantor five percent of its annual gross receipts for the term of its franchise agreement, or any portion thereof, while it is operating a cable system in accordance with this article. 
b.  The grantor expressly reserves the right to negotiate a lower percentage fee in any franchise agreement if it determines that such a lower percentage is in the best interest of the city. 
c.  The franchise fee set forth in any franchise agreement shall be due and payable on a monthly basis. The grantee shall prepare a monthly report stating its gross receipts by revenue category for the immediately preceding month. The gross receipts report shall be submitted to the administrator or the grantor's designee with the franchise fee percentage payment no later than the close of business on the 30th day of the month following the reporting period. 
d.  At the end of any calendar year, the franchise fees paid by a grantee shall be adjusted to account for any under or over payments. In no event shall the franchise fees paid to the grantor exceed five percent of the gross receipts derived from any 12-month period of operation of the cable system, including the time value of money, which would have lawfully been collected if such fees had been paid per annum in arrears. The grantee shall be solely responsible for determining the amount of its monthly payments in such regard. To the extent that overpayments occur, any amounts paid in excess of that which was due shall be deemed to be credited to the following month's payment. The failure to remit the full balance due in any month shall be cured at the year's end by a complete audit. The grantee shall submit complete financial statements, prepared by an independent certified public accountant, to the grantor no later than April 15 of each year of operation, detailing the grantee's operation by month for the preceding calendar year. Interest on any underpaid amounts shall accrue from the date such payments were due until they are paid at the maximum allowable rate under state law. 
e.  Nothing in this subsection (3) shall in any way restrict or nullify any liquidated damage provisions relating to nonpayment of franchise fees on a timely basis contained elsewhere in this article or in a franchise agreement, and nothing in this subsection (3) shall restrict the authority of the grantor to tax the grantee in the ordinary course of its operations solely because of its status as a franchisee. 
(4)  Indemnification. Each applicant for a franchise to own and operate a cable system in the city shall agree in its application to indemnify the grantor against liability for any and all claims arising out of the application process, renewal process, installation, operation, maintenance, construction or reconstruction, extension or removal of the cable system. The agreement to indemnity the grantor shall be stated in every franchise agreement executed and shall expressly include a reference to the reimbursement of all expenses incurred by the grantor in defending itself if any claims are made against it by way of lawsuit or otherwise. The grantor shall notify the grantee or applicant within 30 days following the receipt of any claim of demand for which the grantee or applicant would be liable according to its indemnification responsibilities. Any such notice will be given in writing to the person and at the place named in the franchise agreement or application for a franchise. 
(5)  Insurance. 
a.  In order to provide for the general welfare and convenience of the public and to protect the interests of the grantor, every applicant for a franchise shall indicate its ability to obtain insurance in a form and amount which satisfies the requirements set forth in this subsection (5). The grantor shall not execute a franchise agreement in accordance with this article unless and until an approved grantee provides adequate proof of insurance, together with written proof of payment of all such premiums as may be required to put the coverage described in full force and effect. It shall be the duty of every grantee to file, annually, with the grantor, proof of insurance coverage, including copies of policies. 
b.  Each grantee shall obtain and shall keep in full force and effect at all times during the term of any franchise agreement, or extension thereof, a policy of broad form comprehensive general liability insurance, which includes personal injury liability, and blanket contractual liability. Such policy shall provide the minimum coverages for the benefit of the grantor as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time. Each grantee shall also furnish the grantor a bond for the faithful performance of its obligations under the contract, if awarded under this article, in an amount as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time. Such coverage limits may be achieved in the primary policy or in combination with an umbrella/excess liability policy. If umbrella or excess policies are used, the policy shall include a "broad as primary" endorsement. 
c.  Each grantee shall obtain and shall keep in full force and effect at all times during the term of any franchise agreement, or extensions thereof, all risk liability damage insurance (excluding only flood and earthquake coverage) covering losses arising with respect to the following real and personal property incidental to the operation of its cable system: all buildings, offices, studios and other realty or personalty ordinarily contained therein; all headend electronics or any subheadends; all earth stations, antenna towers and microwave transmission towers; and all vehicles. No physical damage insurance shall be required for the distribution system (trunk, feeder or drop lines), amplifiers or passive hardware or converters. It shall be the sole responsibility of any grantee to pay for all premiums due from the coverage outlined in this subsection (5). 
d.  Each policy of insurance required by this subsection (5) shall contain a 90-day cancellation or nonrenewal provision which shall expressly require the carrier to give written notice to the grantor administrator 90 days prior to cancellation, nonrenewal or material alteration of coverage. 
e.  Any policy of insurance issued pursuant to the requirements of this subsection (5) shall only satisfy the requirements of this article if it shall be issued by a responsible and nonassessable insurance carrier duly authorized to do business in the state, which company must have been rated at least B+ by Best's during each of the preceding five years. 
f.  Nothing in this subsection (5) shall be construed to excuse a grantee from the faithful performance of its obligations under any franchise agreement or to limit its liability under any provision of this article. 
(6)  Security fund. 
a.  Prior to the execution of a franchise agreement, the grantee shall provide and maintain a security fund, for the period and in the sum specified in the franchise agreement, as security for the faithful performance by it of all the provisions of the franchise, and compliance with all orders, permits and directions of any agency of the grantor having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under the franchise, and the payment by the grantor of any claims, liens and taxes due the grantor which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the system. The security fund may be assessed by the grantor for purposes including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Failure of the grantee to pay the grantor sums due under the terms of the franchise; 
2.  Reimbursement of costs borne by the grantor to correct franchise violations not corrected by the grantee after due notice; 
3.  Liquidated damages assessed against the grantee due to default or violation of franchise requirements, which result in financial damages to the grantor; 
4.  Liquidated damages assessed against the grantee due to revocation pursuant to subsection (10) of this section. 
b.  The letter of credit and the performance bond shall contain both of the following unrestricted endorsement: 
"The drawee acknowledges that this letter of credit may not be cancelled by the surety under any circumstances without written authorization from the ___________." 
The statement of the clerk of the grantor in the following form, shall be sufficient to draw against the letter of credit upon presentment: 
"I (We) certify that ___________ now holds a franchise to operate a cable television system within the ___________, and ___________ is now in material breach of its agreements with the grantor." 
c.  Prior to drawing upon the letter of credit or performance bond for the purpose described in this subsection (6), the grantor shall notify the grantee in writing that payment is due and the grantee shall have ten days from the receipt of the written notice to make a full and complete payment. If the grantee does not make the payment within ten days, the grantor may withdraw the amount thereof, with interest and penalties, from the letter of credit or the performance bond. 
d.  Within three days of a withdrawal from the letter of credit or performance bond, the grantor shall send to the grantee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notification of the amount, date and purpose of such withdrawal. 
e.  No later than 30 days after mailing to the grantee, by certified mail, of the notification of a withdrawal pursuant to subsection (6)c. of this section, the grantee shall replenish the letter of credit or performance bond in an amount equal to the amount so withdrawn, unless the grantee has challenged such withdrawal and/or the basis thereafter. Failure to make timely replenishment of such amount to the letter of credit and/or performance bond shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(7)  Liquidated damages. 
a.  In order to facilitate an orderly regulatory framework and provide for the common interests of the grantor and the grantee, any franchise agreement executed pursuant to this article shall contain negotiated dollar amounts to serve as fixed and liquidated damages for the violation of this article or the franchise agreement. The article violations which are to be specified in detail in the franchise agreement shall be those for which ongoing monitoring and enforcement are unduly burdensome for the grantor and which are such that it would be impossible to determine the actual dollar value of damage to the grantor or the public. Similarly, the franchise agreement violations which are to be specified for purposes of liquidated damages shall be those which are not ordinarily capable of being cured by compensatory or punitive damages at law. It is the express purpose of this subsection to identify the common interests of the grantor and the grantee in such a way as to forestall resort to termination of the contract as a remedy for material breaches of the contract or this article and to thereby protect the investment of the grantee and ensure continuity of service for the city. 
b.  The liquidated damages specified in a franchise agreement shall serve as the primary pecuniary remedy for the specified violations. However, nothing in this subsection (7) shall prevent or bar the grantor from pursuing any remedies at law or in equity where a material breach of a franchise agreement persists, notwithstanding the payment of liquidated damages. 
(8)  Regulatory authority. 
a.  Governing requirements. At all times during the term of the franchise, the grantee shall comply with all laws, rules or regulations of the grantor, state or federal government, or their regulatory agencies or commissions, which are or may be applicable to the construction and operation of the cable communications system, including, without limitation, all laws, ordinances or regulations in force or enacted, provided that any law, regulation or ordinance enacted shall not materially affect the rights under the franchise. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed a waiver of grantee's right to challenge the validity of any such law, rule or regulation. The grantee shall comply with new laws and regulations, such as the Americans with Disabilities act. 
b.  Change in law or regulation. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article to the contrary, the grantee shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations of the local, state and federal government. If any action of the state or federal government, or any agency thereof, or any court of competent jurisdiction upon final adjudication, substantially reduce in any way the power or authority of the grantor under this article or franchise, or if in compliance with any local, state or federal law or regulation, the grantee finds conflict with the terms of this article, the franchise or any law or regulation of the grantor, then, as soon as possible following thereof, the grantee shall notify the grantor of the point of conflict believed to exist between such law or regulation and the law or regulations of the grantor, this article and the franchise. The grantor, at its option, may notify the grantee that it wishes to negotiate the provisions which are affected in any way by such modification in regulations or statutory authority. Thereafter, the grantee shall negotiate in good faith with the city in the development of alternative provisions which shall, to the extent permitted by law, materially maintain the rights of the city as established under the terms of this article and the franchise. The city shall have the duty, based upon the results of such negotiations, to modify any of the provisions to such a reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of this article and the franchise and the agreement reached in the negotiations. 
c.  Reservation of rights for regulation. The grantor reserves the right to exercise the maximum plenary authority, as may be lawfully permissible, to regulate the cable communications system, the franchisee and the grantee. Should applicable legislative, judicial or regulatory authorities at any time permit regulation not presently permitted to the grantor, the grantor may, without approval of the grantee, engage in any such regulation as may then be permissible, whether or not contemplated by this article or the franchise, including, without limitation, regulations regarding franchise fees, taxes, programming, rates charged to subscribers and users, consumer protection or any other similar or dissimilar matter. 
d.  Right of inspection of records, etc. The grantor shall have the right to inspect all books, records, reports, maps, plans and financial statements of the grantee and any parent company, to the extent such materials are relevant to the grantee's performance of its obligations under this article and the franchise, and other like materials of the grantee, at any time during normal business hours upon 24 hours' prior notice to the grantee. 
e.  Right of inspection and testing of cable facilities and installation work. The grantor shall have the right to inspect all cable facilities or installation work performed subject to the provisions of the franchise and to make such tests as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this article and other pertinent provisions of the law. 
f.  Nonexclusivity. Any franchise granted pursuant to this article shall be nonexclusive. The grantor specifically reserves the right to: 
1.  Grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a cable communications system as it deems appropriate; and/or 
2.  Build, operate and own such cable communications system as it deems appropriate. 
g.  Expense reimbursement to grantor. The grantee shall pay the grantor a sum of money which will, when added to any application fees received, reimburse all reasonable costs and expenses incurred by it in connection with the granting of an initial franchise, including, but not limited to, consultant fees, attorney's fees, publication fees, travel expenses and all other direct costs. To the extent allowed by law, the grantee shall pay the grantor a sum of money which will reimburse all reasonable costs and expenses incurred by it in connection with the extending or renewing of a franchise, including, but not limited to, consultant fees, attorney's fees, publication fees, travel expenses and all other direct costs. The grantor shall submit a detailed schedule of all such costs. Such payment shall be made within 30 days after the grantor furnished the grantee with a written statement of such expenses. 
(9)  Reports required. 
a.  Annual reports. The grantee shall file the following reports, which shall be submitted 90 days after the end of the grantee's fiscal year, with the grantor administrator: 
1.  Facilities report. An annual report setting forth the physical miles of cable plant construction and reconstruction, and cable plant in operation. The report shall also indicate modifications to the headend and other areas of system operations (i.e., billing, converters and equipment for new services). 
2.  Financial reports. 
i.  An ownership report, indicating all persons who, at any time during the preceding year, did control or benefit from an interest in the franchise of one percent or more. 
ii.  An annual, fully audited and certified financial statement from the previous calendar year, including subscriber revenue from each category of service and every source of nonsubscriber revenue. 
iii.  An annual list of officers and members of the board of the grantee and any parent corporation. 
3.  Operational reports. 
i.  A report on the system's technical tests and measurements, as set forth in this article and in the franchise. 
ii.  A report of new services added and a projection for services planned for the future. 
iii.  A report on support provided by the grantee for public, educational and governmental channels and other public benefit projects. 
iv.  A compilation of the monthly reports to provide a yearend analysis. 
b.  Monthly reports. The grantee shall provide a monthly operational report, which will provide a concise overview of the following system activities: 
1.  A subscriber report, indicating end of month subscriber numbers for all levels of service, an analysis of disconnects and a review of revenues from all other services. 
2.  A gross receipt report, which shall state the gross receipts by revenue category for the immediately preceding month. 
3.  A technical summary of the cable system service log, indicating the types of service problems, the length of time between detection and resolution of the problems, and the action taken to correct the problems. 
4.  A statement of the current status of video production equipment provided by the grantee. The report shall also indicate maintenance issues and any equipment in need of replacement. 
c.  Additional reports. The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the grantor, at the times and in the form prescribed, such additional reports with respect to the operation, affairs, transactions or property as may be reasonably necessary and appropriate to the performance of any of the rights, functions or duties of the grantor in connection with this article or the franchise. 
(10)  Termination. 
a.  If a grantee causes or creates a material breach of a franchise agreement executed pursuant to this article or violates the provisions of this article in a significant and material manner, the grantor may elect to terminate any franchise granted under this article. Any termination for cause shall be made by resolution of the grantor, stating that such cancellation is for cause and the specific reasons alleged to constitute such cause, and the grantee shall have the right to appear before the grantor at a duly noticed and scheduled public meeting to present its position with regard to the finding made under this subsection (10). A material breach shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Any uncured violation of a material provision of a franchise agreement or this article which is not cured within a period of 30 days following receipt of written notice thereof by the grantee. 
2.  Any attempt to sell, transfer or dispose of the capital assets related to the cable system without giving written notice of such attempt 90 days prior thereto to the grantor administrator. 
3.  Any attempt to evade the provisions of this article by deceit, fraud or misrepresentation. 
b.  The actions set forth in subsection (10)a.1.-3. of this section shall only be mitigated by circumstances beyond the control of the grantee. Simple negligence, mistake or neglect shall not excuse such actions. A grantee shall at all times be solely responsible for proving the existence of circumstances beyond its control. 
(11)  Rate regulation. 
a.  The city shall comply with rules of the Federal Communications commission set forth in subpart N (Cable Rate Regulation) of part 76 (Cable Television Service) of chapter I of title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations regarding the regulation of cable television rates for basic service and associated equipment, as amended. 
b.  After a cable operator has submitted, for review, its existing rate for the basic service tier and associated equipment costs of a proposed increase in such rates, the clerk or the grantor's designee shall post a public notice of the rates and costs, giving interested parties, including the cable operator, a reasonable opportunity to file written comments, which shall be available in the office of the city clerk for public inspection and copying during normal business hours. 
c.  The city shall comply with procedures set forth in 47 CFR 76.938 regarding confidential business information submitted by the cable operator in a rate regulation proceeding. 
d.  A cable operator which willfully or repeatedly fails to comply with a rate decision or refund order directed specifically at the cable operator shall be subject to a monetary forfeiture as determined by the city following the procedures set forth in 47 USC 503. 
(Code 1985, § 2.176) 
Sec. 42-36. - Programming. 
    Concurrently with the activation of the cable communications system in the city, the grantee shall provide all services to subscribers as follows: 
(1)  Services offered. The system shall carry programming as specified in the franchise. Any such change in programs or services offered shall comply with the conditions and procedures contained in the franchise, and shall be reported to the clerk of the grantor or other designee of the grantor at least 30 days prior to the proposed implementation. The grantee shall use its best effort to ensure diversity of programming. 
(2)  Basic service tier. A basic service tier shall be offered to subscribers throughout the term of this article and the franchise, to the extent required by law. 
(3)  Access and community channels. The grantee shall provide the number of access and community channels specified in the franchise agreement executed pursuant to this article. All residential subscribers who receive all or any part of the total services offered on the system shall also receive all access channels at no additional charge. The channels shall be activated upon system activation and thereafter maintained as needed. The grantee shall establish rules and regulations for the use of community access channels which shall be approved by the grantor before implementation and thereafter shall not be altered or amended without the approval of the grantor. In preparing such rules, the grantee shall: 
a.  Provide an equal opportunity for city use of access service. 
b.  Present a needs assessment of the city to be served and provide a plan to meet those needs. 
c.  Develop a plan to allocate to the grantor a reasonable use and fair schedule of channel time and use of equipment and facilities so that the grantor can send and receive programming fitted to its needs. Such plan shall be approved by the grantor before implementation and thereafter shall not be altered or amended without approval of the grantor. 
d.  Describe all equipment and facilities and any charges for their use. 
e.  Comply, at a minimum, with the requirements of the grantor adopted or determined regarding access channels. 
(4)  Program guide. The grantee shall provide a program guide, which shall be delivered in electronic form. 
(5)  Institutional network. The grantee shall provide an institutional network as specified in the franchise. 
(6)  Emergency override. The grantee shall, without charge, provide, service and maintain public emergency transmission facilities in the city as described in the franchise. 
(Code 1985, § 2.177) 
Sec. 42-37. - Minimum design requirements. 
    In order to provide for a technologically advanced cable system which will satisfy the communication needs of the city, all applicants for a franchise shall agree to provide the following minimum design features in their applications. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or in any way discourage the development of more extensive systems or better facilities and equipment. The grantor is expressly authorized to negotiate any state of the art improvements with applicants which will serve to ensure that the grantor maintains a modern cable system. 
(1)  Channel capacity. All applicants for a franchise shall agree to construct and maintain the following minimum channel capacities: 
a.  A cable system constructed to provide sufficient bandwidth capacity so that, when used with an appropriate converter device at a subscriber's receiver, it shall enable the reception of a minimum of 54 downstream video channels and 400 megahertz on a single cable. 
b.  A cable system having at least 36 activated video channels at all times. 
(2)  Allocation of public benefit channel capacity. All applicants for a franchise shall provide a percentage of system channel capacity to support the cablecasting of public, educational and governmental access programming. 
(3)  Community installations. Cable service shall be provided to every school building, fire station, city hall, community center, library, police station and other public buildings, with not less than one outlet on each floor at no cost to the user. 
(4)  Parental control devices. All applicants shall make available, upon request by any subscriber, a converter or other device capable of removing from a subscriber's service both the video and audio of any channel which the subscriber considers offensive. The grantee shall inform subscribers of such capability in writing and the appropriate device shall be installed and maintained at no additional cost to the subscriber; however, the grantee may charge a deposit. 
(5)  Video production capability. All applicants shall purchase and maintain video production capability within the cable system for the production of local programming. Ownership of such equipment shall remain with the grantee, and the maintenance of such facilities and equipment shall be the responsibility of the grantee. Whenever it is necessary to replace equipment, the grantee shall replace such equipment with new equipment reflecting advances in the state of the art, provided that such equipment is compatible with the balance of the system. The franchise agreement shall specify the type, quality and quantity of equipment, with a cash value of the proposed equipment package. Such package shall provide character generated services. The grantor reserves the right to specify equipment which best suits the needs of the city. All grantees shall purchase and maintain such video production capability as to be able to produce both live and videotaped programming from remote points in the cable system, including all necessary equipment to transmit upstream signals to the headend for immediate processing and retransmission downstream to subscribers. The grantor shall designate remote points for live cablecasting in the franchise agreement, which points may be changed by the grantor from time to time upon 30 days' prior written notice to the grantee. 
(6)  Leased access channels. Every grantee shall at all times comply with the provisions of the cable act of 1984 pertaining to the availability and use of leased channel space. 
(Code 1985, § 2.178) 
Sec. 42-38. - Guidelines for providing service. 
    In addition to the minimum design requirements established by section 42-37, it is the intention of the grantor to provide for minimum procedures for the delivery of cable service to subscribers as a matter of the general welfare and convenience; therefore, each applicant for a franchise shall maintain certain records and administer certain procedures in compliance with the following: 
(1)  Business office. A grantee shall maintain a reasonably convenient business office, with established office hours for responding to billing or service related problems. The grantor maintains the right to vary such requirement if it is deemed advisable. 
(2)  Policy statement. A grantee shall adopt and maintain a written set of rules and regulations for the conduct of its business so that, upon request, any member of the general public may receive such rules prior to subscribing for cable service. At a minimum, a grantee shall address each of the items set forth in this subsection in a way which satisfies all requirements stated in this subsection. A written notice of the availability of such polices shall be given to each subscriber at the time of initial installation. 
a.  In case of any disturbance of pavement, a sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the grantee shall, at its own expense and in a manner approved by the grantor's engineer, replace and restore all paving, sidewalks, driveways or surfacing of any street or alley disturbed, in as good a condition as before the work was commenced, and shall maintain the restoration in an approved condition for a period of five years. 
b.  If, at any time during the existence of a franchise, the grantor shall lawfully widen, realign or otherwise alter pavement, change the grade of any water main, fire hydrant, sewer or appurtenances, the grantee and any person acting for it in connection with the use of the streets, upon reasonable notice by the grantor, shall remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures, at its own expense. 
c.  In conduit districts established by ordinances of the grantor, and as amended or altered, and in such other areas of the grantor in which telephone lines and electric utility lines are underground, all of the grantee's lines, cable and wires shall be underground. 
(3)  Service disconnection procedure. Upon receipt of notice of a request to disconnect service, written or oral, a grantee shall proceed to close the subscriber's account and remove all equipment from the subscriber's premises. Subscribers shall have the right to have cable service disconnected without charge, unless otherwise specified in the FCC rules. A refund of unused service charges shall be paid to the customer within 60 days from the date of termination of service. In any event, all such requests shall be completed within ten days of the receipt of such requests, absent some circumstances beyond the control of the grantee. In case of a disconnect for nonpayment of service charges, a grantee shall not disconnect cable service for delinquent payment without first sending written notice of such pending disconnection to the delinquent subscriber at least ten days prior to the physical disconnection of such service. 
(4)  Protection of subscriber privacy required. The grantee shall at all times protect the privacy of subscribers, as provided in this article and other applicable federal, state and local laws. 
(5)  Theft of service. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a grantee from immediately disconnecting any person who shall illegally attempt to receive cable service; however, in the event of a theft of service problem, a grantee shall make all reasonable efforts to ascertain that the occurrence is not the result of a prior billing problem prior to disconnection of such service. 
(6)  Prohibition against providing television services. A grantee shall not sell television or radio receiving sets or parts to its cable television subscribers, except that it may repair and service to the extent necessary to establish the validity of its cable television signal. As converters or other parts become necessary for the reception of any and all channels, or for additional outlets of FM service, the grantee shall provide converters to all subscribers on a deposit, sale or rental basis. 
(7)  Customer service standards. 
a.  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subsection (7), shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Normal business hours means the hours during which similar businesses in the city are open to serve customers. In all cases, normal business hours must include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some weekend hours. 
Normal operating conditions means the service conditions which are within the control of the cable operator. The conditions which are not within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages and severe or unusual weather conditions. The conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay per view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, ad maintenance or upgrade of the cable system. 
Service interruption means the loss of picture or sound on one or more cable channels. 
b.  Exceptions. Nothing in this subsection (7) is intended to prevent or prohibit the: 
1.  Grantor and a cable operator from agreeing to customer service requirements that exceed the standards set forth in this subsection (7). 
2.  Grantor from enforcing, throughout the franchise term, preexisting customer service requirements that exceed the standards set forth in this subsection (7) and are contained in current franchise agreements. 
3.  Grantor from enacting or enforcing any consumer protection law. 
4.  Establishment or enforcement of any section or regulation concerning customer service that imposes customer service requirements that exceed or address matters not addressed by the standards set forth in this subsection (7). 
c.  Enumerated. A cable operator is subject to the following customer service standards certified quarterly by the cable operator: 
1.  The cable operator will maintain a local, toll-free or collect call telephone access line, which will be available to subscribers 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Trained company representatives shall be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries during normal business hours. 
2.  After normal business hours, the access line may be answered by a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine. Inquires received after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained company representative on the next business day. 
3.  Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a company representative, including wait time, shall not exceed 30 seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed 30 seconds. Such standards shall be met no less than 90 percent of the time, under normal operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis. 
4.  Under normal operating conditions, the customers may receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time, measured on a quarterly basis. 
5.  Customer service center and bill payment locations will be open at least during normal business hours and will be conveniently located. 
6.  Under normal operating conditions, each of the following five standards will be set no less than 95 percent of the time, measured on a quarterly basis: 
i.  Standard installations will be performed seven business days after an order has been placed. Standard installations are installations that are located not more than 125 feet from the existing distribution system. 
ii.  Excluding conditions beyond the control of the operator, a cable operator shall begin working on service interruptions promptly and in no event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes known. The cable operator must begin actions to correct other service problems the next business day after notification of the service problem. 
iii.  The appointment window for installations, service calls and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at a maximum, a four-hour block during normal business hours. The operator may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the customer. 
iv.  A cable operator may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. 
v.  If a cable operator representative is running late for an appointment and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer will be contacted and the appointment rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer. 
7.  The cable operator shall provide written information on each of the following areas at the time of installation of service, at least annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request: 
i.  Products and services offered; 
ii.  Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services; 
iii.  Installation and service maintenance policies; 
iv.  Instructions on how to use the cable service; 
v.  Channel positions of programming carried on the system; and 
vi.  Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of the cable operator and the municipal building. 
8.  All subscribers shall receive a monthly bill. Bills shall be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills shall clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including operational charges, rebates and credits. In case of a billing dispute, a cable operator must respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days. 
9.  Refund checks shall be issued promptly, but not later than the: 
i.  Customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the request or 30 days, whichever is earlier; or 
ii.  Return of the equipment supplied by the cable operator if service is terminated. 
10.  Credits will be issued no later than the customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. 
d.  Enforcement. The grantor may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies against the cable operator, including, without limitation, all remedies provided under a cable operator's consent agreement with the city, for failure to comply with the act, the FCC rules, any orders or determinations of the city pursuant to this section, any requirements of this section, or any rules or regulations promulgated under this section. Subject to applicable law, failure to comply with the act, the FCC rules, any orders or determinations of the city pursuant to this section, any requirements of the section or any rules and regulations promulgated under this section shall also be sufficient grounds for revocation or denial of renewal of a cable operator's consent agreement. 
(Code 1985, § 2.179) 
Sec. 42-39. - Franchise renewal. 
    Upon completion of the term of any franchise granted under this article, the grantor may, in its discretion, grant or deny renewal of the franchise of the grantee in accordance with the provisions of the cable act. 
(Code 1985, § 2.180) 
Sec. 42-40. - Transfer of ownership. 
    In no event shall a grantee of a franchise executed pursuant to this article transfer any rights granted therein or engage in a transfer of 50 percent or more of ownership or control without first receiving the prior written approval of the grantor. Any transfer, encumbrance or other disposition of any controlling interest in the grantee shall constitute an immediate material breach and violation of this article, subjecting the franchise to termination, unless written notice of any such attempt is given to the grantor at least 120 days prior to any such attempted action. 
(Code 1985, § 2.181) 
Sec. 42-41. - Purchase of cable system by grantor. 
    If a franchise is not renewed or is terminated for cause, the grantor shall have the absolute right, which right shall be made a part of every franchise agreement by reference to this section, to buy the cable system if it chooses to do so. If the grantor elects to buy the system, the price shall be determined at fair market value, with no value attributed to the franchise per se, but with the system valued as a going concern, not at depreciated book value. The grantor and the grantee shall each appoint an appraiser, the two of which shall appoint a third appraiser or, if they cannot agree, a circuit judge from the appropriate jurisdiction shall, acting in an administrative capacity, appoint a third appraiser. The three appraisers shall independently evaluate the value of the system. The average of the three appraisals shall be deemed the purchase price. Each party shall pay the costs of its appraiser and one-half of the cost of the third appraiser. 
(Code 1985, § 2.182) 
Sec. 42-42. - Removal of cable system. 
    If a franchise terminates for any reason and the grantee has not sold or otherwise transferred ownership of the cable system to the grantor or a third party, the grantee shall forthwith remove its facilities from all public easements. If the grantee fails to take prompt action in this regard, the grantor may proceed to remove the system and charge the security fund or the grantee directly. 
(Code 1985, § 2.183) 
Sec. 42-43. - Delegation of authority of grantor. 
    The grantor reserves the right to delegate from time to time any of its rights or obligations under the franchise to any body or organization. Any such delegation shall be effective upon written notice thereof to the grantee. Upon receipt of such notice, the grantee shall be bound by all terms and conditions of the delegation not in conflict with the franchise. Any such delegation or revocation thereof, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed to be an amendment to the franchise or require the grantee's consent. 
(Code 1985, § 2.184) 
Sec. 42-44. - Regional interconnect. 
    The grantor shall retain the right to require a grantee to interconnect its cable system with any other communications facilities in the service area. 
(Code 1985, § 2.185) 
Sec. 42-45. - Separability. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article to the contrary, a grantee shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations of the federal, state, county and grantor governments and all administrative agencies thereof; provided, however, that if any law or regulation shall prohibit a grantee expressly from performing a service required under this article so that it would be in conflict with the terms of this article or the provisions of the grantor's Code of Ordinances, then, as soon as such a conflict becomes known to the grantee, the grantee shall notify the grantor in writing of what it believes the conflict to consist of and in particular what law or regulation it believes to be in conflict with this article or the grantor's Code of Ordinances, and the grantee shall be thereby excused from performance under this article, provided that it acts in good faith reliance thereon, pending an authoritative resolution of such conflict. 
(b)  If any provision of this article or any related ordinance is held by any court or federal, state or county agency of competent jurisdiction to be invalid as conflicting with any federal, state or county law, rule or regulation, such provision shall be considered a separate, distinct and independent part of this article and such other ordinance, and such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of any other of provision of this article or any related ordinance. If such law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changes so that the provisions which had been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with the laws, rules and regulations then in effect, such provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect, and shall be binding on the parties, provided that the grantor shall give the grantee 30 days' written notice of such change before requiring compliance with such provision. 
(c)  If the grantor determines that a material provision of this article or any related ordinance is affected by such action of a court or the federal, state or county government, the grantor shall have the right to modify any of the provisions in this article or in such related ordinance to such a reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 2.186) 
Secs. 42-46-42-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY BY TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS 

Sec. 42-81. - Purposes. 
    The purposes of this article are to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety and welfare, and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the metropolitan extension telecommunications rights-of-way oversight act, Public Act No. 48 of 2002 (MCL 484.3101 et seq.) (referred to in this article as the "act"), and other applicable law, and to ensure that the city qualifies for distributions under the act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the act. 
(Code 1985, ch. 28, § 1) 
Sec. 42-82. - Conflicting provisions. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict with the act or other applicable law. 
(Code 1985, ch. 28, § 2) 
Sec. 42-83. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the metropolitan extension telecommunications rights-of-way oversight act, Public Act No. 48 of 2002 (MCL 484.3101 et seq.). 
    City commission means the city commission of the City of Clare or its designee. This article does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the city commission. 
    City manager means the city manager or other designated city official, if no city manager, or his designee. 
    Permit means a nonexclusive permit issued pursuant to the act and this article to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities. 
(b)  All other terms used in this article shall have the same meaning as defined or as provided in the act, including, without limitation, the following: 
    Authority means the metropolitan extension telecommunications rights-of-way oversight authority created pursuant to section 3 of the act (MCL 484.3103). 
    MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission in the department of consumer and industry services, and shall have the same meaning as the term "commission" in the act. 
    Public right-of-way means the area on, below or above a public roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. Such term does not include a federal, state or private right-of-way. 
    Telecommunications facilities and facilities mean the equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify or provide telecommunication services or signals. Such terms do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of title III of the communications act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 USC 332, and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. 
    Telecommunications provider, provider and telecommunications services mean those terms as defined in section 102 of the Michigan telecommunications act, Public Act No. 179 of 1991 (MCL 484.2102). The term "telecommunication provider" does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of the communications act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 USC 332, and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of the act and this article only, the term "provider" also includes all of the following: 
(1)  A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided by the act, a person who owns telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way. 
(3)  A person providing broadband internet transport access service. 
(Code 1985, ch. 28, § 3) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-84. - Permit. 
(a)  Required. Except as otherwise provided in the act, a telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with section 6(1) of the act (MCL 484.3106(1)). A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the application with the city manager and one copy with the city attorney. Upon receipt, the city manager shall make three copies of the application and distribute a copy to each city department affected. Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the act, including, without limitation, a route map showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with section 6(5) of the act (MCL 484.3106(5)). 
(c)  Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application contain a trade secret, or proprietary or confidential information, which is exempt from the freedom of information act, Public Act No. 442 of 1976 (MCL 15.231 et seq.), pursuant to section 6(5) of the act (MCL 484.3106(5)), the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map. 
(d)  Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the act, the application shall be accompanied by a one-time nonrefundable application fee in the amount as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time. 
(e)  Additional information. The city manager may request an applicant to submit such additional information which the city manager deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the city manager. If the city and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested by the city, the city or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in section 6(2) of the act (MCL 484.3106(2)). 
(f)  Previously issued permits. Pursuant to section 5(1) of the act (MCL 484.3105(1)), authorizations or permits previously issued by the city under section 251 of the Michigan telecommunications act, Public Act No. 179 of 1991 (MCL 484.2251), and authorizations or permits issued by the city to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of section 251 of the Michigan telecommunications act, but after 1985, shall satisfy the permit requirements of this article. 
(g)  Existing providers. Pursuant to section 5(3) of the act (MCL 484.3105(3)), within 180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the act, a telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the city as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under section 251 of the Michigan telecommunications act, Public Act No. 179 of 1991 (MCL 484.2251), shall submit to the city an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this article. Pursuant to section 5(3) of the act (MCL 484.3105(3)), a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is not required to pay the application fee required under subsection (d) of this section. A provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional 180 days to submit the permit application, if allowed by the authority, as provided in section 5(4) of the act (MCL 484.3105(4)). 
(Code 1985, ch. 28, § 4) 
Sec. 42-85. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for a permit is hereby delegated to the city manager. Pursuant to section 15(3) of the act (MCL 484.3115(3)), the city manager shall approve or deny an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under section 42-85(b) for access to a public right-of-way within the city. Pursuant to section 6(6) of the act (MCL 484.3106(6)), the city manager shall notify the MPSC when the city manager has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied. The city manager shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit. 
(b)  Form. If an application for permit is approved, the city manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the act (MCL 484.3106(1), (2), 484.3115). 
(c)  Conditions. Pursuant to section 15(4) of the act (MCL 484.3115(4)), the city manager may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Bond requirement. Pursuant to section 15(3) of the act (MCL 484.3115(3)), and without limitation on subsection (c) of this section, the city manager may require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use. 
(Code 1985, ch. 28, § 5) 
Sec. 42-86. - Construction/engineering permit. 
    A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over, across or under the public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining a construction or engineering permit as required elsewhere in this Code, for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for such a construction or engineering permit. 
(Code 1985, ch. 28, § 6) 
Sec. 42-87. - Use of conduit and utility poles. 
    Pursuant to section 4(3) of the act (MCL 484.3104(3)), obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the act or this article does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles. 
(Code 1985, ch. 28, § 7) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 46. 
Sec. 42-88. - Route maps. 
    Pursuant to section 6(7) of the act (MCL 484.3106(7)), a telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and the city. The route maps should be in paper or electronic format, unless and until the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with section 6(8) of the act (MCL 484.3106(8)). 
(Code 1985, ch. 28, § 8) 
Sec. 42-89. - Restoration of damage. 
    Pursuant to section 15(5) of the act (MCL 484.3115(5)), a telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction, installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the city, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition. 
(Code 1985, ch. 28, § 9) 
Sec. 42-90. - Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. 
    In addition to the nonrefundable application fee paid to the city as set forth in section 42-84(d), a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the city's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance fee to the authority pursuant to section 8 of the act (MCL 484.3108). 
(Code 1985, ch. 28, § 10) 
Sec. 42-91. - Modification of existing fees. 
(a)  In compliance with the requirements of section 13(1) of the act (MCL 484.3113(1)), the city hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the act, which shall be paid to the authority. In compliance with the requirements of section 13(4) of the act (MCL 484.3113(4)), the city also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the city's boundaries, so that such providers pay only those fees required under section 8 of the act (MCL 484.3108). The city shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of this article, in compliance with the requirement of section 13(4) of the act (MCL 484.3113(4)). 
(b)  To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the act or which are otherwise inconsistent with the act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the city's policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error. 
(Code 1985, ch. 28, § 11) 
Sec. 42-92. - Savings clause. 
    Pursuant to section 13(5) of the act (MCL 484.3113(5)), if section 8 of the act (MCL 484.3108) is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under section 42-91 shall be void from the date the modification was made. 
(Code 1985, ch. 28, § 12) 
Sec. 42-93. - Use of funds. 
    Pursuant to section 10(4) of the act (MCL 484.3110(4)), all amounts received by the city from the authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related purposes. In conformance with such requirement, all funds received by the city from the authority shall be deposited into the major street fund and/or the local street fund maintained by the city under Public Act No. 51 of 1951 (MCL 247.651 et seq.). 
(Code 1985, ch. 28, § 13) 
Sec. 42-94. - Annual report. 
    Pursuant to section 10(5) of the act (MCL 484.3110(5)), if required, the city manager shall file an annual report with the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the authority. If filing of such report is permissive, the city manager may, in his discretion, elect not to file an annual report. 
(Code 1985, ch. 28, § 14) 
Sec. 42-95. - Cable television operators. 
    Pursuant to section 13(6) of the act (MCL 484.3113(6)), the city shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenue for charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through broadband internet transport access services. 
(Code 1985, ch. 28, § 15) 
Sec. 42-96. - Existing rights. 
    Pursuant to section 4(2) of the act (MCL 484.3104(2)), except as expressly provided in this article with respect to fees, this article shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the city may have under a permit issued by the city or under a contract between the city and a telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Code 1985, ch. 28, § 16) 
Sec. 42-97. - Compliance. 
    The city hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting the ordinance from which this article is derived is to fully comply with the requirements of the act, and the provisions of this article should be construed in such a manner as to achieve such purpose. The city shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the act, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Exempting certain route maps from the freedom of information act, Public Act No. 442 of 1976 (MCL 15.231 et seq.), as provided in section 42-84(c); 
(2)  Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit requirements of this article, in accordance with section 42-84(f); 
(3)  Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the application fee, in accordance with section 42-84(g); 
(4)  Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in accordance with section 42-85(a); 
(5)  Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with section 42-85(a) of this article; 
(6)  Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance with section 42-85(a); 
(7)  Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, as provided in section 42-85(b); 
(8)  Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way, in accordance with section 42-85(c); 
(9)  Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's access and use, in accordance with section 42-85(d); 
(10)  Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with section 42-86; 
(11)  Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city's right-of-way fees with a copy of this article, in accordance with section 42-91; 
(12)  Submitting an annual report to the authority, in accordance with section 42-94; and 
(13)  Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with section 42-95. 
(Code 1985, ch. 28, § 17) 
Sec. 42-98. - Reservation of police powers. 
    Pursuant to section 15(2) of the act (MCL 484.3115(2)), this article shall not limit the city's right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the city's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(Code 1985, ch. 28, § 18) 
Chapter 44 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic at municipal airport, § 4-38; display of tags and stickers on vehicles, mechanical devices and machines, § 12-52; exterior storage of nonoperative vehicles, § 20-35; motor vehicle repairs a nuisance, § 20-36; law enforcement, ch. 26; offenses, ch. 28; throwing objects from moving automobiles, § 28-164; motor vehicle restrictions in parks, § 30-72; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40. 
State Law reference- Michigan vehicle code, MCL 257.1 et seq.; regulation by local authorities, MCL 257.605, 257.606, 257.610. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 44-1. - Michigan code adopted. 
(a)  The Michigan vehicle code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq.), is adopted by reference. 
(b)  References in the Michigan vehicle code to "local authorities" shall mean the City of Clare. 
(c)  The penalties provided by the Michigan vehicle code are adopted by reference; provided however, that the city may not enforce any provision of the Michigan vehicle code for which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days. 
(Code 1985, §§ 10.1, 10.2, 10.5) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt the Michigan vehicle code by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Sec. 44-2. - Uniform Traffic Code adopted. 
(a)  The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages, promulgated by the director of state police and published in the Michigan Administrative Code, in accordance with Public Act No. 62 of 1956 (MCL 257.951 et seq.), is hereby adopted by reference. 
(b)  References in the Uniform Traffic Code for Michigan Cities, Townships and Villages to "governmental unit" shall mean the City of Clare. 
(Code 1985, §§ 10.1, 10.2) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt the Uniform Traffic Code by reference, MCL 257.951. 
Sec. 44-3. - Commercial delivery vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall drive any commercial delivery vehicle over any publicly owned street which is designated by a traffic sign forbidding the driving of such a vehicle on the designated street. This subsection shall not apply to commercial vehicles that are limited to residential deliveries. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be fined not less than $5.00, nor more than $500.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Code 1985, § 10.410) 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 12. 
Sec. 44-4. - Snowmobiles. 
(a)  No person may operate a snowmobile on a city street: 
(1)  At a rate of speed greater than is reasonable and proper having due regard for conditions then existing, and in no event in excess of ten miles per hour. 
(2)  Except for the purpose of gaining access to or from an area of operation outside the city by the most direct route. 
(3)  Adjacent to school facilities between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. when school is in session or within two hours before and after school functions. 
(4)  With more than one passenger on the snowmobile. 
(b)  Any person operating a snowmobile on a city street must: 
(1)  Travel at the extreme right of the plowed area of the street, in single file with the flow of traffic. 
(2)  Come to a complete stop at every street intersection and railroad crossing. 
(3)  Have one headlight and one taillight turned on at all times. 
(4)  Obey all traffic signals, signs and devices. 
(5)  Yield the right-of-way to all vehicular traffic and pedestrians. 
(c)  Operation of snowmobiles is prohibited on the following streets, except to cross at designated intersections: 
(1)  McEwan Street (U.S. 27), from the north city limit to the south city limit. 
(2)  Fifth Street (U.S. 10), from the east city limit to the west city limit. 
(3)  Third Street, between McEwan and Pine. 
(4)  Fourth Street, between Beech and Pine. 
(5)  Sixth Street, between Beech and McEwan. 
(6)  Wheaton Avenue, between Beech and McEwan. 
(7)  Beech Street, between Fourth and Sixth. 
(d)  No snowmobile shall be operated to cross any street, except at a street intersection of a street not prohibited by subsection (c) of this section or prohibited streets, except at the following designated street intersections: 
(1)  McEwan Street (North U.S. 27), at Wilcox Parkway to or from Pettit Park. 
(2)  McEwan Street (North U.S. 27), at Schoolcrest to or from Mary. 
(3)  Fifth Street (West U.S. 10), at Spruce to or from Maple Road. 
(4)  Fifth Street (East U.S. 10), at Fourth to or from Rainbow Drive. 
(e)  Any snowmobile operated contrary to this section may be impounded by the police department. If a snowmobile is impounded, the owner of the snowmobile must pay the cost of transportation, towing and storage, and prove ownership of the snowmobile before it will be released to him. 
(Code 1985, §§ 10.42, 10.76) 
Sec. 44-5. - [Off-road recreation vehicles (ORVs).] 
    No person may operate an ORV on a city street except as provided by state law being MCL 324.81101 et seq., being part 811 of the Natural Resources Environmental Protection Act. This section permits: 
(1)  Crossing a public highway at a right angle to get from one legal operation area to another, if it can be done safely and consistent with normal traffic regulations involving stopping and yielding before the crossing. 
(2)  Operation on a public street for a special event of limited duration by prearrangement and with a permit. 
(3)  In connection with farm operations. 
    An ORV shall be defined as a motor-driven off-road recreation vehicle capable of cross-country travel without benefit of a road or trail, on or immediately over land, snow, ice, marsh, swampland, or other natural terrain. ORV or vehicle includes, but is not limited to, a multi-track or multi-wheel drive vehicle, an ATV, a motorcycle or related two-wheel, three-wheel, or four-wheel vehicle, an amphibious machine, a ground effect air cushion vehicle, or other means of transportation deriving motive power from a source other than muscle or wind. A golf cart as defined by state law (MCL 257.25b) being a four-wheel motor vehicle whose speed attainable in one mile is more than 20 miles per hour but not more than 25 miles per hour on a paved level surface is defined as an ORV in accordance with MCL 324.81101. 
(Ord. No. 2010-001, 4-19-2010) 
Secs. 44-6-44-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Off-street parking requirements generally, § 52-305; off-street parking requirements for commercial buildings with available municipal parking lots, § 5; location, layout and construction standards of off-street parking areas, § 52-307. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate standing or parking of vehicles, MCL 257.606(1)(a); stopping, standing or parking of vehicles, MCL 257.672 et seq. 

Sec. 44-31. - Overnight parking. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle to park such motor vehicle upon any of the streets or avenues of the city between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., between November 15 and April 1 of each year. 
(Code 1985, § 8.25) 
Sec. 44-32. - Temporary signs. 
    The city police are hereby authorized to place movable "No Parking" signs on any street in the city for a period of three hours at any one time for emergency and snow removal purposes. 
(Code 1985, § 8.26) 
Sec. 44-33. - Maximum parking time limit. 
    No vehicle shall be parked on the streets of the city for more than 24 hours without being moved to a new parking location by the owner or operator thereof. A person who violates this section shall be responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1985, § 8.27) 
Sec. 44-34. - Impoundment of unlawfully parked vehicles. 
    It shall be the duty of the operator of the snow removal equipment of the city or any police official to remove any motor vehicle parked in violation of sections 44-31-44-33, at the expense of the owner or operator of such motor vehicle, and such expense shall constitute a lien upon such motor vehicle, which the city may foreclose in the same manner as authorized by law for chattel mortgage foreclosures. 
(Code 1985, § 8.28) 
Secs. 44-35-44-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SHOPPING CENTERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic control in shopping center parking lots, MCL 257.941 et seq. 

Sec. 44-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Shopping center means a minimum area of three acres of land on which there is located one or more stores or business establishments, and where there is provided a parking area. 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 44-62. - Request for regulation. 
    Traffic in shopping center parking areas shall be regulated as provided in this article, an authorized representative of each shopping center having requested, in writing, such regulation at the shopping center. 
Sec. 44-63. - Traffic control devices and signs. 
(a)  Posting to notify or clarify prohibitions. The chief of police or any other person authorized by the city manager shall cause signs or other traffic control devices required in a parking area to be posted along the areas in front of the buildings or at other specified locations in order to notify the public of the prohibitions set forth in this article. Signs may be posted in other areas if it appears necessary in order to clarify the prohibitions to the public. 
(b)  Conformance to requirements. A sign or other traffic control device required in a parking area shall conform to the requirements of the state Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
Sec. 44-64. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Civil infractions. All violations of this article pertaining to standing or parking of vehicles or traffic control are declared to be civil infractions as provided for in the Michigan vehicle code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq.). 
(b)  Procedures relating to violations. The procedure for issuing parking violation notices or appearance citations, the procedure after their issuance, fines to be assessed and all other provisions relating to violations of the standing or parking, or traffic sections of this article shall be in accordance with and pursuant to the Michigan vehicle code. 
Sec. 44-65. - Towing. 
(a)  Authority granted. The city police are authorized to remove and tow away, or have removed and towed away, by a commercial towing service, any car or other vehicle parked or abandoned in violation of this article, where such vehicle: 
(1)  Creates or constitutes a traffic hazard. 
(2)  Blocks the use of a fire hydrant. 
(3)  Obstructs traffic or may obstruct the movement of any emergency vehicle. 
(b)  Storage of impounded vehicles. Cars and other vehicles towed away for illegal parking shall be stored in a safe place. 
(c)  Payment of fines and charges. Cars or other vehicles towed away for illegal parking shall be released to the owner or operator of such car or other vehicle upon payment of the fine and the reasonable towing and storage charges. 
Sec. 44-66. - Unlawful standing or parking. 
    At any time, it shall be unlawful for any vehicle to stand or park in any marked entrance and/or exit lane and marked driving aisle in the parking lot of the shopping center. 
Sec. 44-67. - Traffic control devices. 
    A person who violates the directions of any traffic control device is responsible for a violation of this article. 
Chapter 46 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Municipal utilities, ch. 12. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; businesses, ch. 12; community development, ch. 16; environment, ch. 20; land divisions and subdivisions of land, ch. 24; utilities and improvements in subdivisions, § 24-161 et seq.; solid waste, ch. 36; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40; utility poles on streets, § 40-38; telecommunications, ch. 42; use of conduit and utility poles, § 42-87. 
State Law reference- Ownership and operation of water supply or sewage disposal facility by city, Mich. Const. 1963, art. 7, § 24; local authority to provide and regulate sewer and water service, MCL 324.4301 et seq.; water and sewer authorities, MCL 124.281 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1-46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SYSTEM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-31. - Operation. 
    The city water system shall operate as a self-sustaining utility under the direction of the city manager as provided by section 12.4 of the city Charter. 
(Code 1985, § 2.21) 
Sec. 46-32. - Construction of mains. 
(a)  New water mains or extensions of present water mains may be constructed in accordance with the provisions of the city Charter or by petition. 
(b)  New water mains or extensions of present water mains shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of Approval and Design Requirements for Construction of Water Supply and Distribution Systems in the City of Clare in Clare County and the Technical Specifications for Sanitary Sewer and Water Main Construction City of Clare Department of Public Works as adopted in 2014 and as amended from time to time. 
(Code 1985, § 2.22; Ord. No. 2015-003 , 4-20-2015) 
Sec. 46-33. - Petitions for construction. 
    In order that any new extensions of present water mains or the construction of new water mains be commenced and/or completed by petition, it shall be necessary that the owners of two-thirds of the frontage abutting the line of proposed extension or new construction shall sign and file with the city clerk a petition requesting such construction, and the granting of such petitions so filed shall remain within the discretion of the city commission. Such petitions shall always include the promise and agreement of all petitioners to pay the cost of all construction on the basis of the special benefits directly received and at rates established by the city commission. 
(Code 1985, § 2.23) 
Sec. 46-34. - Connections. 
(a)  No person, unless authorized in writing by the city manager, shall tap any water main or distribution pipe of the waterworks system, or insert therein any corporation cock, stopcock or any other fixture or appliance, or alter or disturb any service pipe, corporation stop, curb stop, gate valve, hydrant, water meter or any other attachment belonging to the waterworks system and attached thereto; and no person, except plumbers duly licensed, shall install any water service pipe or connect or disconnect any such service pipe with or from the mains or distribution pipes of the waterworks system, nor with or from any other service pipe connected with such system, nor make any repairs, additions to or alterations of any such service pipe, tap, stopcock or any other fixture or attachment connected with any such service pipe. 
(b)  All premises within the city used or occupied for residential, commercial or industrial purposes shall be connected to the city water system, and the owners and occupants of all such premises are required to maintain such connections in accordance with the provisions of this article. This subsection shall not apply to premises the nearest part of which is more than 100 feet from a city water main. 
(Code 1985, § 2.24) 
Sec. 46-35. - Water system buy-in fees. 
    A buy-in fee as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time shall be required for all single-family residential water services at the time such services are connected to the city's water system for the first time. For commercial, industrial and multifamily residential services, the amount of the buy-in fee shall be determined using the residential equivalents schedule as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time. Such fees are in addition to tap/connection fees, which are charged on the basis of actual time and materials expended by the city to make the required tap/connection. 
Sec. 46-36. - Permit required. 
    Before any service connection shall be made to any part of the waterworks system, or any work performed upon old or new connections, a permit shall be obtained from the city clerk. Such permit shall be issued only where a licensed plumber has been employed. Written application will be on forms prepared for such purpose and obtained from the city clerk. 
(Code 1985, § 2.25) 
Sec. 46-37. - Application fee. 
(a)  Upon filing an application for permit to connect with any water main or distribution pipe of the waterworks system, there shall be paid to the city clerk such tapping fee as shall be prescribed by the rules and regulations governing the waterworks system. Such fee is to include all the costs of tapping the main, installing the corporation cock, furnishing and laying the service pipe to the property line and installing the stopcock and shutoff box, and all such materials are to be and remain the property of the city water system. 
(b)  All new construction shall be designed and built so as to conveniently accommodate installation of a water meter. 
(Code 1985, § 2.26) 
Sec. 46-38. - Separate service; waste of water. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any building or premises entitled to the use of water from the waterworks system shall not supply water to other persons or premises. A separate connection and service is required for each dwelling unit with no duplexes or multifamily buildings on one service. 
(b)  No person shall permit an unnecessary waste of water. 
(Code 1985, § 2.27) 
Sec. 46-39. - Water turn-on permit. 
    No person shall turn on the water from any main or distribution pipe into any service pipe without a permit, in writing, from the city manager, except that a licensed plumber may turn on water into service pipes without such permit, for the sole purpose of testing such pipe for leaks, but in such case, such plumber shall turn the water off from such service pipe immediately upon completion of the test. 
(Code 1985, § 2.28) 
Sec. 46-40. - Service pipes. 
    All service pipes connecting with the distributing mains of the waterworks system from the city main to the stop and waste inside building shall be laid under the supervision of the city manager and in accordance with the provisions of the rules and regulations governing the waterworks system. 
(Code 1985, § 2.29) 
Sec. 46-41. - Disconnection for violations. 
    Any premises may be disconnected, upon ten days' prior notice, from the distribution pipes of the city waterworks system and the supply of water withheld from such premises upon violation by the owner or occupant of such premises of any provision of this article, or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto. Whenever the water is turned off from any premises because of any such violation, the water shall not be turned on again until the owner or occupant has paid a turn-on charge as established by the city commission by resolution. 
(Code 1985, § 2.30) 
Sec. 46-42. - Liability. 
    The city shall not be liable under any circumstances for any failure or deficiency in the supply of water to consumers, whether occasioned by shutting off the water to make necessary repairs or connections, or from any other cause. 
(Code 1985, § 2.31) 
Sec. 46-43. - Multiple services. 
    In all cases where a water service is intended to supply more than one tenement, shop, store or building, it shall be the duty of the person making such service connection, or causing the connection to be made, to install a branch, with a stopcock for each branch, outside the line of the premises to be supplied, to be suitably protected and marked so as to be easily located. In no case shall one service supply more than one lot unless occupied by a single building covering more than one lot used or a single industry or enterprise. 
(Code 1985, § 2.32) 
Sec. 46-44. - Lawn and garden sprinkling. 
    The use of water for sprinkling lawns and gardens, and the hours for such use, shall be as prescribed by the rules and regulations adopted for the governing of such water system. 
(Code 1985, § 2.33) 
Sec. 46-45. - Standpipe connections. 
    The properties of manufacturing institutions, lumberyards, warehouses, elevators, stores, hotels, schools and other public buildings wishing to install large pipes with hydrant and hose couplings, to be used only in case of fire, will be permitted to connect with the street main, at their own expense, upon application to the city manager and under his direction and supervision, and will be allowed to use water for firefighting purposes free of charge, but all such pipes must be provided with a suitable valve which must be sealed by the city. Such seal may be broken only for the extinguishment of a fire, and in such case, such owner or proprietor shall immediately give notice to the city manager. The breaking of such seal for any other purpose shall be deemed a violation of this Code, and such owner or proprietor shall be subject to prosecution for such violation. 
(Code 1985, § 2.34) 
Sec. 46-46. - Right of entry. 
    The city manager or any of his agents shall have the power and authority, at all reasonable hours, to enter upon any premises where water is furnished from the city waterworks system, for the purpose of reading meters or the inspection of all pipes and fixtures connected with such waterworks system, and they shall have power and authority to require any defective pipes or fixtures to be repaired, removed or replaced where they are not in compliance with the provisions of the rules and regulations pertaining to the waterworks system, and any person refusing or neglecting to make such repairs when so ordered shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Code and liable to prosecution for such violation. 
(Code 1985, § 2.35) 
Sec. 46-47. - Damage to meters. 
    Water meters may be installed upon any premises supplied with water and any damage to such meter resulting from the carelessness of the owner, agent or tenant through neglect to properly protect the meter shall be assessed to such owner or tenant. Water consumers shall not tamper with or remove a meter from the service, or interfere with the reading thereof. The owner shall be responsible for any damage caused by a tenant. 
(Code 1985, § 2.36) 
Sec. 46-48. - Rules and regulations. 
    The commission of the city shall from time to time make and adopt such rules and regulations for the operation and use of the water system and the supplying of water to consumers as the city commission shall deem expedient and necessary, and such rules and regulations, when adopted, shall be and become a part of this article and enforceable under this article, and the penalties prescribed in this article for a violation of this Code shall apply to the violation of any such rules and regulations the same as though such rules and regulations were incorporated in this article. 
(Code 1985, § 2.37) 
Sec. 46-49. - Water mains and appurtenances. 
(a)  Scope of work. The work covered by this section of the specifications consists of furnishing all plant, labor, materials, equipment and in performing all operations for the installation of the water mains and appurtenances in strict accordance with these specifications and applicable contract drawings. 
(b)  Materials. 
(1)  Pipe materials. 
a.  Ductile iron pipe and fittings shall be designed in accordance with American Water Works Association (AWWA) Standards C150-02 and C151-02 also ANSI Standards A21.50-02 and A21.51-02. The pipe shall be designed to withstand a minimum working pressure of 200 psi and a minimum hydrostatic test pressure of 300 psi. The pipe shall also be designed for a laying depth of a minimum of six feet. Pipe designed or installed at a depth less than or greater than six feet must be approved by the owner or city engineer prior to installation. All ductile iron pipe shall meet the requirements of NSF International (NSF) Standard 61. 
All ductile iron pipe and fittings shall be coated on the outside with an asphaltic coating of asphalt base one mil thick at the point of manufacture in accordance with the specifications of the AWWA Standard C151-02 and ANSI Standard A21.51.02. Cement lining requirement shall conform to AWWA Standard C104-03 and ANSI Standard A21.4-03. The spigot ends of all pipe lengths which have been cut in the field shall be ground to a smooth surface, tapered back about ? inch at an angle of 30º with the pipe centerline, and painted with two coats of asphaltum metal protective paint. 
Ductile iron pipe shall conform to the dimensions set forth in the table below (design engineer shall verify expected pressure range with city engineer during design phase). 
Pipe Size Nominal Inside Diameter in Inches Outside Diameter in Inches Pipe Barrel Thickness in Inches Thickness Class 6 6.90 0.31 52 8 9.05 0.33 52 10 11.10 0.35 52 12 13.20 0.37 52 16 17.40 0.40 52 20 21.60 0.42 52  
b.  High density polyethylene pipe (HDPE) for river crossings or wetland crossings shall be DR 9, Class 3408 as supplied by Driscoplex PW 4000 by Performance Pipe or equal, and meet the following conditions. 
Pipe Size Standard Dimension Ratio (DR) Working Pressure Working Pressure + Surge Pressure DIPS 9 200 psi 300 psi  
All HDPE pipe shall be joined by heat fusion per manufacturer's requirements. HDPE pipe must meet the requirements of AWWA C906 and NSF Standards 14 and 61 to be used for potable water systems. The exterior wall print line of all HDPE pipe proposed for installation and potable use must bear the AWWA C906 and NSF-PW identification. River crossing section shall be pressure tested independently of other water main. See section (g) of these specifications. This method and locations must be approved by the city engineer. Refer to standard details for the connection of ductile iron pipe to HDPE. This connection, a mechanical joint (gate or butterfly valve, and corporations on the ductile iron) shall be enclosed in a pre-cast concrete manhole. The size of the manhole will be determined by the engineer and a standard EJIW 1040 shall be utilized for this structure and shown in the standard detail. 
Refer to MDOT specification BJ-2D, Special Provisions for Directionally Bored Pipe and MDEQ DWRP-03-009, Requirements for Use of HDPE water main. 
HDPE pipe shall be inspected prior to installation by a qualified person or by the city engineer. If damage is found to be unacceptable according to the manufacturer, then suitable efforts shall be made to repair the damaged pipe or the pipe shall be rejected from use. 
The pipe should all be approved by the city. 
c.  Polyvinyle chloride pipe (PVC) four inches-12 inches shall be designed in accordance with standards set forth in the latest revision of American Water Works Association Specifications AWWA C900. The pipe shall be designed to withstand a minimum working pressure of 150 psi and a minimum hydrostatic test pressure of 300 psi. The pipe shall also be designed for a laying depth of a minimum of six feet. 
PVC pipe must meet the requirements of NSF Standard 14 and NSF Standard 61 to be used for potable water systems. The exterior wall print line of all PVC pipe proposed for installation and potable use must bear the NSF-PW identification. 
Polyvinyle chloride pipe (PVC) shall conform to the dimensions set forth in the table below. Tolerances permitted in AWWA specifications listed above will apply. 
Pipe size Nominal Inside Diameter in Inches Outside Diameter in Inches Pipe Barrel Thickness in Inche Pressure Class 6 6.90 0.506 150 8 9.05 0.533 150 10 11.10 0.654 150 12 13.20 0.777 150  
d.  Fusible polyvinyl chloride pipe (PVC) for river crossings or wetland crossings shall be DR 14, Class 12454 per ASTM D1784 as supplied by Underground Solutions, or equal, and meet the following conditions. 
Pipe Size Standard Dimension Ratio (DR) Working Pressure Working Pressure + Surge Pressure DIPS 14 200 psi 300 psi  
All fusible PVC pipe shall be joined by heat fusion per manufacturer's requirements. Fusible PVC pipe must meet the requirements of NSF Standard 14 and NSF Standard 61 to be used for potable water systems. The exterior wall print line of all fusible PVC pipe proposed for installation and potable use must bear the NSF-PW identification. River crossing section shall be pressure tested independently of other water main. See section (g) of these specifications. This method and locations must be approved by the city engineer. Refer to standard details for the connection of ductile iron pipe to fusible PVC. This connection, a mechanical joint (gate or butterfly valve, and corporations on the ductile iron) shall be enclosed in a pre-cast concrete manhole. The size of the manhole will be determined by the engineer and a standard EJIW 1040 shall be utilized for this structure and shown in the standard detail. 
Refer to MDOT specification BJ-2D, Special Provisions for Directionally Bored Pipe. 
Fusible PVC pipe shall be inspected prior to installation by a qualified person or by the city engineer. If damage is found to be unacceptable according to the manufacturer, then suitable efforts shall be made to repair the damaged pipe or the pipe shall be rejected from use. 
The pipe should all be approved by the city. 
(2)  Joints for water main pipe shall conform to the following: 
a.  Flanged joints for ductile iron pipe shall be made with flanges, bolts, nuts, washers and gaskets conforming to AWWA Standard C110-03 and ANSI Standard A21.10-03. 
b.  Mechanical joints shall conform to AWWA Standards C110-03 and C111-07 along with ANSI Standards A21.10-03 and A21.11-07. Rubber gaskets shall conform to manufacturer's standards. 
1.  Retainer glands shall be utilized on all mechanical joint fittings. 
2.  Lead tip gaskets will not be allowed for providing metal to metal contact at joints. 
c.  Rubber gasket joints for ductile iron pipe shall be of a bell and spigot type which employs a single rubber gasket to effect the joint seal. These joints shall conform to AWWA Standard C111-07 and ANSI Standard A21.11-07. These joints shall be similar to "Tyton" as manufactured by U.S. Pipe and Foundry Co., "Bell-Tite" as manufactured by James B. Clow and Sons, Inc. or approved equal. 
d.  Bell joints shall be cast iron, mechanical, flexible joint tube designed to withstand a working pressure of 200 pounds and a hydrostatic test pressure of 300 pounds. Joints shall be similar to "Molox" as manufactured by the American Cast Iron Pipe Company, "Usiflex" as manufactured by U.S. Pipe and Foundry Co., "River Crossing Pipe" James B. Clow & Sons, Inc. or an approved equal. 
e.  Field-Loc gaskets/Fast-Grip or equal are accepted for the use of Tyton push on joints for fittings. 
f.  Ductile sleeves shall have "cookie" piece inserted between two pipes if there is any separation between the two pipes. 
(3)  Gate valves. Gate valves shall meet the requirements of AWWA Standard C500-02 or C515-01. Valves shall be designed for not less than 150 psi working pressure and shall be tested for leakage and distortion under a hydraulic pressure of not less than 300 psi. Under such pressure, the valves shall show no leakage or distortion. 
All gate valves shall be cast iron body, fully bronze mounted, bronze stem, double disc gate valves or resilient wedge gate valves. The wedge casting shall be of a solid design and 100 percent encapsulated with nitrile rubber. Hollow wedges are not allowed and no epoxy coating is allowed in wedge. There shall be three stem seal O-rings; two in the seal plate which shall be replaceable with the valve in the full open position at rated working pressure, and one under the stem thrust collar. All gaskets shall be o-ring seals. O-rings set in a cartridge shall not be allowed. Each valve shall have a clear waterway equivalent in area, when open, to that of the connecting pipe. Valves shall be made to open left (counter clockwise). All valves shall be connected to the pipeline by mechanical joints. All valves shall be operated by non-rising stems and shall have square wrench nuts. 
All valves shall be furnished with a three piece adjustable valve box as specified herein unless the valve is housed in a manhole. Valves intended to be specifically used in fire line shall be designed and tested at minimum pressure of 200 psi. 
(4)  Butterfly valves. Butterfly valves, as called out on the plans, shall be so designed and fabricated that they will conform to AWWA Standard C504-06 for Class 150B valves. The rubber valve seat shall cover the entire interior surface of the valve body and the face of the body. The valve disc shall be streamlined, free of external ribs, keyed to the shaft, provided with suitable means for positioning and shall utilize wedge type closing against the rubber liner at a full close seating angle of 90º to the axis of the pipe. Valves shall be as manufactured by dresser manufacturing division, Keystone International, Inc. or an approved equal. 
All butterfly valves shall be installed in a manhole per the Standard Detail Sheet. 
(5)  Valve boxes. Valve boxes shall be cast iron, three-piece, adjustable type, with a 51/4 inch shaft. Covers shall be furnished with fingerholes and marked "WATER". Valve boxes shall be similar to that as manufactured by the East Jordan Iron Works or an approved equal. Contractors shall be responsible for adjusting valve boxes to meet finish grades once finish grades are established. 
(6)  Fire hydrants. At the points indicated on the drawings, there shall be installed a hydrant assembly consisting of a hydrant, a six-inch gate valve, a cast iron valve box and all piping and fittings necessary for a complete job. Gate valves shall be as specified above. Valves shall be located three feet, plus or minus, from the hydrant as shown on typical hydrant setting on drawings. 
a.  Hydrant barrel inside dimension to be a minimum of 71/4 inches I.D. from top to bottom. 
b.  Nozzles to be on a removable head so that they may be rotated by changing the position of the top flange without removing the barrel. 
c.  Hydrant to be fully bronze mounted including top of operating stem where it passes through the double O-ring seal in the bronze packing gland. Operating stem in base and valve seat shall be made of bronze. No "V" type threads are allowed for the operating stem or nut. 
d.  The drain valve shall be plugged in all locations. 
e.  Hydrant nozzle shall be located three feet to three feet and six inches above breakaway flange. 
Hydrants furnished for this work shall meet the requirements of AWWA Standard C502-05 Standard for dry-barrel fire hydrants. They shall be East Jordan Iron Works Model 5-BR Water Master or Water Master 5BR250, or approved equal. Hydrants shall be designed for installation with six feet of cover over the connection. The diameter of the valve port in the hydrant shall be at least five inches. The hydrant shall be equipped with one 41/2 inch and two 21/2 inch pumper connections. Threads shall conform to national standard threads. Hydrant stems shall be built to open left (counter clockwise). 
Hydrants shall be of the "break flange" type. The hydrant shall be so designed that all working parts, including valve and drip mechanism, may be removed from the hydrant through the barrel without the necessity of excavation. The hydrant shall be designed for a working pressure of 150 psi. Operating nuts shall be one inch square. 
(7)  Water service connections. Water service connections are the water line connections which extend from the water main to the property line or easement line of water system customers. A water service connection shall consist of a corporation stop in the water main, a small diameter water line to the property line, a curb stop at the property line and curb box and cover. The contractor shall place the water service connections where directed by the design engineer. The service line piping and fittings shall be either one-inch or two-inch size as called out on the plans. 
a.  Service line pipe and fittings. Pipe material shall be Type K copper or plastic 200 PSI CTS, annealed and soft temper ASTM B.88. Joints shall be compression type. No flared fitting is allowed. Must conform to AWWA Standard C800-05. 
b.  Corporation stops. One-inch and two-inch corporation stops shall be ball style Mueller series B-25000 series, A.Y. McDonald 4100 series or equal, or equal, for copper service pipe. Corporation stops shall be in the "open" position after the service connection is complete. Must conform to AWWA Standard C800-05. 
c.  Curb stops. Curb stops shall be Mueller B-25204, A.Y. McDonald 6100 or approved equal. Curb stops shall be of the quarter turn, ball style, positive shut-off type. Must conform to AWWA Standard C800-05. 
d.  Curb boxes (all sizes) 1 inch and 11/2 inch. Curb boxes shall be adjustable in height to allow for variable grade elevations. Curb boxes shall be all cast iron construction and coated inside and out with tar base enamel. A cast iron lid shall be furnished with 1-1/4 or plug in center (no rod) and shall have "WATER" permanently stamped. 
(8)  Tapping sleeve and valve. Where shown on the plans or where a tee and valve are to be installed on an existing main under pressure, a tapping sleeve and drilling machine shall be used. After installing the sleeve and prior to drilling, the sleeve shall be pressure tested at 150 psi for five minutes. The city resident project representative and the department of public works shall be given 48 hours notice of all water main live taps. Tapping sleeves shall utilize a stainless steel (vega type) wrap around sleeve. 
(9)  Water main stubs. At the end of a stub, the last three pipe joints shall have Field-Loc gaskets/Fast-Grip gaskets or equal. No galvanized pipe materials shall be allowed. A corporation shall be placed for the use of flushing and sampling. 
(c)  Installation of pipe and fittings for water mains. All pipe and fittings shall be installed in strict accordance with the recommendations of the manufacturer and AWWA Standard C600-05 for ductile iron pipe and C605-05 for PVC pipe. Piping and fittings for water mains shall be of the types and materials hereinbefore specified. The pipe and accessories shall be new and unused. Before installation, the pipe shall be inspected for defects and any section of pipe or fittings found to be defective, before or after laying, will be rejected and replaced with sound pipe without additional expense to the owner. 
The interior of the pipe and fittings shall be thoroughly cleaned of foreign matter before being lowered into the trench with an approved method and shall be kept clean during laying operations by plugging the ends or other approved methods. The plug shall be fitted with a means for venting. When work is not in progress, open ends of pipe and fittings shall be securely closed so that no trench water, earth, animals or other substance will enter the pipes. When practical, the plug shall remain in place until the trench is pumped completely dry. Care must be taken to prevent pipe floatation, if the trench fills with water. No pipe or fittings shall be laid in water or when the trench or weather conditions are unsuitable for work except by permission of the city engineer. Valves shall be installed in the closed position. 
Ductile iron pipe and fittings used on ductile iron (except flanged pipe) shall be provided with three brass wedges at each joint, Fastite conductive (American Pipe) or equal, "Electro-bond" strips of "Cadweld" connectors or other means of providing metal-to-metal contact at the joint to allow an electric current to flow through the joint. 
Trench widths shall meet all standards, such as OSHA and AWWA Standard C600-05 and C605-05. The full length of each section of pipe shall rest solidly upon the pipe bed with recesses provided to accommodate the bells and joints. Refer to AWWA Standard C600-05 and C605-05 for maximum allowable joint deflection. 
When pipe is cut in the field, the outside of the cut end shall be tapered back about ? inch at an angle of 30º with the centerline of the pipe to remove any sharp, rough edges. Exposed edges shall be coated with two coats of asphaltum metal protective paint. 
Fittings at bends in the pipe line shall be firmly wedged against the undisturbed vertical face of the trench to prevent the fittings from being blown off the lines when under pressure. Concrete thrust blocks shall be provided as shown in the standard details or directed by the city engineer. 
Where pipe ends are left for future connections, they shall be valved, plugged, or capped as called for on the drawings. Where connections are made between new work and existing mains, the connections shall be made by using special pipes and fittings as required to suit the actual conditions. 
All temporary and permanent water main stubs shall be restrained with Field-Loc gaskets/Fast-Grip or equal for at least three pipe joints prior to the stub end, including mechanical fittings. This will allow for a connection to the main without removing or reducing the existing water pressure. It is recommended that a gate valve be installed at the end of the stub. 
(d)  Setting hydrants. Under each hydrant the ground shall be excavated to a depth of at least one foot below the hydrant base and over an area approximately three feet square. Refer to the standard details. 
Each hydrant shall be set truly plumb and held firmly braced in this position. The connection of the hydrant to the branch shall be made by mechanical joint as herein specified under jointing. After the joining has been made, a concrete thrust block shall be poured on the side opposite the branch connection, from the hydrant to the solid undisturbed earth of the excavation wall. 
When the concrete has become sufficiently hard, an additional one-foot depth of gravel shall be spread and tamped around the hydrant. When this has been done, the remaining backfill shall be placed and compacted, taking care at all times to avoid jarring the hydrant. 
Wherever it is necessary to adjust the length of the barrel to meet variations in elevation of the ground surface over the water main and at the hydrant location, suitable extensions shall be provided for the hydrant barrel and operating stem. In all cases, the break flange shall be located at grade. 
Contractor shall remove all water from fire hydrants. Water left remaining in each fire hydrant assembly will be removed by pumping prior to acceptance by the city. Thawing and/or repair of frozen hydrants shall be performed by the contractor at no additional expenses to the owner. 
(e)  Connecting to existing water mains. Where connections are made between new work and existing water mains, the connections shall be made by using special pipes and fittings as required to suit the actual conditions. No connections to existing mains shall be made until the new main has been pressure tested and chlorinated and is ready to be placed into service. When making the connection, swab pipe and fittings with four percent chlorine solution. The city engineer shall witness all connections and shall be notified 48 hours prior to the connection of new pipe to existing pipe. Bacteriological samples shall be taken after connection to existing is completed to provide a record for determining the procedures effectiveness per AWWA Standard C651-05. Conform to AWWA Standards C600-05, C605-05 and C651-05. 
(f)  Directionally drilled water main. 
(1)  Description. This work shall consist of constructing underground crossings of a wetland using the directional drilling method of placing pipe to serve as carrier pipe. 
(2)  Depth of bore. The minimum depth of drill using this method shall be six feet of cover below existing grade, and a minimum depth of three feet under any existing stream. 
(3)  Materials. Plastic pipe: Section 2 A.2. High density polyethylene pipe or fusible PVC C900. 
(4)  Construction method. This method consists of augering or jacking a steerable rod under the wetland; then pulling back a cone that expands the soil or a wing cutter, which cuts a hole big enough to obtain the desired diameter. The diameter of the reamer or wing cutter is not to exceed the diameter of the pipe being placed plus two inches. 
A drilling fluid of water and bentonite may be used in all operations of a directional drill. The use of a polymer for lubrication in the drilling fluid is acceptable. 
Connection to HDPE and PVC pipe shall not be made immediately after the pipe has been installed. It is recommended to wait overnight so that the pipe can approach an equilibrium temperature with its surrounding environments. Linear dimensions will vary with temperature changes. A tracer wire adequate for future location of the pipe shall be installed with all HDPE and PVC projects, in accordance with section (l) of these specifications. 
(g)  Acceptance testing water main. 
(1)  General. Prior to connecting the new water main to an existing water main, the new main shall be flushed, chlorinated, and pressure tested as outlined herein. 
The city engineer shall be notified 48 hours prior to the start of a pressure test. All acceptance testing shall be witnessed by the city engineer or city resident project representative. 
A physical gap of at least three feet must be left between the existing and new water main until all testing results are satisfactory. The testing sequence shall be: 1) flushing, 2) pressure test, and 3) chlorination. Water for testing may be taken from a nearby hydrant or tee connection by using fittings to accommodate a standard fire hose connection. A reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly must be used on the 21/2 inch connection to the main being tested. 
(2)  Flushing of mains. The water main shall be flushed clean of sand and debris. Flushing shall be done using the "poly-pig" method of flushing. The contractor shall furnish the brand new, unused, foam "poly-pig" swabs to be used. Prior to pigging and flushing the water main must be charged with water. 
Contractor shall insert "poly-pig" swab in the end of the new main nearest the existing water main (or where shown on the plans). The swab shall be passed through the new main using water pressure. The swab shall be recovered at the end of the main through the blow-off assembly. 
(3)  Hydrostatic testing. The water main or sections thereof shall be tested by the contractor in the presence of the city engineer and all leaks shall be made tight to meet the requirements below. The contractor shall furnish all piping, bulkheads, pumps, gauges and other equipment required to carry out the test and shall obtain city engineer's approval of same prior to testing. 
The section of main to be tested shall be slowly filled with water at least 24 hours prior to starting the test. Expel air through corporation stops installed at high points in line. The contractor shall make arrangements with the operation/maintenance personnel for obtaining water for testing. All water used shall be metered and quantities reported to the operation/maintenance personnel. 
At the start of testing, the main shall be pumped up to a pressure of 150 psi and the test period shall start immediately thereafter. Test pressure shall not be less than 11/4 times the working pressure at the highest point along the test section. The line shall then be maintained under this test pressure for a continuous period of two hours by pumping water into the line at frequent intervals. The test pressure shall not vary by more than +5 psi for the duration of the test. The volume of water so added shall be measured and considered to represent the leakage from the line under test during the intervals. All water service leads shall be tested with the mainline pipe. Conform to AWWA standard C600-05 and C605-05. 
Testing allowance. No pipe installation will be accepted if the amount of makeup water is greater than that determined by the following formula: 
In inch-pound units, 
L= SD v P 
 148,000 
Where: 
L=Testing allowance (makeup water), in gallons per hour 
S=Length of pipe tested, in feet 
D=Nominal diameter of the pipe, in inches 
P=average test pressure during the hydrostatic test, in pounds per square inch (gauge) 
The leakage per 1,000 feet under the conditions of test shall not exceed the values shown in the following table, in accordance with AWWA Standard C600-05 for ductile iron and C605-05 for plastic pipe: 
Hydrostatic testing allowance per 1,000 ft of pipeline-gph 
Test Pressure 150 psi 
Nominal Pipe diameter Maximum Leakage Gallons Per Hour Per 1,000 Feet of Pipeline 6" 0.50 8" 0.66 10" 0.83 12" 0.99 14" 1.16 16" 1.32 18" 1.49 20" 1.66 24" 1.99  
Test Pressure 150 ps> 
Hydrostatic testing allowance per 1,000 ft of pipeline-gp> 
In the event that the leakage exceeds the specified amount, the joints in the line shall be carefully inspected for leaks and repaired where necessary. Any pipes or special casting found to be cracked shall be removed and replaced with new pieces by the contractor. No repair clamps or bell clamps can be utilized for repairs on new construction. After this work has been done, the tests shall be repeated. Final acceptance of the lines will not be made until satisfactory tests have been passed. 
Water service leads installed with mainline pipe will be included in the water main pressure test. Installed water service leads shall have a riser (extension of water service) placed at the downstream side of the curb box. For flushing, testing, and sampling, once all tests are completed, this riser must be removed or buried six feet below grade. 
Not more than 1,200 LF of water main shall be tested at one time, plus one set from the end of the line and at least one from each branch greater than one pipe length. If the pipeline under test contains sections of various diameters, the testing allowance will be the sum of the testing allowance for each size. 
Where there is a considerable elevation difference in the section of water main being tested, the test pressure shall average 150 psi over the length of main, but shall be not less than 140 psi at the highest elevation. 
All main line valves and hydrant lead valves within the test section shall remain open during the pressure test. 
After completion of the two hour pressure test, each valve shall be checked against test pressure. 
(4)  Disinfecting water mains. After completion of pressure testing and flushing of the water main, the disinfection of the water main shall be carried out in accordance with AWWA Standard C651-14. 
The method of chlorination chosen shall be one of the four methods specified under section 4.4 of AWWA Standard C651-14. Sampling requirements stipulated by the city water treatment department shall also be followed for new construction or extensive repair for all water systems that are operated and maintained by the department of public works. This procedure is as follows: 
a.  After disinfecting, flush the system until the chlorine residual equals the source water and then allow the water to remain static for 24 hours before drawing the first sample. Submit the first sample which will then be tested using the Colilert procedure. 
b.  There are two sampling options: (1) Option A-Samples are taken 16 hours apart and (2) Option B-Samples are taken 15 minutes apart after a 16 hour rest period. The initial sample shall be done using the Colilert procedure and the second shall entail two samples from the same sample point, one of which will be tested using the Colilert procedure and the other using the membrane filter procedure. If both of the second samples are negative, authorization will be given to use the new construction or repair. If the second Colilert sample is negative but the membrane filter sample produces background growth, resampling for the membrane filter testing shall only be required until no growth occurs on the membrane filter sample. 
Note: If the system is rechlorinated or repigged the sampling procedure shall be started over as listed above in subsections a. and b. When no growth occurs on the membrane filter, approval will be given to activate the system. 
c.  The contractor shall discuss his proposed disinfection procedure with the city engineer and have it approved prior to beginning the process. 
d.  The contractor shall supply the chlorine, all necessary equipment and labor necessary for its application. The contractor shall make suitable arrangements with the city engineer for bacteriological analysis and shall be responsible for all cost incurred from bacteriological testing. Bacteriological analysis shall conform to the requirements of the Michigan Safe Drinking Water Act and be performed by a state approved drinking water testing laboratory. 
e.  One sample shall be taken of the source water prior to connecting the new water main to the existing. The procedure and analysis shall be compliant with the city water department requirements stated above. 
f.  De-chlorination: Contractor shall comply with AWWA C655 on proper de-chlorination and disposal of heavily chlorinated water. 
(5)  Continuity testing. The system (pipeline and hydrants) shall be tested for electrical continuity and current capacity. The electrical test shall be made after the hydrostatic pressure test and while the line is at normal operating pressure. Backfilling shall have been completed. The new water main must not be connected to existing during this testing operation. The line may be tested in sections from hydrant to hydrant as approved by the city engineer. Direct current of 400 amperes + ten percent shall be passed through the pipe line for five minutes. Current flow through the pipe shall be measured continuously on a suitable ammeter and shall remain steady without interruption or excessive fluctuation throughout the five minute test period. 
Insufficient current or intermittent current or arcing, indicated by large fluctuation of the ammeter needle, shall be evidence of defective electrical contact in the pipeline. The cause shall be isolated and corrected. Thereafter, the section in which the defective test occurred shall be retested. 
(h)  Transfer of water services. Where water services are to be transferred from an existing water main to a new water main, as shown on the plans, contractor shall provide corporation stop and necessary pipe and fittings. Work shall be scheduled in such a manner that transfer of service to any residence or water customer will result in the least possible interruption of water supply service. All services are one inch unless otherwise shown on the plans. 
(i)  Transfer of existing hydrants. Where indicated, existing hydrants are to be transferred from an existing main to a new main, as shown on the plans. Contractor shall excavate and reset the hydrant, as shown on Hydrant Assembly Detail, provide new six-inch hydrant gate valve, six-inch hydrant lead to new main and all fittings required for a complete installation. 
(j)  Handling pipe. All pipes and special castings shall be unloaded and distributed along the line of work in such a manner and with such care as will effectively avoid the cracking of any pipe or casting. Dropping directly from the truck will not be permitted. Care must also be exercised on the inside of the pipe. Wherever the outside coating may be found to have rubbed off, the part shall be thoroughly cleaned by brushing and shall then be recoated with an approved asphaltic paint or as may be required by the nature of the pipe coating. The contractor shall keep on hand a supply of paint for such purposes. 
(k)  Marking pipe. Each cast iron fitting shall have its weight and class designation conspicuously painted or cast on it. All other pipe materials shall have the class designation painted thereon. Where required, other designation marks shall be painted on the pipe or fittings to indicate correct location in the pipe section in conformity to a detailed layout plan. 
(l)  Pipe locator. A continuous 1/4-inch diameter stainless steel cable shall be installed along with the plastic pipe for use as a locator wire on all directionally drilled projects and a continuous, insulated ten gauge wire shall be laid in the trench along with all plastic pipe. Contractor shall verify continuity of the locator wire prior to acceptance by the engineer. All locator wire shall be looped at 400 foot intervals and installed within a tracer wire access box. This tracer wire box shall be made of cast iron with a permanently attached 3 inches × 12 inches ABS tube with a flared end to secure it in the ground. It shall be tamper resistant, with a cast iron locking lid and stainless steel terminal connections on the bottom side to which the tracer wires/cables are attached. Lid will open using a standard AWWA pentagon key. Tracer wire access box as distributed by USA Blue Book shall be utilized or equal. Located at each tracer wire access box a flexible rebounding marking post must be installed. This marking post must be able to snap back to its normal position when hit. It must extend at least three feet above ground for visibility and have a width of four inches. This flexible blue rebounding marking post must have a permanent decal applied indicating "Warning Water Main Pipeline". This marker size and type must be approved by the owner. 
A two-inch wide metallic lined marking tape, which meets the latest APWA specifications, similar to Seton Detection Tape Type 2 SEW, will be installed in addition to the magnetic markers described above, as applicable for pipe installed by means of open excavation. The detection tape shall be buried for the full length of the water main at a depth prescribed by the manufacturer. 
(m)  Pipe taps. Pipe lines shall be tapped for corporation cocks where shown or required for testing of completed water mains. For ductile iron or steel pipe, cocks shall be threaded directly into the pipe. 
(n)  Blowoff. Blowoffs shall be placed on all dead-end mains and shall be as shown on the plans. Permanent blow-off assemblies shall be cut off below grade after testing is complete. Standing water within the blowoff shall be pumped out of the riser, capped, bolted, and buried. 
(o)  Thrust blocks. Concrete thrust blocks shall be poured on hand-excavated, undisturbed soil bearing surfaces of a minimum size as shown on the standard details or increased in size according to the actual bearing values of the soil in each location, in accordance with the instructions of the design engineer. 
Thrust blocks shall be made of 3,000 psi concrete, wet mix. Concrete thrust blocks shall be placed at all 22-1/2 ° bends or greater, deadends, tees, reducers, hydrants and crosses, as required. Pre-cast thrust blocks may be utilized for certain applications, if approved by the city engineer. Retainer glands and/or mega lugs shall be utilized on all mechanical joint fittings. 
(p)  Painting. All pipe, valves, bolts and any other portions of water main exposed inside manholes and other structures shall be painted. If necessary, heat shall be provided to maintain good drying conditions. All items to be painted shall be dry and clean before application of the paint. Any rust or scale shall be removed by wire brushing or scraping. 
(q)  Shop drawings. The contractor shall furnish, as prescribed under section "General Requirements" dimension and erection drawings and details of the water main, valves, and other appurtenances furnished under this section. Complete details of all pipe deflections and ties to adjoining pipe shall be submitted to the city engineer for approval. 
(r)  Certification. The manufacturer of pipe and fittings shall furnish a certified statement that all pipe and fittings furnished by him have been inspected and tested in accordance with the applicable specifications. Pipe will be subject to inspection and approval upon delivery and no cracked, broken, damaged or defective pipe or fittings shall be laid in the work. Any piece that is found to be defective after it has been laid shall be removed by the contractor and replaced by a sound and perfect piece. 
(Ord. No. 2018-002 , 3-5-2018) 
Secs. 46-50-46-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CROSS CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 46-71. - State of Michigan rules adopted by reference. 
    The city adopts by reference the water supply cross connection rules of the State of Michigan, being R 325.11401 to R 325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-006, 9-20-2010) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-006, adopted Sept. 20, 2010, changed the title of § 46-41 from "State department of environment quality rules adopted by reference" to "State of Michigan rules adopted by reference." 
Sec. 46-72. - Where prohibited. 
(a)  A cross connection shall not be made between the public water supply system and a secondary water supply. 
(b)  A cross connection shall not be made by a submerged inlet. 
(c)  A cross connection shall not be made between the public water supply and piping which may contain sanitary waste or a chemical contaminant. 
(d)  A cross connection shall not be made between the public water supply system and piping immersed in a tank or vessel which may contain a contaminant. 
(Code 1985, § 2.38) 
Sec. 46-73. - Piping identification. 
    When a secondary water source is used in addition to the public water supply system, exposed public water and secondary water piping shall be identified by distinguishing colors or tags and maintained so that each pipe may be readily traced in its entirety. If piping is installed so that it is impossible to trace it in its entirety, it will be necessary to protect the public water supply at the service connection in a manner acceptable to the state department of environmental quality. 
(Code 1985, § 2.39) 
Sec. 46-74. - Inspections. 
    It shall be the duty of the department of water to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply where cross connection with the public water supply is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the department of water and as approved by the state department of environmental quality. 
(Code 1985, § 2.40) 
Sec. 46-75. - Right of entry. 
    The representatives of the department of water shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the city for the purpose of inspecting the piping systems thereof for cross connections. Upon request, the owner, lessee or occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping systems on such property. The refusal of such information or access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. 
(Code 1985, § 2.41) 
Sec. 46-76. - Discontinuance of service. 
    The department of water, with the approval of the city commission, is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service, after reasonable notice, to any property wherein any connection in violation of this division exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connection has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1985, § 2.42) 
Sec. 46-77. - Protection from contamination. 
(a)  The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by this division and by the state and city plumbing codes. 
(b)  Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as "WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING." 
(Code 1985, § 2.43) 
Secs. 46-78-46-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER SYSTEM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-111. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), as amended. 
    Approval authority means the director in an NPDES state with an approved state pretreatment program and the administrator of the EPA in a non-NPDES state or NPDES state without an approved state pretreatment program. 
    Authorized representative of industrial user means a: 
(1)  Principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president, if the industrial user is a corporation; 
(2)  General partner or proprietor of the industrial user, if a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; 
(3)  Duly authorized representative of the individual designated in subsections (1) and (2) of this definition, if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates. 
    BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in parts per million by weight. 
    Building drain means the part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drain pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
    CFR means the Code of Federal Regulations. 
    COD means chemical oxygen demand. 
    Combination sewer and combined sewer mean a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Control authority means the "approval authority," as defined in this section, or the superintendent of the POTW if the city has an approved pretreatment program under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.11. 
    Cooling water means the water discharged from any use, such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
    Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
    Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, such term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of such agency. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, processing and sale of produce, meat or other food items. 
    Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a wastestream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the wastestream and without consideration of time. 
    Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks, such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
    Indirect discharge means the discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under section 307(b) or (c) of the act (33 USC 1317) into the POTW, including holding tank waste discharged into the system. 
    Industrial user means a source of indirect discharge which does not constitute a discharge of pollutants under the act (33 USC 1342). 
    Industrial wastes means the liquids, solids or gaseous wastes from industrial or commercial processes, as distinct from sewage. 
    Interference means the inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit. Such term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with 405 of the act (33 USC 1345) or any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or more stringent state criteria, including the criteria contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to title IV of SWDA, applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW. 
    l means liter. 
    Manager means the city manager or his appointed representative. 
    mg means milligrams. 
    mg/l means milligrams per liter. 
    National Categorical Pretreatment Standard and pretreatment standard mean any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 USC 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit and NPDES permit mean a permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the act (33 USC 1342). 
    National Prohibitive Discharge Standard and prohibitive discharge standard mean any regulation developed under the authority of 307(b) of the act and 40 CFR 403.5. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of water, either surface water or groundwater. 
    New source means any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the act, which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with such section, provided that the: 
(1)  Building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
(2)  Building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
(3)  Production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. 
In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors, such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
    Normal domestic sewage (NDS) means wastewater which, when analyzed, shows a daily average concentration of not more than 300 mg/l of BOD, nor more than 350 mg/l of suspended solids, nor more than 20 mg/l of phosphorus, nor more than 150 mg/l of fats, oil and grease, and is free of toxic or interfering pollutants. 
    O and M means operation and maintenance of the POTW. 
    Other wastes means decayed wood, sawdust, shavings, bark, lime, refuse, ashes, garbage, offal, oil, tar, chemicals and all other substances, except sewage and industrial wastes. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representative, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural, where indicated by the context. 
    pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    Pollutant means any substance discharged into a POTW or its collection system or a natural outlet containing any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological material, radioactive material, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
    Pollution means the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water. 
    Pretreatment and treatment mean the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from cooking, preparing and dispensing of food that have been cut or shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting property have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works as defined by section 212 of the act (33 USC 1292), which is owned in this instance by the city. Such term includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this article, such term also includes any sewer that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's POTW. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewer means any pipe, tile, tube or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Significant industrial user means any industrial user of the city's wastewater disposal system who: 
(1)  Has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average work day; 
(2)  Has a flow greater than five percent of the flow in the city's wastewater treatment system; 
(3)  Has in his wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to section 307 of the act or state statutes and rules; or 
(4)  Is found by the city, state or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality or air emissions generated by the system. 
    Significant noncompliance means a user who is in significant noncompliance, if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Has chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, in which 66 percent or more of all the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant perimeter. 
(2)  Has technical review violations, in which 33 percent or more of all the measurements for each pollutant perimeter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by applicable technical review criteria. (Technical review criteria equals 1.4 for BOD, total suspended solids, fats, oil and grease and 1.2 for all other pollutants, except pH.) 
(3)  Has any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer term average) that the control authority determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through, endangerment of the health of POTW personnel or the general public. 
(4)  Has any discharge of a pollutant that has caused immediate endangerment to human health, welfare or the environment, or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority in this article to halt or prevent such a discharge. 
(5)  Failed to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or obtaining final compliance. 
(6)  Failed to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports, such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance schedules. 
(7)  Failed to accurately report noncompliance. 
(8)  Has any other violation or group of violations which the control authority determines would adversely effect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
    Slug load means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, or more than five times the average limit for that constituent, or causes interference or pass-through at the sewage works. 
    Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972. 
    Storm sewer and storm drain means a sewer which carries stormwater, surface water and drainage, but which excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
    Superintendent means the person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the publicly owned treatment works and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or his duly authorized representative. 
    Suspended solids means the solids that either float on the surface of or are suspended in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    SWDA means the Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC 6901 et seq. 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of CWA 307(a) or other acts. 
    TSS means total suspended solids. 
    Upset means an exceptional incident in which a discharger unintentionally and temporarily is in a state of noncompliance with the standards set forth in this article or the dischargers wastewater contribution permit, if applicable, due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the discharger, and excluding noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation thereof. 
    USC means the United States Code. 
    User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the city's POTW. 
    Wastewater means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW. 
    Wastewater contribution permit has the meaning as set forth in section 46-192. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
    Waters of the state means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
(Code 1985, § 2.500) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-112. - Injurious and detrimental deposits. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit, or permit to be deposited, in any area under the jurisdiction of the city for discharge into any natural watercourse, any substance which is injurious to the public health or detrimental to the public welfare. 
(Code 1985, § 2.501) 
Sec. 46-113. - Privies and septic tanks. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this division, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facilities intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Code 1985, § 2.502) 
Sec. 46-114. - Connections to public sewer. 
    The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is or may be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, are hereby required, at their own expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly to the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this division, provided that such public sewer is within 100 feet of the nearest property line of the premises. 
(Code 1985, § 2.503) 
Sec. 46-115. - Private sewer systems. 
    Where a public sanitary sewer or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of section 46-114, the building sewer shall be connected with a private disposal system complying with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1985, § 2.504) 
Sec. 46-116. - Septic tank permit required; fee. 
    No septic tank shall be constructed or installed within the city unless the plans for the installation are approved by the city manager as conforming to the regulations prescribed, and a permit issued by the city clerk. The fee for such permit shall be as prescribed by city commission resolution. 
(Code 1985, § 2.505) 
Sec. 46-117. - Inspection of septic tanks. 
    The city manager or his designee shall have authority to require that ample notice be given to the city manager or his designee to permit inspection of the installation of a septic tank prior to backfilling, to regulate the use, operation and maintenance of any and all septic tanks in the city or to order the tanks to be cleaned, repaired or reconstructed, or further use discontinued when, in his judgment, the use, operation or maintenance of any septic tank shall be unhealthy or harmful. 
(Code 1985, § 2.506) 
Sec. 46-118. - Abandonment and filling of private sewer disposal systems. 
    At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewer disposal system, as provided in section 46-114, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewers in compliance with the provisions of this division, and any septic tank, privy, privy vault, cesspool or similar private sewage disposal facility shall be abandoned and filled in a manner approved by the city manager or his designee. 
(Code 1985, § 2.512) 
Sec. 46-119. - Operation and maintenance of private sewage disposal facilities. 
    The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 2.513) 
Sec. 46-120. - Public sewer connection permit. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer, or any appurtenance thereof, without first obtaining a written permit from the city clerk. The fee for a connection permit shall be as established by city commission resolution. 
(Code 1985, § 2.514) 
Sec. 46-121. - Building sewer installation and maintenance. 
    All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of a building sewer shall be borne by the owner of such property. The owner shall indemnify the city for all loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. The owner shall be responsible for repairs to and maintenance of the building sewer, at his expense. 
(Code 1985, § 2.515) 
Sec. 46-122. - Sanitary sewer system buy-in fees. 
    A buy-in fee as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time shall be required for all single-family residential sanitary sewer services at the time such services are connected to the city's sewer system for the first time. For commercial, industrial and multifamily residential services, the amount of the buy-in fee shall be determined using the residential equivalents schedule as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time. Such fees are in addition to tap/connection fees, which are charged on the basis of actual time and materials expended by the city to make the required tap/connection. 
Sec. 46-123. - Installation inspection. 
(a)  The applicant for a sewer connection permit shall notify the city clerk when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The city commission or its designated representative shall then inspect the installation and, if such construction is found to conform to the established specification and be in a safe and sanitary condition, approval shall be granted to connect the building sewer to the public sewer system. 
(b)  As a prerequisite to the issuance of all permits under this division or the continuance thereof, satisfactory evidence must be received by the city clerk indicating compliance with all state laws and regulations concerning sewage disposal. 
(Code 1985, § 2.516) 
Sec. 46-124. - Building sewers. 
(a)  Sanitary sewers shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of Approval and Design Requirements for Construction of Sewage Collection Systems in the City of Clare and the Technical Specifications for Sanitary Sewer and Water Main Construction City of Clare Department of Public Works as adopted in 2014 and as amended from time to time. 
(b)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another or an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building. 
(c)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the city manager, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(d)  The building sewer shall be constructed of PVC or equivalent, as approved by the city manager. The city reserves the right to specify and require the encasement of any sewer pipe with concrete, or the installation of the sewer pipe in a concrete cradle if the foundation and construction are such as to warrant such protection in the opinion of the city manager. 
(e)  The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to approval by the city manager, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall be not less than one-quarter inch per foot, unless otherwise permitted. The slope of pipe, the diameter of which is six inches or more, shall not be less than one-eighth inch per foot, unless otherwise permitted. 
(f)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade. The line shall be straight or laid with properly curved pipe and fittings. Changes in direction of greater than 45 degrees shall be provided with cleanouts that are accessible for cleaning. 
(g)  In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by artificial means approved by the city manager, and discharged to the building sewer. 
(h)  All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. All joints shall be approved by the city manager, and discharge to the building sewer. 
(i)  No sewer connection will be permitted unless there is capacity available in all downstream sewers, lift stations, force mains and the sewage treatment plant, including capacity for treatment of BOD and suspended solids. 
(j)  All newly constructed building sewers shall have a properly sized cleanout at the head of such sewer that is accessible at all times. The cleanout shall allow access of sewer cleaning equipment of a size equivalent to the size of the building sewer. 
(Code 1985, § 2.517; Ord. No. 2015-003 , 4-20-2015) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10. 
Sec. 46-125. - Stormwaters. 
    No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process water to any sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1985, § 2.518) 
Sec. 46-126. - Storm sewers. 
    Storm sewers and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to an approved natural outlet. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process water may be discharged, upon approval of the city commission, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or approved natural outlet. 
(Code 1985, § 2.519) 
Sec. 46-127. - General discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  No user shall contribute, or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW. Such general prohibition applies to all such users of the POTW, whether or not the users are subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. A user may not contribute the following substances to any POTW: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit. In no case can heat be released in such quantities that the temperature at the sewage treatment plant exceeds 104 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(2)  Any water or waste which may contain more than 25 parts per million, or any other amount that will cause interference with or pass-through the POTW, of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or a product of mineral oil origin. 
(3)  Wastewater containing more than 150 mg/l of floatable oil, fat or grease, or in quantities that may adhere to structures or interfere with sewage works operations or pass-through the POTW. 
(4)  Any liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of their nature or quantity, are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion, or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system or at any point in the system, be more than five percent, nor any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. No wastestream shall have a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorites, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, sulfides and any other substance which the city, state or EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the system. 
(5)  Any garbage which has not been properly shredded. 
(6)  Any solid or viscous substance which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities, such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt, residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes. 
(7)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0 or higher than 10.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to the structures, equipment or personnel of the sewage works. 
(8)  Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW or exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to section 307(a) of the act. 
(9)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(10)  Any waters or wastes containing heavy metals, including, but not limited to, cadmium, chromium, copper, lead, mercury, nickel, zinc, selenium, molybdenum arsenic, silver or toxic substances, such as cyanide, PCB or other organics in the families of halogenated hydrocarbons, aromatic hydrocarbons, phenols or phthalate esters. 
(11)  Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which a user knows or has reason to know will cause interference to the POTW. In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentrations or quantities of pollutants that exceed, for any time period longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of quantities or flow during normal operation. 
(12)  Any discharge which exceeds the limitations set forth in division 2 of this article. 
(13)  Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or treatment residues, sludges or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse, or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the act or any criteria guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(14)  Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or state disposal system permit or the receiving water quality standards. 
(15)  Any substance with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(16)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations. 
(17)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points approved and designated by the POTW. 
(18)  A daily average flow greater than five percent of the average daily sewage flow of the wastewater treatment plant, or a five-day BOD greater than 300 parts per million by weight, or containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids, or containing more than 20 parts per million by weight of phosphorus. 
(b)  When the superintendent determines that a user is contributing to the POTW any of the substances set forth in subsection (a) of this section in such amounts as to interfere with the operation of the POTW, the superintendent shall advise the user of the impact of the contribution on the POTW, develop effluent limitations for such user to correct the interference with the POTW and he may also take any combination of the following actions to protect the POTW: 
(1)  Reject the wastes. 
(2)  Require pretreatment to the level of normal domestic sewage. 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge. 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating wastes not covered by existing taxes and sewer charges. 
(5)  Require new industrial customers or industries with significant changes in strength or flow to submit prior information to the city concerning the proposed flows. 
(c)  When directed by the city, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to: 
(1)  Reduce the BOD to 300 parts per million, the suspended solids to 350 parts per million and phosphorous to 20 parts per million by weight; 
(2)  Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in this section; or 
(3)  Control the quantities and rates of discharges of such waters and wastes. 
Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for approval of the city, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until such approval is obtained. 
(d)  Any sewage works user who has a discharge which exceeds the limits set forth in this section will be considered a significant discharger and, as such, will be subject to regulations set forth in division 2 of this article, provided, such acceptance of waste is allowed by the city commission as set forth in section 46-130. 
(Code 1985, § 2.530) 
Sec. 46-128. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
(a)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city commission or its designated representative, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any inflammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall be a type and capacity approved by the city commission or its designated representative, and shall be located so as to be readily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(b)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be substantially constructed, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers, which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight. 
(c)  Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained in continuously efficient operation at all times by the owner at his expense. 
(Code 1985, §§ 2.531, 2.532) 
Sec. 46-129. - Measurements, tests and analyses. 
    All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in sections 46-127 and 46-128 shall be determined in accordance with the Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, as jointly published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation or with procedures established by the U.S. EPA and contained in 40 CFR 136, as amended. Such tests as specified in this section shall be determined upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole provided for in division 2 of this article. If no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected or where designated. 
(Code 1985, § 2.540) 
Sec. 46-130. - Special agreements and arrangements. 
    No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment. Such wastes, if accepted, will be charged a surcharge based on the amount of BOD, suspended solids, flow, phosphorous or other characteristic not consistent with this article. Only that portion of the discharge which is in excess of the limits established will be subject to a surcharge. Such agreements will be by permit on a case-by-case basis. Surcharges will reflect the cost of the additional expense involved in the operation, maintenance and capital improvements required to effectively treat the unusual or extra-strength waste. 
(Code 1985, § 2.541) 
Sec. 46-131. - Protection from damage. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage works. 
(Code 1985, § 2.542) 
Sec. 46-132. - Authority to enter upon properties. 
    The city commission and other duly authorized representatives of the city shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article at any time during reasonable or usual business hours. 
(Code 1985, § 2.543) 
Sec. 46-133. - Violations; penalties. 
    Any person found to be violating any provision of this article will be considered a significant discharger and will be subject to the rules, regulations and penalties provided under division 2 of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 2.544) 
Sec. 46-134. - Actions. 
    The city commission may bring any appropriate action in the name of the city, in the proper court, as may be necessary or desirable to restrain or enjoin any public nuisance, to enforce any of the provisions of this article and in general to carry out the intent and purpose of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 2.545) 
Sec. 46-135. - Liability for damages. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
(Code 1985, § 2.546) 
Secs. 46-136-46-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT AND MONITORING 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 46-161. - Purpose, policy, applicability and enforcement. 
(a)  This division sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system of the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the general pretreatment regulations (40 CFR 403). 
(b)  The objectives of this division are to: 
(1)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city wastewater system which interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
(2)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere, or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system; and 
(4)  Provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal wastewater system. 
(c)  This division provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and enforcement of general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user reporting, assumes that existing customers' capacity will not be preempted and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established in this division. 
(d)  This division shall apply to the city and persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's POTW. Except as otherwise provided in this division, the superintendent of the city's POTW shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1985, § 2.550) 
Sec. 46-162. - Wastewater strength limitations. 
(a)  Federal categorical pretreatment standards. Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal pretreatment standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this division for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this division. The superintendent shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. 
(b)  Modification of federal categorical pretreatment standards. Where the city's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the city may apply to the approval authority for modification of specific limits in the federal pretreatment standards. The term "consistent removal" shall mean reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is achieved by the system in 95 percent of the samples taken when measured according to the procedures set forth in 40 CFR 403.7(c)(2), entitled General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution, promulgated pursuant to the act. The city may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the federal pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR 403.7 are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval authority is obtained. 
(c)  State requirements and limitations. State requirements and limitations on discharges to the POTW shall be met by all dischargers which are subject to such standards in any instance in which such requirements and limitations are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this division or any other applicable ordinance. 
(d)  Right of revision. The city reserves the right to amend this division to provide for more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW where deemed necessary to comply with the objectives set forth in section 46-161. 
(e)  Excessive discharges. No user shall at any time increase the use of process water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the federal categorical pretreatment standards or any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or state. 
(f)  Specific pollutant limitations. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following: 
Material Concentration (mg/l) Arsenic 0.0285 Benzene 8.8 Cadmium 0.0111 Carbonaceous Biochemical Oxygen Demand 7658 Chromium 1.73 Copper 0.598 Cyanide 0.5 Ethylbenzene 6.3 Lead 0.336 Mercury 0.0000 Methylenechloride 16.5 Nickel 0.873 Phenol 338 Phosphorus 18 Silver 0.016 Toluene 31.4 Xylene 8.4 Total Suspended Solids 1146 Zinc 3.0506 111.Trichloroethane 23.4  
(g)  Mass limitations. The city may impose mass limitations on dischargers which are using dilution to meet the pretreatment standards or requirements of this division or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is deemed appropriate by the city. 
(Code 1985, § 2.551; Ord. No. 2010-006, 9-20-2010) 
Sec. 46-163. - Accidental discharges. 
(a)  Each user shall provide protection from accidental or slug discharges of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this division. Facilities to prevent accidental discharges of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide such protection shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be approved by the city before construction of the facilities. All existing users shall complete such a plan within 180 days of enactment of the ordinance from which this division is derived. No user who commences contribution to the POTW after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental slug discharge procedures have been approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this division. 
(b)  In the case of an accidental or slug discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. 
(Code 1985, § 2.552) 
Sec. 46-164. - Upsets. 
    If an accidental discharge is caused by the upset of an industrial user's treatment facility, the industrial user must notify the POTW within 24 hours of the upset. Written notification must be provided as described in section 46-166. An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the causes of the upset; 
(2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; 
(3)  The industrial user has submitted the appropriate notifications to the POTW as described in this section and section 46-166. 
(Code 1985, § 2.553) 
Sec. 46-165. - Bypasses. 
(a)  Bypasses are prohibited and may result in enforcement action against the industrial discharger unless: 
(1)  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property damage; 
(2)  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes or maintenance during normal periods of down time; 
(3)  The industrial user submitted the proper notices to the POTW. 
(b)  An unanticipated bypass requires the industrial user to notify the POTW within 24 hours after becoming aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided according to the conditions of section 46-166. 
(Code 1985, § 2.554) 
Sec. 46-166. - Written notice requirements. 
    Within five days following an accidental discharge, operational upset or bypass, the user shall submit to the superintendent of the POTW a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge, its duration, including exact dates and times when it was corrected, and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills or any other liability which may be imposed by this division or other applicable law. If a substance is discharged to the POTW, which if otherwise disposed of would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261, then notification must include the name of the hazardous waste, the EPA hazardous waste number and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, etc.). The user must also notify the EPA regional waste management division director and state hazardous waste authorities in writing. 
(Code 1985, § 2.555) 
Sec. 46-167. - Notice of emergency notification procedure. 
    A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous slug discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous slug discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Code 1985, § 2.556) 
Sec. 46-168. - Recovery of costs. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the city's wastewater disposal system for the implementation of the program established in this division. The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in the city's schedule of charges and fees as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time. 
(b)  Charges and fees. 
(1)  The city may adopt charges and fees which may include: 
a.  Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program; 
b.  Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures; 
c.  Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
d.  Fees for permit applications; 
e.  Fees for filing appeals; 
f.  Fees for consistent removal by the city of pollutants otherwise subject to federal pretreatment standards; and 
g.  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in this division. 
(2)  Such fees relate solely to the matters covered by this division and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the city. 
(Code 1985, § 2.557) 
Secs. 46-169-46-190. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Administration[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 46-191. - Wastewater dischargers. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge, without a permit, any wastewater to any natural outlet within the city, in any area under the jurisdiction of the city and/or to the POTW, except as authorized by the superintendent in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1985, § 2.560) 
Sec. 46-192. - Wastewater contribution permits. 
(a)  Required. All significant users proposing to connect or contribute to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting or contributing to the POTW. All existing significant users connected or contributing to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater contribution permit within 180 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
(b)  Permit application. 
(1)  Users required to obtain a wastewater contribution permit shall complete and file with the city an application in the form prescribed by the city, and accompanied by the appropriate fee as set forth in the city's schedule of charges and fees. Existing users shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within 30 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, and proposed new users shall apply at least 90 days prior to connecting or contributing to the POTW. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
a.  Name, address and location, if different from the address; 
b.  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended; 
c.  Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including, but not limited to, those mentioned in this division, as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 305(g) of the act and contained in 40 CFR 136, as amended; 
d.  Time and duration of contribution; 
e.  Average daily and 30-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any; 
f.  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details showing all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by size, location and elevation; 
g.  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials which are or could be discharged; 
h.  Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants or materials in the discharge which are limited by any city, state or federal pretreatment standards and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards; 
i.  If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet with the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in the schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to the schedule: 
1.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.); 
2.  No increment referred to in subsection (b)(1)i.1. of this section shall exceed nine months; 
3.  Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the superintendent, including, as a minimum, whether or not the user complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with the increment of progress, the reason for delay and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the superintendent; 
j.  Each product produced by type, amount, process and rate of production; 
k.  Type and amount of raw materials processed, average and maximum per day; 
l.  Number and type of employees and hours of operation of the plant, and proposed or actual hours of operation of the pretreatment system; 
m.  Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
(2)  The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the city may issue a wastewater contribution permit subject to the terms and conditions provided in this subdivision. 
(Code 1985, § 2.561) 
Sec. 46-193. - Permit modifications. 
    Within nine months of the promulgation of a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the wastewater contribution permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the time-frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater contribution permit as required by section 46-192(b), the user shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard. In addition, the user with an existing wastewater contribution permit shall submit to the superintendent within 180 days after the promulgation of an applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard the information required by section 46-192(b)(1)h. and i. 
(Code 1985, § 2.562) 
Sec. 46-194. - Permit conditions. 
    Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this division and all other applicable regulations and user charges and fees established by the city. Permits may contain the following: 
(1)  Unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer; 
(2)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
(4)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
(5)  Specifications for monitoring programs, which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule; 
(6)  Compliance schedules; 
(7)  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports (see section 46-197); 
(8)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the city, and affording city access thereto; 
(9)  Requirements for notification of the city of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system; 
(10)  Requirements for notification of slug discharges as per section 46-163; 
(11)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this division. 
(Code 1985, § 2.563) 
Sec. 46-195. - Permit duration, modifications and changes. 
(a)  Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than one year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. 
(b)  The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the city during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in section 46-127 are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed change in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of such change. Any change or new condition in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(Code 1985, § 2.564) 
Sec. 46-196. - Permit assignability and transferability. 
    Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred, or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises or a new or changed operation without the approval of the city. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit. 
(Code 1985, § 2.565) 
Sec. 46-197. - Reporting requirements of permittee. 
(a)  Compliance date report. 
(1)  Within 180 days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, 90 days prior to commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the superintendent a baseline monitoring report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated processes which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements, and the average and maximum daily flow for such process units in the user's facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. A minimum of four grab samples must be used for readily degradable parameters such as pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, and sulfide and volatile organics. Samples for other pollutants shall be a 24-hour composite flow proportional unless prior approval of waiver for flow proportional sampling is obtained from the POTW. A minimum of one representative sample taken immediately downstream of the regulated processes is required. All sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with 40 CFR 136 or as approved by the superintendent. The baseline report shall indicate the time, date, place and name of the person collecting the sample and the methods of analysis, and shall certify it is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges. The baseline report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. The statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified to by a qualified professional. 
(2)  New sources shall install and have in operating condition, and shall startup all pollution control equipment required to meet the wastewater contribution permit and/or applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest feasible time, not to exceed 90 days, new sources must meet all applicable pretreatment standards. 
(b)  Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge to the POTW, or any other significant industrial user, shall submit to the superintendent during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the superintendent, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by the pretreatment standards. In addition, the report shall include a record of all daily flows which, during the reporting period, exceeded the average daily flow reported in section 46-194(2). If an industrial user monitors any pollutant more frequently than required, the results shall be included in the report. At the discretion of the superintendent and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the superintendent may agree to alter the months during which the reports are to be submitted. Periodic compliance reports shall be reviewed and signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user. 
(2)  The superintendent may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by subsection (b)(1) of this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. Such reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow, and the nature and concentration or production and mass, where requested by the superintendent, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard. All analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the administrator pursuant to section 304(g) of the act and contained in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto, or with any other test procedure approved by the administrator. Sampling shall be representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period, and shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the administrator. 
(c)  Violation of discharge standards. If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation of discharge standards, the user shall notify the POTW within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat sampling and analysis, and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the POTW within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. 
(Code 1985, § 2.566) 
Sec. 46-198. - Monitoring facilities. 
(a)  The city shall require to be provided and operated, at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
(b)  There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole of the facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility's sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition, at the expense of the user. 
(c)  Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following written notification by the city. 
(Code 1985, § 2.567) 
Sec. 46-199. - Inspection and sampling. 
(a)  The city may inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this division is being met and all requirements are being complied with. 
(b)  Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city or their representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination or in the performance of any of their duties. The city shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(Code 1985, § 2.568) 
Sec. 46-200. - Pretreatment. 
(a)  Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this division and shall achieve compliance with all federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this division. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or methods of operation shall be reported and acceptable to the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
(b)  The city shall annually publish in a newspaper of general circulation within the city a list of the users which were not in compliance with any pretreatment requirements or standards at least once during the 12 previous months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the users during the same 12-month period. 
(c)  All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the EPA or the approval authority upon request. 
(Code 1985, § 2.569) 
Sec. 46-201. - Confidential information. 
(a)  Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs, and inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction, unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. 
(b)  When requested by a discharger furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this division, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(c)  Information accepted by the city as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or the general public by the city until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the user. 
(Code 1985, § 2.570) 
Sec. 46-202. - Harmful contributions. 
(a)  The city may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or wastewater contribution permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the city, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, causes interference to the POTW or causes the city to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. 
(b)  Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or wastewater contribution permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individual. The city shall reinstate the wastewater contribution permit and/or wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city within 15 days of the date of occurrence. 
(Code 1985, § 2.571) 
Sec. 46-203. - Revocation of permit. 
    Any user who violates the following conditions of this division or applicable state and federal regulations is subject to having his permit revoked in accordance with the procedures set forth in this subdivision: 
(1)  Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge; 
(2)  Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or 
(4)  Violation of conditions of the permit. 
(Code 1985, § 2.572) 
Sec. 46-204. - Notification of violation. 
    Whenever the city finds that any user has violated or is violating this division, a wastewater contribution permit or any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained in this division, the city may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days of the date of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the city by the user. 
(Code 1985, § 2.573) 
Sec. 46-205. - Show cause hearing. 
(a)  The city may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW to show cause before the city commission why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user, specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the city commission regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action and directing the user to show cause before the city commission why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation. The city commission may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence or may designate any of its members or any officer or employee to: 
(1)  Issue, in the name of the city commission, notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings. 
(2)  Take the evidence. 
(3)  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations, to the city commission for action thereon. 
(b)  At any hearing held pursuant to this section, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges therefor. 
(c)  After the city commission has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed or existing treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
(Code 1985, § 2.574) 
Sec. 46-206. - Legal action. 
    If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the city's wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this division, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the city, the city attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the circuit court of the county. 
(Code 1985, § 2.575) 
Sec. 46-207. - Right of appeal. 
    Any discharger or interested party shall have the right to request, in writing, an interpretation or ruling by the city on any matter covered by this division and shall be entitled to a prompt written reply. If such inquiry is by a discharger and deals with matters of performance or compliance with this division for which enforcement activity relating to an alleged violation is the subject, receipt of the discharger's request shall stay all enforcement proceedings, pending receipt of the written reply. Appeal of any final judicial order entered pursuant to this division may be taken in accordance with local and state law. 
(Code 1985, § 2.576) 
Secs. 46-208-46-220. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Penalties 

Sec. 46-221. - Civil penalties. 
    Any user who is found to have violated an order of the city commission or who has willfully or negligently failed to comply with any provision of this division, and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued under this division, shall be fined not less than $100.00, nor more than $1,000.00 for each offense. In addition to the penalties provided in this section, the city may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit of law against the person found to have violated this division or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued under this division. 
(Code 1985, § 2.580) 
Sec. 46-222. - Falsifying information. 
    Any person who knowingly makes any statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this division or a wastewater contribution permit, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this division, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1985, § 2.581) 
Sec. 46-223. - Records retention. 
    All dischargers subject to this division shall retain and preserve, for not less than three years, any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports and correspondence, and any and all summaries thereof, relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analyses made by or on behalf of a discharger in connection with its discharge. All records which pertain to matters which are the subject of administrative adjustment or any other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the city pursuant to this division shall be retained and preserved by the discharger until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired. 
(Code 1985, § 2.582) 
Secs. 46-224-46-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HAULED WASTE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 36. 

Sec. 46-241. - Purpose and policy. 
    This division sets forth the policy for accepting vehicle transported wastes into the city's wastewater system. 
(Code 1985, § 2.590) 
Sec. 46-242. - Background. 
(a)  The city's wastewater system has made it a practice for many years not to accept any hauled waste under any condition. Such wastes have been viewed as potential threats to the treatment plant through the inclusion of toxic, hazardous or other undesirable constituents. Additionally, to provide the degree of control necessary to properly screen and monitor such wastes would require extensive preliminary sampling and laboratory analysis, review of load manifests and trip tickets, and a complete recordkeeping system. Lastly, once wastes are accepted into the system, they and any environmental problems they may cause become the responsibility of the city's wastewater system. 
(b)  Requests have come from septic haulers, public institutions, private industrial waste haulers and private industrial and commercial firms. Each request would require a significant amount of time for proper evaluation prior to acceptance or rejection. Requests by waste generators are made for one reason only, to reduce their costs of disposal and, thus, the costs of doing business. Further, the city has had a well documented policy of not accepting additional waste from outside the city, except in the case of waste from specified service districts (i.e., the state department of transportation's city rest area). There is no reason to believe that the policy will change. The acceptance of hauled waste from outside the city would constitute a breach of the policy; therefore, the policy is designed to handle hauled waste that originates within the city. 
(Code 1985, § 2.591) 
Sec. 46-243. - Management. 
(a)  Acceptance criteria. 
(1)  The city will only accept hauled waste from destinations that originate from within the city. The one exception to such policy will be to accept leachate from a type II landfill that accepts the solid waste from the city's contracted waste haulers (i.e., Northern Oaks Recycling and Disposal Facility). 
(2)  The city will accept hauled waste by permitted waste haulers only. Any person wishing to discharge any material into the city's sanitary system via truck will be required to obtain a permit application from the city's water and waste department at 11175 South Eberhart Road. The permit will be issued for one specific class or type of waste only. 
(3)  The hauled waste permit will be issued for a maximum period of one year. There will be a permit fee as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time. 
(4)  Applicants will be notified within 30 days as to acceptance or rejection of the permit. 
(b)  Administration. To ensure that the integrity of the wastewater treatment plant is maintained and that a complete record of each waste load is available, the following requirements must be met prior to the acceptance of each load: 
(1)  The only site approved for waste hauler discharge will be located at 812 Cedar Street, the site of the former city wastewater treatment plant. Such site is access controlled. For this reason, prior notification of truck arrival must be made or schedules supplied. Any discharge to the sanitary sewer system, other than the approved site, will constitute a violation of this chapter. The discharge site will be open only during normal working hours that the plant is staffed. Any after-hours request will be assessed an additional fee based on the actual costs involved. 
(2)  Any hauled waste discharger will be required, prior to discharge into the plant, to submit a copy of the load manifest to the wastewater treatment plant superintendent or his appointed representative. The load manifest shall contain the following information: 
a.  Origin of waste. 
b.  Waste hauler's name, address, etc. 
c.  Date and time of pickup, and date and time of discharge off-loading at the wastewater treatment plant. 
d.  Volume of waste. 
e.  A certification statement that the waste is not a Resource Conservation and Recovery Act hazardous waste or a prohibited discharge. The certification statement must be signed before any discharge will be allowed, and must be signed by the waste hauler and the generator of the waste. 
(3)  The manifest shall be completed in triplicate, with one copy for the waste hauler, one copy for the wastewater treatment plant and one copy for the utilities billing clerk. 
(c)  Inspection, sampling and load analysis. 
(1)  The city shall have the right to collect samples of the waste for analysis at any time. The purpose of the analysis shall be for billing surcharges and compliance monitoring. An analysis cost shall be paid by the generator of the waste. 
(2)  The city shall maintain the right to deny or limit the discharge of any trucked-in material. The city shall also have the right to request load analysis before accepting any material from an unknown source. 
(3)  Because trucked-in waste must meet the requirements of the general pretreatment regulations, it is necessary for the generator located outside the city's legal jurisdiction to consent to inspections and samplings of the generator's facilities according to the limitations of section 46-199. 
(d)  Compliance with industrial pretreatment. Waste hauler discharges fall within the scope of the general pretreatment regulations, 40 CFR 403.1(b), and division 2 of this article. Therefore, the local limits and general prohibited discharge standards (40 CFR 403.5(b)) apply as well and any categorical limits of the waste comes from a categorical industry. 
(e)  Hazardous waste. The discharge of any hazardous waste, as defined by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), 42 USC 6901 et seq., is expressly prohibited. Any violation of this subsection will result in an immediate fine of $10,000.00 per occurrence and the discharger shall be held responsible for any fine, damage, litigation cost, etc., that could result from such act. 
(Code 1985, § 2.592) 
Sec. 46-244. - Fee schedule and classifications. 
(a)  The fees charged for approved wastes transported to the city's wastewater treatment plant shall be assessed based on classification, volume, strength and treatability characteristics. Such fee designations will be approved in accordance with article IV. 
(b)  Wastes will be identified by the following classifications: 
(1)  Class I. Septage from domestic origins. 
(2)  Class II. Leachate from type II landfills only. 
(3)  Class III. Industrial/commercial wastes, groundwater decontamination, project wastewaters, underground tank removal waste products and other nondramatic waste as defined by federal, state and local laws. 
(c)  Fees will be as listed in article IV, updated annually in concurrence with the city's fiscal year or as revised to meet current costs. 
(d)  Bills will be provided on a monthly basis and will be due within 15 days of the billing date. Billings in arrears shall be cause to void the permit. 
(e)  In cases where circumstances warrant, the city may require a deposit as prepayment. Such deposit shall be equal to the total estimated costs, plus 25 percent. Any balance shall be returned at the conclusion of the permit period or the project. 
(Code 1985, § 2.593) 
Secs. 46-245-46-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER AND SEWER RATES 

Sec. 46-271. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial means any retail store, restaurant, office building, laundry and other private business and service establishments. 
    Debt service charge means the charges designed to recover the cost of debts incurred by the department. 
    Department means the city's water and/or sewer departments. 
    Governmental means legislative, judicial, administrative and regulatory activities of federal, state and local governments. 
    Industrial means any nongovernmental, nonresidential user of publicly owned water or sewage treatment works which is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented under the following divisions: 
(1)  Division A, Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing; 
(2)  Division B, Mining; 
(3)  Division D, Manufacturing; 
(4)  Division E, Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary; and 
(5)  Division I, Services. 
    Institutional means social, charitable, religious and educational activities, such as schools, churches, hospitals, nursing homes, penal institutions and similar institutional users. 
    Normal domestic sewage means the wastewater which, when analyzed, shows a daily average concentration of not more than 300 mg/l of BOD, nor more than 350 mg/l of suspended solids, nor more than 20 mg/l of phosphorus, nor more than 150 mg/l of fats, oils and grease and is free of toxic or interfering pollutants. 
    Operation and maintenance (O&M) means the functions that result in expenditures during the useful life of the water and/or sewage treatment works for materials, labor, utilities and other items which are necessary for managing and for which such works were designed and constructed. Such term includes the term "replacement," as defined in this section. 
    Person means any individual, firm, association, public or private corporation, or public agency or instrumentality. 
    Premises means each lot or parcel of land, building or premises having any connection to the water distribution system or the sewage disposal system of the city. 
    Replacement means the expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the water and/or sewage treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. 
    Residential means mean any contributor or benefactor of the city's water or sewage treatment works whose lot, parcel, real estate or building is used for domestic purposes only. 
    Service charges means the portion of the total water and/or wastewater service charge which is levied to cover costs not associated with O&M and replacement costs. Such costs might include late payment penalties; septage treatment costs; tap-in costs, turn-on/turnoff costs; and other costs of general management and administrative activities not directly associated with O&M and replacement. 
    Sewer charge means the charge made for wastewater services which may include debt service charges, service charges, user charges, industrial surcharges or other charges as may be applicable to the discharge as set forth in this article and various other ordinances of the city. 
    Superintendent means the superintendent of the department. 
    User charge means the portion of the total water and/or wastewater service charge which is levied in a proportional and adequate manner for the cost of operation and maintenance, and replacement of the water and/or wastewater treatment works. 
    User classes means premises having water and/or sewer connections. Such classes may include residential, commercial, industrial, institutional and governmental users. 
(Code 1985, § 2.101) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-272. - Basis. 
    All water service shall be charged for on the basis of water consumed as determined by the meters installed by the department on the premises of water or sewage disposal service customers. All sewage disposal service shall be charged for on the basis of water consumed. No free water service or sewage disposal service shall be furnished to any person. 
(Code 1985, § 2.102) 
Sec. 46-273. - Water rates. 
(a)  User charges. Except as otherwise provided in this article, water to be furnished by the system to any premises shall be measured by a meter installed and controlled by the city, and charges per meter for such metered water service to any premises within the city connected with the water supply system shall be at the rates in effect until changed pursuant to resolution of the city commission. 
(b)  Water service tap fee. The city commission may adopt, and amend by resolution from time to time, a water service tap fee. The purpose of the fee is to cover the cost of the water meter and the cost of installation. The fee may be established by meter size or on a time and materials basis. Revenues for such service will be deposited in the water system operating fund. 
(c)  Water system development fee. The city commission may adopt, and amend by resolution from time to time, a system development fee. The purpose of the fee is to cover a portion of the system capital costs to make their connection possible, and the fee represents a buy-in to the system. The fee may be established based on meter size or residential equivalents. Revenues from the fee will be deposited in the water system capital fund. 
(d)  Cross connection inspection fee. The city commission may adopt, and amend by resolution from time to time, a cross connection inspection fee. The fee is to cover a portion or all of the expenses associated with inspection of private wells to ensure that they are not connected to the city water system in any manner. Revenues from the fee will be deposited in the water system operating fund. 
(e)  Water turn-on fee. The city commission may adopt, and amend by resolution from time to time, a water turn-on fee. The fee is to cover a portion or all of the expenses associated with turning on service where a meter already exists. A different fee may be charged based on whether or not the turn-on takes place during regular business hours. Revenues from the fee will be deposited in the water system operating fund. 
(f)  Water shutoff fee. The city commission may adopt, and amend by resolution from time to time, a water shutoff fee. The fee is to cover a portion or all of the expenses associated with turning off service. The public works department may waive the fee in the event of an emergency shutoff. Revenues from the fee will be deposited in the water system operating fund. 
(Code 1985, § 2.103) 
Sec. 46-274. - Sewer user charge system. 
(a)  Established; revisions; applicability; basis for computations. Rates and charges for the use of the wastewater system of the city are hereby established. Revisions to the rates for total sewer service charges are to be established by resolution of the city commission, which may be enacted apart from the published ordinances as necessary to ensure sufficiency of revenues in meeting operation and maintenance, and replacement costs, as well as debt service. Such charges and rates shall be made against each lot, parcel of land or premises which may have any sewer connections with the sewer system of the city, or which may otherwise discharge sewage or industrial waste, either directly or indirectly, into such system or any part thereof. Such charges shall be based upon the quantity of water used thereon or therein. 
(b)  Amounts and billings. 
(1)  The rates and charges for service furnished by such system shall be levied upon each lot, parcel or premises having any sewer connection with such system, on the basis of the quantity of water used thereon or therein, as measured therein, or, in the absence thereof, by such equitable method as shall be determined by the superintendent, and shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as provided for the payment of charges for water used, except in cases where the character of the sewage from a manufacturing or industrial plant, building or premises is such that unreasonable additional burden is placed upon the system, greater than that imposed by the normal domestic sewage delivered to the system plant, the additional costs of treatment created thereby shall be an additional charge over the regular rates set forth in this section, or the city may, if it deems it advisable, compel such manufacturing or industrial plant, building or premises to treat such sewage in such a manner as shall be specified by the city before discharging such sewage into the sewage disposal system. Rates for all users obtaining all or part of their water supply from sources other than the city water system may be determined by gauging or metering the actual sewage entering the system or by metering the water used by them, in a manner acceptable to the superintendent. 
(2)  The rate to be billed for use of the system for all users within the sanitary sewer service area of the city shall be as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time. 
(c)  Summer sewer discount. Residential customers who have one residential unit per meter will receive a discount for sewer service provided in the months of May, June, July and August. The discount recognizes that residential customers utilize additional water for irrigation, vehicle washing and other purposes that do not require sewer treatment. The discount is calculated on the actual water usage for the month or the average usage for the months of January, February and March, whichever is less. 
(d)  Sewer service tap fee. The city commission may adopt, and amend by resolution from time to time, a sewer service tap fee. The purpose of the fee is to cover the cost of tapping the sewer collection line. The fee may be established by meter size, building use or on a time and materials basis. Revenues for the service will be deposited in the sewer system operating fund. 
(e)  Sewer system development fee. The city commission may adopt, and amend by resolution from time to time, a sewer system development fee. The purpose of the fee is to cover a portion of the system capital costs to make their connection possible, and the fee represents a buy-in to the system. The fee may be established based on meter size or residential equivalents. Revenues from the fee will be deposited in the sewer system capital fund. 
(f)  Industrial pretreatment inspection fee. The city commission may adopt, and amend by resolution from time to time, an industrial pretreatment inspection fee. The fee would be an annual charge for existing industrial pretreatment program permits. The purpose of the fee is to cover a portion or all of the expenses associated with administering the industrial pretreatment program. Revenues from the fee would be deposited in the sewer system operating fund. 
(Code 1985, § 2.104) 
Sec. 46-275. - Annual audit and accounting. 
(a)  Revision of rates. The rates fixed by this article are estimated to be sufficient to provide for the expenses of operation and maintenance, and replacement of the system as are necessary to preserve the system in good repair and working order. Such rates shall be fixed and revised from time to time as may be necessary to produce such amounts. An annual audit shall be prepared. Based on such audit, rates for sewage services shall be revised annually and as necessary by the city commission by resolution to meet system expenses and to ensure that all user classes pay their proportionate share of operation and maintenance, and equipment replacement costs. 
(b)  Water system operating fund. The city shall maintain a water system operating fund that will account for the operation and maintenance of the water system and its debt service. The revenues to support the fund shall be water system user fees, water system tap-in fees, cross connection inspection fees, water system turn-on fees, water system shut-off fees, interest earnings and other miscellaneous services and reimbursements involving the operation of the water system. 
(c)  Water system capital fund. The city shall establish a water system capital fund. Proceeds from the fund are limited to water system capital improvement expenditures, which include, but are not limited to, system expansion and replacement of existing water infrastructure in excess of $25,000.00. Sources of funding for the fund will include water system development fees and transfers from the water system operating fund for renewal or replacement. 
(d)  Sewer system operating fund. The city shall maintain a sewer system operating fund that will account for the operation and maintenance of the sewer system and its debt service. The revenues to support the fund shall be sewer system user fees, sewer system tap-in fees, industrial pretreatment inspection fees, interest earnings and other miscellaneous services and reimbursements involving the operation of the sewer system. 
(e)  Sewer system capital fund. The city shall establish a sewer system capital fund. Proceeds from the fund are limited to sewer system capital improvement expenditures, which include, but are not limited to, capital expenditures for the expansion of treatment capacity, extension of sewer collection systems and replacement of existing sewer infrastructure in excess of $25,000.00. Sources of funding for the fund will include sewer system development fees and transfers from the sewer system operating fund for renewal and replacement. 
(Code 1985, § 2.105) 
Sec. 46-276. - Free service. 
    No free service shall be allowed for any user of the city's water or wastewater systems. 
(Code 1985, § 2.106) 
Sec. 46-277. - Billing; payment; delinquencies. 
    Water and wastewater service charges shall be billed by the 15th day of each month for the preceding month. Payment is due on the first of the following month. If payment is not received by the fifth day of the following month, then a ten percent delinquent penalty will be added to the bill. 
(Code 1985, § 2.107) 
Sec. 46-278. - Collection. 
(a)  Security deposits. The city commission shall adopt a security deposit as set by resolution of the city commission from time to time for residential customers establishing new accounts for water, sewer and/or solid waste/recycling service. The security deposit will be held in reserve by the city until the customer has made payments, without any delinquencies, for a period of one year. At that point, the security deposit will be refunded, without interest. 
(b)  Authorization for enforcement. 
(1)  The city treasurer is hereby authorized to enforce the payment of charges for water service, sewer service and garbage service. The department may discontinue water or sewer service should the account become delinquent and in excess of the security deposit amount and after the city has taken appropriate actions to notify residents of delinquencies. 
(2)  Where service has been discontinued, the city may apply the customer's security deposit toward payment of the delinquent account. If the security deposit is not sufficient to cover the delinquent account, an action of assumpsit may be instituted by the city treasurer against the delinquent customer. 
(c)  Placement of delinquent accounts on tax roll. The charges for water service, sewage disposal service and solid waste/recycling collection, which, under the provisions of Public Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq.), as amended, are made a lien on the premises to which furnished, are hereby recognized to constitute such lien; and the city treasurer shall, semiannually, certify all unpaid charges for such services furnished to any premises which have remained unpaid for a period of 30 days, to the city assessor, who shall place the charges on the next tax roll of the city. Such charges so assessed shall be collected in the same manner as general city taxes. 
(Code 1985, § 2.108; Ord. No. 2008-01, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 46-279. - Annual notification. 
    All customers of the city's water and wastewater system will receive an annual notification, either printed on the bill or enclosed in a separate letter, which will show the breakdown of the water and sewer bill into its components for operation and maintenance, and replacement, and for debt service. 
(Code 1985, § 2.109) 
Secs. 46-280-46-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PRIVATE WELLS 

Sec. 46-311. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Well means an opening in the surface of the earth on any privately owned land for the purpose of removing fresh water, or a test well, recharge well, waste disposal well or a well used temporarily for dewatering purposes during construction. 
(Code 1985, § 2.131) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-312. - Permit required. 
    No person shall dig or drill a private well upon any land within the city without having first secured a permit from the city commission, nor shall any private well be extended or enlarged without having first secured a permit under this article. 
(Code 1985, § 2.132) 
Sec. 46-313. - Permit application and fee. 
    Any person desiring to dig, drill, extend or enlarge any private well shall make application to the city commission. Such application shall be in writing and shall contain all pertinent information concerning the size and location of the proposed well, or extension thereof, with a statement of the purposes for which water therefrom will be used. Such application shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount established by resolution of the city commission, which fee shall be returned if the permit shall not be granted. 
(Code 1985, § 2.133) 
Sec. 46-314. - Hearing. 
    The city commission shall hold such hearing on the application as it may deem necessary, and may grant or deny issuance of a permit. If a permit is granted, the permit shall contain such reasonable terms and conditions as the city commission may deem necessary, relative to the depth or size of such private well, and the use and disposal of water taken therefrom. 
(Code 1985, § 2.134) 
Sec. 46-315. - Regulations. 
    When any permit is granted for the drilling of any private well, such well shall be drilled in strict conformity and compliance with regulations contained in such permit, and such well, both at the time of drilling and subsequent thereto, shall be subject to inspection at all reasonable times by the water department of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 2.135) 
Sec. 46-316. - Meters. 
    The city commission may, as a condition precedent to the granting of any permit, require installation on any private well of a meter measuring the amount of water taken therefrom. Such meter, if so required, shall be installed by the city water department, and all costs in connection therewith shall be borne by the owner of the premises and shall be an additional charge over and above the permit fee provided for in section 46-313. 
(Code 1985, § 2.136) 
Sec. 46-317. - Disposition of waste. 
    No water from private wells within the city shall be permitted to enter the sewer system of the city unless the water first passes through a meter duly installed and approved by the city water department. 
(Code 1985, § 2.137) 
Sec. 46-318. - Sewer charges. 
    Water from private wells deposited in the sewer system of the city shall be subject to the same charges as are provided for sewage treatment of water from the city's water system. 
(Code 1985, § 2.138) 
Sec. 46-319. - Permit revocation. 
    Any permit granted under this article shall be revocable at the will of the city commission, provided that the city commission, prior to revoking such permit, shall give to the owner or operator of such well at least 90 days' written notice of its intent to revoke such permit. Such notice shall be deemed sufficient if served on such owner personally or by registered or regular mail and by posting a copy thereof on the premises where such well is located. Use of water shall be discontinued forthwith on revocation of such permit, and such well shall be capped or otherwise treated as required by order of the city commission. 
(Code 1985, § 2.139) 
Sec. 46-320. - Water sales. 
    It shall be unlawful to sell water from any private well, except by express permission of the city commission, or to use water for any purpose other than the purposes specified in the permit granted therefor. 
(Code 1985, § 2.140) 
Sec. 46-321. - Purpose of regulation; public nuisance declared. 
(a)  The regulation of private wells is intended to prevent waste, in an unreasonable manner, of water from artesian wells, or use thereof which may in any way cause depletion or lowering of the head or reservoir thereof to the detriment or damage of other wells in the city. 
(b)  Any private well dug or drilled, or operated and maintained in violation of any provision of this article or of the permit for such well shall be a public nuisance, and the nuisance shall be abated forthwith. 
(Code 1985, § 2.141) 
Sec. 46-322. - Wellfield protection area. 
(a)  The city wellfield protection area is hereby designated for the purpose of protecting public health and the environment, and to prevent interference with the implementation of a remedy selected for the city's wellfield site pursuant to the United States Environmental Protection Agency's (U.S. EPA) record of decision dated September 16, 1992 (ROD). 
(b)  The city wellfield protection area is located in the southwestern quadrant of the city in Section 34 of Township 17 North, Range 4 West of Grant Township in Clare County. The area is bounded on the north by Wheaton Avenue, to the south by Dunlop Street, to the west 200 feet west of the western boundary of property currently owned by the Mitchell Company of Owosso and to the east by U.S. Route 27. 
(c)  The following activities are prohibited upon or with respect to any lands located within the city wellfield protection area: 
(1)  No person shall be issued a permit for a private well; 
(2)  There shall be no consumptive or other use of the groundwater from existing wells that could cause exposure of humans or animals to any contaminated groundwater; 
(3)  No person shall interfere with the performance, construction, installation, effectiveness or maintenance of the remedial action being conducted in accordance with the ROD; and 
(4)  No person shall tamper with or remove the containment, treatment and/or monitoring systems related to any response action taken by the U.S. EPA, or any party acting as an agent for the U.S. EPA, or a responsible party acting under an administrative or judicial order, and which is selected and/or undertaken by the U.S. EPA pursuant to Section 104 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, as amended (CERCLA), 42 USC 9601 et seq. 
(Code 1985, § 2.142) 
Chapter 50 - WATERWAYS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; community development, ch. 16; environment, ch. 20; land divisions and subdivisions of land, ch. 24; parks and recreation, ch. 30; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40; zoning, ch. 52. 
State Law reference- Watercraft and marine safety, MCL 324.80101 et seq.; local regulation, MCL 324.80110 et seq. 

Sec. 50-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Waterway means Lake Shamrock and the Tobacco River and all channels, lagoons and waterways having any connection therewith within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  Additional definitions. The definitions contained in the marine safety law, part 801 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.80101 et seq.), and not otherwise defined in this section, shall apply in the interpretation of this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 3.61) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-2. - Speed limit. 
    Pursuant to the Michigan Administrative Code Rule 281.718.5 on the waters of Shamrock Lake and the Tobacco River, Sections 26 and 35, Township 17 North, Range 4 West, of the city in the County of Clare, no operator of any motorboat shall operate such motorboat at a high speed at or above which a motorboat reaches a planing condition. 
(Code 1985, § 3.65) 
Sec. 50-3. - Pulling water skier or surfboard rider. 
    Pursuant to the Michigan Administrative Code Rule 281.718.5 on the waters of Shamrock Lake and the Tobacco River, Section 26, Township 17 North, Range 4 West, of the city in the County of Clare, no operator of any motorboat shall have in tow or otherwise assist in the propulsion of a person on water skis, a water sled, surfboard or other similar contrivance. 
(Code 1985, § 3.70) 
Chapter 51 - PLANNING COMMISSION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions, § 2-91 et seq. 

Sec. 51-1. - Creation. 
    The City of Clare Planning Commission created pursuant to City Code section 52-51 is continued and shall be constituted as a planning commission pursuant to P.A. 33 of 2008, as amended, being the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, MCL 125.3801 et seq., hereinafter referred to as the planning commission with the powers and duties as therein set forth and as hereinafter provided and staffed planning department. This chapter shall be officially known and described as the "City of Clare Planning Commission Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2012-002, 2-6-2012) 
Sec. 51-2. - Membership. 
(a)  The planning commission shall consist of nine members appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city commission. To be qualified to be a member and remain a member of the planning commission, the individual shall meet the following qualifications: 
(1)  Shall be a qualified elector of [the] City of Clare, except not more than two nonqualified elector(s) may be member(s) and one member of the commission; 
(2)  Shall not be a declared candidate for any political office, except this condition shall not apply to the city commission representative to the planning commission; 
(b)  Members currently serving shall serve out their terms in accordance with their initial appointments. Thereafter, members shall be appointed for three-year terms. However, if necessary, when first appointed a number of members shall be appointed to one-year, two-year, or three-year terms such that, as nearly as possible, the terms of one-third of all commission members will expire each year. If a vacancy occurs, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as provided for an original appointment such that, as nearly as possible, the terms of one-third of all commission members continue to expire each year. 
(c)  There shall be no ex officio members on the planning commission. 
(d)  The membership shall be representative of the important segments of the of community, such as the economic, governmental, educational, and social development of the City of Clare, in accordance with the major interests as they exist in the City of Clare, as follows: 
(1)  Agriculture; 
(2)  Natural resources; 
(3)  Recreation; 
(4)  Education; 
(5)  Public health; 
(6)  Government; 
(7)  Transportation; 
(8)  Industry; 
(9)  Commerce; 
(10)  Tourism. 
(e)  The membership shall also be representative of the entire geography of the City of Clare to the extent practicable, and as a secondary consideration to the representation of the major interests. 
(f)  A member of the city commission, mayor or person designated by the mayor, of the City of Clare shall not be chair of the planning commission. 
(g)  Not more than one-third of the total membership of the planning commission shall consist of, collectively, a member of the city commission, mayor, person designated by the mayor, or city manager of the City of Clare. 
(Ord. No. 2012-002, 2-6-2012) 
Sec. 51-3. - Liaisons. 
    The planning commission, in its bylaws, may name "liaisons" to the city commission. The purpose of liaisons is to provide City of Clare officials an ability to participate in discussion with the planning commission in addition to speaking in public participation, and nothing else. At a minimum liaisons shall include: 
(1)  City of Clare staff, and their agents and consultants. 
(2)  City manager. 
(3)  City attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2012-002, 2-6-2012) 
Sec. 51-4. - Removal from office. 
(a)  The City of Clare may remove a member of the planning commission for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon written charges and after a public hearing. Failure to disclose a potential conflict of interest shall be considered malfeasance in office. Repeated failure to attend planning commission meetings shall be considered nonfeasance in office. 
(b)  The secretary of the planning commission shall report any member who has missed three regular meetings in a row to the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 2012-002, 2-6-2012) 
Sec. 51-5. - Membership; vacancies. 
    The city commission shall fill any vacancy in the membership of the commission for the unexpired terms in the same manner as the initial appointment. 
(Ord. No. 2012-002, 2-6-2012) 
Sec. 51-6. - Membership; transition. 
(a)  The transition from the previous City of Clare Planning Commission and the planning commission established in this chapter shall be gradual and shall take place over the next three years, if necessary. The city commission shall continue to make annual appointments, appointing approximately one-third of the membership of the commission as specified in this chapter, so that three years from the effective date of this chapter the membership, membership representation, and number of members have completed the transition to fully comply with this chapter. 
(b)  All other aspects of this chapter shall have immediate effect. 
(Ord. No. 2012-002, 2-6-2012) 
Sec. 51-7. - Membership; compensation. 
    All members of the planning commission shall serve as planning commissioners and receive compensation (if provided for) and as set by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 2012-002, 2-6-2012) 
Sec. 51-8. - Meetings. 
(a)  The planning commission shall meet at least once every month as needed (in no case less than four times a year) and a majority of the planning commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of the ordinary business of said planning commission and all questions which shall arise at their meetings shall be determined by a vote of the majority of the members of the planning commission. 
(b)  The affirmative vote of two-thirds of the total number of seats for members of the commission, regardless if vacancies or absences exist or not, shall be necessary for the adoption, or recommendation for adoption, of any plan or amendment to a plan. 
(Ord. No. 2012-002, 2-6-2012) 
Sec. 51-9. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The planning commission shall have their powers and duties as set forth in P.A. 33 of 2008, as amended, being the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, MCL 125.3801 et seq.; and P.A. 110 of the Public Acts of 2006, as amended, being the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, (MCL 125.3101 et seq.). 
(b)  The commission shall have authority to apply for and receive grants from any government agency or the federal government and to receive gifts. 
(Ord. No. 2012-002, 2-6-2012) 
Sec. 51-10. - Meetings; records. 
    The planning commission shall adopt bylaws for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations, which records shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 2012-002, 2-6-2012) 
Sec. 51-11. - Approval, ratification, and reconfirmation. 
    All official actions taken by all City of Clare Planning Commissions preceding the planning commission created by this chapter are hereby approved, ratified and reconfirmed. Any project, review, or process taking place at the effective date of this chapter shall continue with the planning commission created by this chapter, subject to the requirements of this chapter, and shall be deemed a continuation of any previous City of Clare Planning Commission. This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and publication. 
(Ord. No. 2012-002, 2-6-2012) 
Chapter 52 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Zoning, § 7.11. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance pertaining to rezoning property saved from repeal, § 1-5(a)(15); adult entertainment, § 6-121; buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; community development, ch. 16; environment, ch. 20; land divisions and subdivisions of land, ch. 24; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 40; telecommunications, ch. 42; waterways, ch. 50. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate land use, MCL 125.581 et seq.; municipal planning, MCL 125.31 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 52-1. - Enactment. 
    This chapter continues Ordinance No. 219, adopted pursuant to Public Act No. 207 of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq.), for the general purpose of promoting the public health, safety and general welfare of the city. It has been designed to lessen congestion in the streets, secure safety from fire, prevent the overcrowding of land, bring about the gradual conformity of the uses of land and buildings, and minimize conflict among the uses of land and buildings, and provide adequate light and air. 
(Code 1985, § 5.1) 
Sec. 52-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. This provision is amended by the addition of the following definitions: 
    Access management (access control) means a technique to improve traffic operations along a major roadway and decrease the potential for accidents through the control of driveway locations and design; consideration of the relationship of traffic activity for properties adjacent to, and across from, one another; and the promotion of alternatives to direct access. 
    Access to property, reasonable means a property owner's legal right, incident to property ownership, to access a public road right-of-way. Reasonable access to property may be indirect or certain vehicle turning movements prohibited for improved safety and traffic operations. 
    Accessory building means any subordinate building, such as private garages and farm buildings located on the same lot with the main building, or any portion of the main building, if such portion is occupied or devoted exclusively to an accessory use. Where an accessory building is attached to a main building in a substantial manner by a wall or roof, such accessory building shall be considered part of the main building for the purpose of determining the required dimensions of yards. 
    Accessory use means any use customarily incidental to the main use of the premises. 
    Adequate lateral support means the control of soil movement on a site as determined by accepted engineering standards. 
    Adjacent means touching or sharing a boundary. Adjacent does not mean contiguity for local unit boundary adjustment purposes. 
    Adult bookstore means an establishment that has as a substantial portion of its stock in trade and offers for sale, for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, movies, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other visual representations that are characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia designed for use as part of or in connection with specified sexual activities. 
    Alley means a roadway in any district that fronts a side of the parcel other than the front, especially a road between or behind buildings. 
    Architectural feature, significant means any building, structure, or portion thereof that is sufficiently distinctive or unusual in design or construction as to warrant the preservation and minimal alteration of its original form. 
    Area of the lot means the net area of the lot and shall not include portions of streets and alleys. 
    Arterial street means a street defined in the master plan or city's Act 51 plan as "major traffic routes" and/or as an arterial or major street by the Michigan Department of Transportation where the movement of through traffic is the primary function, with service to adjacent land uses a secondary function. 
    As-built plans means construction plans in accordance with all approved field changes. 
    Bar and tavern means any public place licensed for the sale of alcoholic liquors, having a maximum occupancy capacity of less than 100 persons and not meeting the requirements of a class I restaurant. 
    Berm means a mound of earth graded, shaped and improved with landscaping in such a fashion as to be used for visual and/or audible screening purposes. 
    Buffer zone means a strip of land often required between certain zoning districts reserved for plant material, berms, walls, or fencing singularly or in combination to serve as a visual and noise barrier. 
    Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof and walls, and intended for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any find. A building shall include tents, mobile homes, manufactured housing, storage sheds, garages, greenhouses, pole barns, semitrailers, vehicles situated on a parcel and used for the purposes of a building and similar structures. A building shall not include such structures as signs, fences, smokestacks, canopies, or overhangs but shall include structures such as storage tanks, produce silos, coal bunkers, oil-cracking towers, or similar structures. 
    Building envelope means the ground area of a lot which is defined by the minimum setback and spacing requirements within which construction of a principal building and any attached accessory structures (such as a garage) is permitted by this chapter. For condominium developments, the building envelope shall be illustrated on a site plan. 
    Building line means a horizontal line generally parallel to a front, rear, or side lot line which is located at the point of the foundation of a principal building nearest to the front, rear, or side lot line. 
    Building, principal means a building in which is conducted the principal uses of the lot on which such building is located. 
    Building, service establishment means a business which provides business-type services to patrons including, but not limited to, copy centers, postal centers, data centers and computer-repair establishments. 
    Cabaret means any place wherein food and any type of alcoholic liquor is sold or given away on the premises and the operator thereof holds a yearly license to sell such beverages by the glass and which features topless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainers. 
    Caliper means the diameter of a trunk measured as follows: 
(1)  Existing trees are measured at four and one-half feet above the average surrounding grade; and 
(2)  Trees which are to be planted shall be measured 12 inches above the average surrounding grade if the tree caliper is more than four inches, or if the tree caliper is less than four inches, it shall be measured at six inches above the average surrounding grade. 
    Canopy tree means a deciduous tree whose mature height and branch structure provide foliage primarily on the upper half of the tree. The purposes of a canopy tree are to provide shade to adjacent ground areas and to enhance aesthetics. 
    Certificate of zoning compliance means a document signed by the building and zoning administrator as a condition precedent to the commencement of a use or the alteration of a structure or building or the construction/reconstruction of a structure or building which acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with the provisions of this chapter. 
    Colocation shall mean the location of two or more wireless communication providers of wireless communication facilities on a common structure, tower, or building, in an effort to reduce the overall number of structures required to support wireless communication antennas within the community. 
    Commercial use means an occupation, employment, or enterprise that is carried on for profit by the owner, lessee, or licensee for more than seven days during a calendar year. 
    Commercial vehicle means any vehicle bearing or required to bear commercial license plates and which falls into one or more of the categories listed below: 
(1)  Truck tractor. 
(2)  Semitrailer, which shall include flat beds, stake beds, roll-off containers, tanker bodies, dump bodies and full or partial box-type enclosures. 
(3)  Vehicles of a type that are commonly used for the delivery of ice cream, milk, bread, fruit or similar vending supply or delivery trucks. This category shall include vehicles of a similar nature which are also of a type commonly used by electrical, plumbing, heating and cooling, and other construction oriented contractors. 
(4)  Tow trucks. 
(5)  Commercial hauling trucks. 
(6)  Vehicle repair service trucks. 
(7)  Snow plowing trucks. 
(8)  Any other vehicle with a commercial license plate having a gross vehicle weight in excess of 10,000 pounds or a total length in excess of 22 feet. 
    Common elements means the portions of the condominium project other than the condominium units are defined as follows: 
(1)  General common elements means and includes: 
a.  The land in the condominium project. 
b.  The foundations, main walls, roofs, halls, lobbies, stairways entrances, exits, or communication ways. 
c.  The basements, flat roofs, yards and gardens, except as otherwise provided or stipulated. 
d.  The premises for the use of janitors or persons in charge of the condominium project, including lodging, except as otherwise provided or stipulated. 
e.  The compartments or installations of central services such as heating, power, light, gas, cold and hot water, refrigeration, air-conditioning, reservoirs, water tanks, and pumps and the like. 
f.  The elevators, incinerators and, in general, all devices or installations existing for common use. 
g.  All other elements of the condominium project owned in common and intended for common use or necessary to the existence, upkeep and safety of the project. 
(2)  Limited common elements means and includes those common elements which are reserved in the master deed for the exclusive uses of less than all of the co-owners. 
    Common land means a parcel or parcels of land with the improvements thereof, the use, maintenance and enjoyment of which are intended to be shared by the owners and/or occupants of individual building units in a subdivision or a planned unit development. 
    Common open space means an unoccupied area within a planned unit development which is reserved primarily for the leisure and recreational use of all the planned unit development residents, owners and occupants, and generally owned and maintained in common by them, often through a homeowners association. 
    Communications tower means any freestanding structure or any antenna-type apparatus appended to any existing structure, used primarily or solely for the transmission of commercial data or radio, telephone and television signals. 
    Contractor yard means a site on which a building or construction contractor stores equipment, tools, vehicles, building materials and other appurtenances used in or associated with building or construction. A contractor's yard may include outdoor storage, or a combination of both. 
    Convenience store or mini-mart means a one-story retail store that is designed and primarily stocked to sell food, beverages, and other household supplies to customers who purchase only a relatively few items (in contrast to a "supermarket"). Convenience stores are designed to attract greater volumes of stop-and-go traffic. 
    Convenience store with gasoline sales means an establishment that retails convenience-food items which occupy 50 square feet or greater of the sales area in conjunction with gasoline sales. 
    Cul-de-sac means a dead-end public or private street, generally short in distance, which terminates in a circular or semicircular section of street which allows for vehicle turnaround. 
    Curb cut means the entrance to or exit from a property provided for vehicular traffic to or from a public or private thoroughfare. 
    Deceleration lane means an added roadway lane that permits vehicles to slow down and leave the main vehicle stream before turning. 
    Detention basin or facility means a manmade or natural water-collector facility designed to collect surface water in order to impede its flow and to release the water gradually at a rate not greater than that prior to the development of the property, onto natural or manmade outlets. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations. A development may include a site plan, a plot (building) plan, a condominium plan, a plat or a manufactured housing community. 
    Drive-in means a business establishment so developed that its retail or service character is dependent on providing a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while in the motor vehicle rather than within a building or structure, including customer communication facilities for banks or other uses. A drive-in restaurant is distinct from a drive-through restaurant in that the majority of drive-in patrons consume food and beverages while in the vehicle and parked on the premises. 
    Dumpster or waste receptacle means any accessory exterior container used for the temporary storage of rubbish, pending collection, having the capacity of at least one cubic yard. Recycling stations and exterior compactors shall be considered to be dumpsters or waste receptacles. 
    Dwelling means any building or portion thereof usable exclusively for residence purposes. 
    Dwelling, attached single-family means a single-family dwelling unit attached to one or more other single-family dwelling units by means of a common-party wall or by a connecting wall or similar architectural feature, such as a garage or carport, and with such dwelling having its own doors which open to the outdoors. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family means any building usable for residence purposes by two or more families, not including a mobile home. 
    Dwelling, single-family means a building containing not more than one dwelling unit designed for residential use and complying with the following standards: 
(1)  The dwelling complies with the minimum square footage requirements of this chapter for the zone in which it is located. 
(2)  The dwelling has a minimum width across any front, side or rear elevation of 20 feet and complies in all respects with this Code, including minimum heights for habitable rooms. Where a dwelling is required to comply with any federal or state standards or regulations for construction and where such standards or regulations for construction are different than those imposed by this Code, then, and in such event, such federal or state standard or regulation shall apply. 
(3)  The dwelling is firmly attached to a permanent foundation constructed on the site in accordance with the city's building code and shall have a wall of the same perimeter dimensions as the dwelling and constructed of such materials and type as required in the applicable building code for single-family dwellings. If the dwelling is a mobile home as defined in this section, such dwelling shall be installed pursuant to the manufacturer's setup instructions and shall be secured to the premises by an anchoring system or device complying with the rules and regulations of the state mobile home commission or shall have a perimeter wall as required in this subsection. 
(4)  The dwelling, if a mobile home as defined in this section, is installed with the wheels removed and, additionally, no dwelling shall have any exposed towing mechanism, undercarriage or chassis. 
(5)  The dwelling is connected to a public sewer and water supply or to such approved private facilities, if permissible under the provisions of this Code. 
(6)  The dwelling contains a storage-capability area in a basement located under the dwelling, in an attic area, in closet areas or in a separate structure of standard construction, which storage area shall be equal to ten percent of the square footage of the dwelling or 100 square feet, whichever shall be less. 
(7)  The dwelling is aesthetically compatible in design and appearance with other residences in the vicinity, with either a roof overhang of not less than 12 inches on all sides or alternatively with window sills or roof-drainage systems concentrating roof drainage at collection points along the sides of the dwelling; has not less than two exterior doors, with the second one being in either the rear or side of the dwelling; and contains steps connected to such exterior door areas or to porches connected to such door areas where a difference in elevation requires such steps. 
(8)  The compatibility of design and appearance shall be determined in the first instance by the city building inspector upon review of the plans submitted for a particular dwelling, subject to appeal by an aggrieved party to the zoning board of appeals within a period of 15 days from the receipt of notice of such building inspector's decision. Any determination of compatibility shall be based upon the standards set forth in this definition, as well as the character, design and appearance of one or more residential dwellings, located outside of mobile home parks, within 2,000 feet of the subject dwelling where such area is developed with dwellings to the extent of not less than 20 percent of the lots situated within such area or, where such area is not so developed, by the character, design and appearance of one or more residential dwellings, located outside of mobile home parks, throughout the city. This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit innovative design concepts involving such matters as solar energy, view, unique land contour or relief from the common or standard site-built home. 
(9)  The dwelling contains no additions, rooms or other areas which are not constructed with similar-quality workmanship as the original structure, including permanent attachment to the principal structure and construction of a foundation as required in this definition. 
(10)  The dwelling complies with all pertinent building and fire codes. In the case of a mobile home, all construction and plumbing, electrical apparatuses and insulation within and connected to the mobile home shall be of a type and quality conforming to the mobile home construction and safety standards as promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, 24 CFR 3280, and as such standards may be amended from time to time. Additionally, all dwellings shall meet or exceed all applicable roof snow load and strength requirements. 
The standards set forth in this definition shall not apply to a mobile home located in a licensed mobile home park, except to the extent required by state or federal law, or otherwise specifically required in provisions of this Code pertaining to such parks. All construction required in this definition shall be commenced only after a building permit has been obtained in accordance with the applicable city building code provisions and requirements. 
    Economic impact study means a professionally prepared, written evaluation which contrasts the economic vitality of the city with and without the proposed land use. 
    Entertainment facilities means an establishment which provides for activities such as, but not limited to, bowling alleys, billiard and pool halls, game and video arcades, and tag games. 
    Environmental impact study means a professionally prepared, written evaluation which defines, describes and evaluates the positive and negative environmental impacts of a proposed land use. 
    Essential public service building means a building or structure principal to an essential public service, such as a drop-off station for residential recyclables, vehicle garages, telephone exchange buildings, electricity transformer stations or substations, gas regulator stations. 
    Excavation means any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and ground care. 
    Facade means the exterior wall of a building exposed to public view. 
    Family means any number of individuals customarily living together as a single housekeeping unit and using common facilities. 
    Feasibility of Colocation. Colocation shall be deemed to be "feasible", for purposes of this section where all of the following are met: 
(1)  The wireless communication provider entity under consideration for colocation will undertake to pay market rent or other market compensation for colocation. 
(2)  The site on which colocation is being considered, taking into consideration reasonable modification of replacement of a facility, is able to provide structural support. 
(3)  The colocation being considered is technologically reasonable, e.g.; the colocation will not result in unreasonable interference, given appropriate physical and other adjustments in relation to the structure, antennas, and the like. 
(4)  The height of the structure necessary for colocation will not be increased beyond a point deemed to be permissible by the city taking into consideration the several standards contained in section 52-319 of this ordinance. 
    Floor area, gross or total means the sum of all gross horizontal areas of all floors of a building or buildings, measured from the outside dimensions of the outside face of the outside wall. Unenclosed porches, courtyards, or patios shall not be considered as part of the gross area except where they are utilized for commercial purposes such as the outdoor sale of merchandise. 
    Floor area, residential. For the purpose of computing the minimum allowable floor area in a residential dwelling unit, the sum of the horizontal areas of each story of the building shall be measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two dwellings. The floor area measurement excludes areas of basements, unfinished attics, attached garages, breezeways, and enclosed and unenclosed porches. 
    Floor area, useable. For the purposes of computing parking requirements, the useable floor area shall be considered as that area to be used for the sale of merchandise or services, or for use to serve patrons, clients, or customers. Such floor area which is used or intended to be used principally for the storage or processing of merchandise, hallways, stairways, and elevator shafts, or for utilities for sanitary facilities, shall be excluded from this computation of useable floor area. Useable floor area shall be measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls, and total useable floor area for a building shall include the sum of the useable floor area for all floors. Where calculations are not provided, the useable or gross leasable floor area shall be assumed to be 85 percent of the gross floor area. 
    Frontage means the linear dimension measured along the public street right-of-way line or along the private road access easement. 
    Frontage road means a public or private drive which generally parallels a public street between the right-of-way and the front building setback line. Frontage roads can be one-way or bidirectional in design. The frontage road provides specific access points to private properties while maintaining separation between the arterial street and adjacent land uses. A road which allows parking or is used as a maneuvering aisle within a parking area is generally not considered a frontage road. 
    Garage, private, means a detached accessory building or portion of a main building used for the storage of passenger vehicles. 
    Garage, public, means any building used for the hire, sale, storage or servicing of automotive vehicles or trailers. 
    Glare means the effect produced at the lot line by brightness sufficient to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility. 
    Grade, average means the arithmetic average of the lowest and highest grade elevations in an area within five feet of the foundation line of a building or structure. 
    Grade, finished means the lowest point of elevation between the exterior wall of the structure and a line five feet from the exterior wall of the structure. 
    Grade, natural means the elevation of the ground surface in its natural state, before construction begins. 
    Greenbelt means a landscaped area along a street between the curb or road shoulder and the front yard building or parking setback line, this area also includes a front yard parking lot setback area. 
    Handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodge, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature that advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing, or which directs attention to any business, mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity for the purpose of either, directly or indirectly, promoting the interest thereof by sales, or which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged, or a collection taken for the purpose of private gain or profit, or which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominately and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor. Such term does not include any bona fide newspaper, the principal objective of which is the dissemination of news items, even though the newspaper contains matter of an advertising nature. Such term also does not include signs advertising garage sales, yard sales, etc., regulated elsewhere in this Code. 
    Hard surface. For a single-family home, hard-surface consists of MDOT 22A or 23A gravel, brick, asphalt or concrete meeting the construction specifications of the city. 
    Historical feature, significant means any site or structure which is located in a designated local historic district or listed in the state or national register of historic places. 
    Home occupation means any occupation that is customarily performed at home and that does not involve an external structural change in the building, does not require the employment of the equivalent of full-time help, does not require on-street parking, does not require the display of a sign, is not conducted in an accessory building and does not impose any negative external influences upon surrounding property. Under no circumstances shall a business that involves or is related to medical marijuana in any way be considered a home occupation. Home occupations expressly excludes all medical marijuana dispensaries, retail activity, growing facilities, and all activities licensed under Public Act 281 of 2016. 
    Incinerator facilities means a facility that uses thermal-combustion processes to destroy or alter the character or composition of medical waste, sludge, soil or municipal solid waste, not including animal or human remains. 
    Impervious surface means a manmade material which covers the surface of land and substantially reduces the infiltration of storm water to a rate of five percent or less. Impervious surface shall include pavement, buildings, and structures. 
    Living space means areas in a dwelling unit that are livable space. Livable space does not include closets, attics, crawl spaces and other storage areas. 
    Lot means a parcel of land occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a main building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for the principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such yards and open spaces as are required under the provisions of this chapter. A lot may or may not be specifically designated as such on public records. For purposes of meeting the dimensional standards of this chapter, a lot does not include public rights-of-way or private road easements, but does include access easements for a service drive. A lot may be a single lot of record, a portion of a lot of record, a combination of contiguous lots of record, contiguous portions of lots of record, a parcel of land described by metes and bounds or a condominium lot. 
    Lot area, gross means the area contained within the lot lines or property boundary including street right-of-way if so included. 
    Lot area, net means the total area of a horizontal plane within the lot lines of a lot, exclusive of any public street rights-of-way or private road easements, or the area of any lake. The lot area shall be used in determining compliance with minimum lot area standards. 
    Lot area, net buildable means the net lot area less areas devoted to floodplains or surface water bodies; water bodies being defined as areas greater than five acres in size (either before or after project implementation) which are periodically or permanently covered with water. 
    Lot, corner means any lot having at least two contiguous sides abutting upon one or more streets, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of such two sides is less than 135 degrees. A lot abutting a curved street shall be a corner lot if the arc has a radius less than 150 feet. 
    Lot coverage means the part or percent of a lot occupied by buildings and accessory buildings. 
    Lot depth means the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured along the midpoint between side lot lines. 
    Lot, flag means a lot which is located behind other parcels or lots fronting on a public road, but which has a narrow extension to provide access to the public road. 
    Lot frontage means the length of the front lot line. 
    Lot, interior means a lot other than a corner lot which, with the exception of a "through lot," has only one lot line fronting on a street. 
    Lot line means a line bounding a lot, parcel, or general common element if there is no limited common element, which separates the lot, parcel, or general common element if there is no limited common element, from another lot, parcel, general common element if there is no limited common element, existing street right-of-way, approved private road easement, or ordinary high water mark. 
    Lot line, front means the lot line which separates the lot from the existing street right-of-way or approved private road easement that provides access to the lot. In the case of a corner lot, the line separating the narrowest side from the street. 
    Lot line, rear means the lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of a triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lot or parcel, it means an imaginary line ten feet in length entirely within the lot or parcel, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line. 
    Lot line, side means any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. 
    Lot, nonconforming means a lot of record which does not meet the dimensional requirements of this chapter. 
    Lot of record means a tract of land which is part of a subdivision shown on a plat or map which has been recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds for Clare or Isabella Counties; or a tract of land described by metes and bounds which is the subject of a deed or land contract which is likewise recorded in the office of the register of deeds. When two lots in a recorded plat have been combined into a single building site, said lots shall be deemed a single lot of record for the purposes of this chapter. 
    Lot, through (also called a double frontage lot) means an interior lot having frontage on two more or less parallel streets. In the case of a row of double frontage lots, all yards of said lots adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and front yard setbacks shall be provided as required. 
    Lot width means the horizontal distance between side lot lines measured parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required front setback line. 
    Lot, zoning means a single tract of land, located within a single block, which, at the time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. A zoning lot shall satisfy this chapter with respect to area, size, dimensions, and frontage as required in the district in which the zoning lot is located. A zoning lot, therefore, may not coincide with a lot of record as filed with the county register of deeds, but may include one or more lots of record, or portions thereof. 
    Massage parlor means an establishment or place primarily in the business of providing massage services and which is not a myotherapy establishment. 
    Medical marijuana definitions: 
(1)  Grower means a licensee that is a commercial entity located in this state that cultivates, dries, trims, or cures and packages marijuana for sale to a processor or provisioning center. 
(2)  Licensee means a person holding a state operating license. 
(3)  Marijuana means that term as defined in section 7106 of the public health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.7106. 
(4)  Marijuana facility means a location at which a license holder is licensed to operate under this act. 
(5)  Marijuana plant means any plant of the species Cannabis sativa L. 
(6)  Marijuana-infused product means a topical formulation, tincture, beverage, edible substance, or similar product containing any usable marijuana that is intended for human consumption in a manner other than smoke inhalation. Marijuana-infused product shall not be considered a food for purposes of the food law, 2000 PA 92, MCL 289.1101 to 289.8111. 
(7)  Michigan Medical Marijuana Act means the Michigan Medical Marijuana Act, 2008 IL 1, MCL 333.26421 to 333.26430. 
(8)  Paraphernalia means any equipment, product, or material of any kind that is designed for or used in growing, cultivating, producing, manufacture, compounding, converting, storing, processing, preparing, transporting, injecting, smoking, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body, marijuana. 
(9)  Person means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, limited liability limited partnership, trust, or other legal entity. 
(10)  Plant means any living organism that produces its own food through photosynthesis and has observable root formation or is in growth material. 
(11)  Processor means a licensee that is a commercial entity located in this state that purchases marijuana from a grower and that extracts resin from the marijuana or creates a marijuana-infused product for sale and transfer in packaged form to a provisioning center. 
(12)  Provisioning center means a licensee that is a commercial entity located in this state that purchases marijuana from a grower or processor and sells, supplies, or provides marijuana to registered qualifying patients, directly or through the patients' registered primary caregivers. Provisioning center includes any commercial property where marijuana is sold at retail to registered qualifying patients or registered primary caregivers. A noncommercial location used by a primary caregiver to assist a qualifying patient connected to the caregiver through the department's marijuana registration process in accordance with the Michigan Medical Marijuana Act is not a provisioning center for purposes of this Act. 
(13)  Registered primary caregiver means a primary caregiver who has been issued a current registry identification card under the Michigan Medical Marijuana Act. 
(14)  Registered qualifying patient means a qualifying patient who has been issued a current registry identification card under the Michigan Medical Marijuana Act or a visiting qualifying patient as that term is defined in section 3 of the Michigan Medical Marijuana Act, MCL 333.26423. 
(15)  Registry identification card means that term as defined in section 3 of the Michigan Medical Marijuana Act. MCL 333.26423. 
(16)  Safety compliance facility means a licensee that is a commercial entity that receives marijuana from a marijuana facility or registered primary caregiver, tests it for contaminates and for tetrahydrocannabinol and other cannabinoids, returns the test results, and may return the marijuana to the marijuana facility. 
(17)  Secure transporter means a licensee that is a commercial entity located in this state that stores marijuana and transports marijuana between marijuana facilities for a fee. 
(18)  State operating license or, unless the context requires a different meaning, license means a license that is issued under this act that allows the licensee to operate as one of the following, specified in the license: 
a.  A grower. 
b.  A processor. 
c.  A secure transporter. 
d.  A provisioning center. 
e.  A safety compliance facility. 
(19)  Statewide monitoring system or, unless the context requires a different meaning, system means an internet-based, statewide database established, implemented, and maintained by the department under the marijuana tracking act, that is available to licensees, law enforcement agencies, and authorized state departments and agencies on a 24-hour basis for all of the following: 
a.  Verifying registry identification cards. 
b.  Tracking marijuana transfer and transportation by licensees, including transferee, date, quantity, and price. 
c.  Verifying in commercially reasonable time that a transfer will not exceed the limit that the patient or caregiver is authorized to receive under section 4 of the Michigan Medical Marijuana Act, MCL 333.26424. 
    Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained in the structure. Such term does not include a recreational vehicle. 
    Natural features means features including soils, wetlands, floodplain, water bodies, topography, vegetative cover, and geological formations. 
    Nightclub means any public place licensed for the sale of alcoholic liquors, having a maximum occupancy capacity of greater than 100 persons and not meeting the requirements of a class I restaurant. 
    Nonconforming building means any building or portion thereof lawfully existing at the time the ordinance from which this chapter is derived became effective and which now does not comply with its regulations. 
    Nonconforming use means any property use which was lawful at the time the ordinance from which this chapter is derived became effective and which now does not comply with its regulations. 
    Nuisance factors means an offensive, annoying, unpleasant, or obnoxious thing or practice, a cause or source of annoyance, especially a continuing or repeating invasion of any physical characteristics of activity or use across a property line which can be perceived by or affects a human being, or the generation of an excessive or concentrated movement of people or things, such as, but not limited to: noise, dust, smoke, odor, glare, fumes, flashes, vibration, shock waves, heat, electronic or atomic radiation, objectionable effluent, noises of or congregation of people and traffic. 
    Obscuring screen means a visual barrier between adjacent areas or uses. The screen may consist of structures, such as a wall or fence, or living plant material. 
    Offset means the distance between the centerlines of driveways or streets across the street from one another. 
    Outdoor display, sales, or storage means outdoor display, sales, or storage that is accessory to a permitted commercial use or a business operated substantially outside of any building, including: retail sales of garden supplies and equipment (including but not limited to, trees, shrubbery, plants, flowers, seed, topsoil, trellises, and lawn furniture); sale of building and lumber supplies; automobiles, recreational vehicles, boats, mobile homes, garages, swimming pools, playground equipment, mowing equipment, farm implements, construction equipment and similar materials or equipment, rental and leasing establishments; and year-round flea markets, farmer's markets, roadside stands, and auctions. 
    Parapet wall means an extension of a building wall above the roof which may serve to screen roof-mounted mechanical equipment. 
    Paraprofessional means a person with similar, but ordinarily less, occupational background and experience than a professional, who assists a professional in the performance of his duties and responsibility. 
    Parcel or tract means a continuous area of acreage of land which can be described as provided for in the Michigan Land Division Act. 
    Parking lot, off-street means a facility providing vehicular parking spaces, along with adequate drives and aisles for maneuvering to provide access for entrance and exit for the parking of more than three vehicles. 
    Parking space means an area of definite length and width, said area shall be exclusive of drives, aisles or entrances giving access thereto, and which is accessible for the parking of permitted vehicles, meeting the requirements of [sections] 52-305 through 52-308. 
    Pawnshop means any business that loans money on deposit of personal property or deals in the purchase or possession of personal property on condition of selling the same back again to the pledger or depositor, or loads or advances money on personal property by taking chattel mortgage security thereon, and takes or receives such personal property. This definition shall be deemed to exclude banks and other regulated financial business. 
    Performance guarantee means a financial guarantee to ensure that all improvements, facilities, or work required by this chapter will be completed in compliance with the ordinance, regulations and the approved plans and specifications of a development. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, limited liability limited partnership, trust, or other legal entity. 
    Planned residential unit development means a residential development planned and developed as an entity, under unified control, developed according to comprehensive and detailed plans, including a program providing for the continual maintenance and operation of such improvements, facilities and services, which will be for the common use of the occupants of the planned residential unit development, which may have single-family dwellings or attached single-family dwellings. 
    Professional means an individual whose full-time career requires extraordinary or highly specialized education, training, skills and licensing in a commonly recognized occupation which adheres to a formally established set of ethical and/or legal standards of eligibility, performance and personal conduct. 
    Public and quasi-public institutional buildings, structures, and uses means buildings, structures, and uses of governmental agencies and nonprofit organizations including, but not limited to, office buildings, police stations, fire stations, municipal parking lots, post offices, libraries, museums, and community centers. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle primarily designed and used as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel purposes, including a vehicle having its own motor power or a vehicle mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. 
    Restaurant means any public place licensed by the state department of agriculture where food is cooked, prepared, provided or served for human consumption without a license for the sale of alcoholic liquor, excluding churches, educational facilities, hospitals, and nonprofit clubs and lodges. 
    Restaurant, class I , means any public place licensed by the state department of agriculture where food is cooked, prepared, provided or served for human consumption and the premises are licensed for the sale of alcoholic liquors, provided that the establishment is operated subject to all of the following requirements and performance standards: 
(1)  Culinary facilities shall at all times be maintained and provided for the preparation and cooking of food for consumption on the premises. 
(2)  The establishment shall offer a varied menu of food items, consisting of not fewer than ten such food items, cooked or prepared on the premises. 
(3)  Not more than 50 percent of the gross floor area open to the general public shall be used for purposes other than seating for diners consisting of tables, chairs, booths and necessary aisle ways, and public restrooms shall not be considered in such determination. 
(4)  During any given 90-day period, no more than 50 percent of the gross revenues of the establishment shall be derived from the sale of any alcoholic liquor as defined by the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, Public Act No. 58 of 1998 (MCL 436.1101 et seq.). 
    Restaurant, drive-in or drive-thru means any restaurant where foods and beverages are sold to a retail customer through a service window or similar aperture without requiring the retail customer to exit his vehicle to make the purchase, and shall include an establishment that allows the retail customer to drive in or through any enclosed building or structure and make a purchase of food and beverage without requiring the retail customer to exit his vehicle. 
    Restaurant, sit-down , means any restaurant where foods and beverages are sold primarily for consumption on the premises. 
    Retention basin means a pond, pool, or basin used for the permanent storage of storm water runoff. 
    Screening means the method by which a view of one site from an adjacent site is shielded, concealed, or hidden. Screening techniques include fences, walls, hedges, berms, or other features. 
    Significant natural, historical, and architectural features means significant architectural features, drainage ways and streams, endangered species habitat, floodplains, hedgerows, significant historical features, landmark trees, ponds and lakes, steep slopes, wetlands and woodlots. 
    Specified anatomical areas means and includes any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means and includes any one or more of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; 
(2)  Human sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including, but not limited to, intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
(3)  Human masturbation, actual or simulated; 
(4)  Human excretory functions as part of, or as related to, any of the activities described in subsections (1) through (3); and 
(5)  Physical violence, bondage, mutilation or rape, actual or simulated, as part of, or as related to, any of the activities described in subsections (1) through (4). 
    Steep slopes means slopes with a grade of 12 percent of more. 
    Story means that part of a building, except a mezzanine as defined herein, included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the next floor, or if there is no floor above, then the ceiling next above. A story thus defined shall not be counted as a story when more than 50 percent, by cubic content, is below the height level of the adjoining ground. A basement shall not be counted as a story. 
    Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either (1) before the improvement or repair is started, or (2) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (2) any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of historic places or the state inventory of historic places. 
    Substantial portion means a use or activity accounting for more than 20 percent of any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Stock in trade; 
(2)  Display space; 
(3)  Floor space; or 
(4)  Viewing time, movie display time or entertainment time measured per month. 
    Supercenter means a retail establishment selling supermarket items as well as those items typically found in a department or discount store, of more than 50,000 square feet within one or more structures. 
    Supermarket means a retail establishment selling groceries, dry goods, frozen foods and similar items typically within a building of over 5,000 square feet. 
    Telecommunication system. A system of antennas, cables, amplifiers, towers, microwave lengths, and any other conductors, converters, equipment or facilities designed and constructed for the purpose of distributing communication services to homes and businesses. 
    Telecommunication tower shall mean and include all structures and accessory facilities relating to the use of the radio frequency spectrum for the purpose of transmitting or receiving radio signals. This may include, but shall not be limited to, radio towers, television towers, telephone devices and exchanges, micro-wave relay facilities, telephone transmission equipment buildings and private and commercial mobile radio facilities. Not included within this definition are: citizen band radio facilities; short-wave receiving facilities; radio and television broadcast reception facilities; federally Licensed amateur (ham) radio facilities; satellite dishes, and governmental facilities which are subject to state or federal law or regulations which pre-empt municipal regulatory authority. 
    Topographical map means a map showing existing physical characteristics, with contour lines at sufficient intervals to permit determination of proposed grades and drainage. 
    Traffic impact study means the analysis of the potential traffic impacts generated by a proposed project. This type of study and level of analysis will vary dependent upon the type and size of the project. 
(1)  Rezoning traffic impact study. A traffic impact study which contrasts typical uses permitted under the current and requested zoning or land use classification. This study usually includes a trip generation analysis and a summary of potential impacts on the street system. 
(2)  Traffic impact assessment. A traffic impact study for land uses which are not expected to have a significant impact on the overall transportation system but will have traffic impacts near the site. This type of study focuses on the expected impacts of a development at site access points and adjacent driveways. 
(3)  Traffic impact statement. A traffic impact study which evaluates the expected impacts at site access points and intersections in the vicinity. 
(4)  Regional traffic impact study. A comprehensive traffic impact study for land uses expected to have a significant long term impact on the street system. Such a study evaluates the impacts over a long period and may involve analyses of alternate routes. This type of study is typically prepared using a computer model which simulates traffic patterns. 
    Truck terminal means a structure to which goods, except raw or unprocessed agricultural products, natural minerals, or other natural resources, are delivered for immediate distribution to other parts of the city, for delivery to other intrastate or interstate destinations, or for distribution involving transfer to other modes of transportation. 
    Yard, front , means the open space extending from the full width of the lot between a building and the front lot line. 
    Yard, rear , means the open space extending the full width of the lot between a building and rear lot line. 
    Yard, side , means the open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between a building and the side lot line. 
(Code 1985, § 5.7; Ord. of 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 2011-004, 3-7-2011; Ord. No. 2012-002, 2-6-2012; Ord. No. 2014-008 , 10-6-2014; Ord. No. 2016-002 , 12-5-2016; Ord. No. 2018-001 , 1-2-2018) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 52-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-002 , adopted Dec. 5, 2016, repealed § 52-3, which pertained to intent and derived from Ord. No. 2011-004, adopted Mar. 7, 2011. 
Secs. 52-4-52-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 52-31. - Administration and enforcement. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the city manager. All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a plan, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size of the building to be erected, the use of the property and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of the regulations set forth in this chapter. A careful record of such applications and plans shall be kept in the office of the building inspector. 
(Code 1985, § 5.91) 
Sec. 52-32. - District changes and ordinance amendments. 
(a)  In accordance with the provisions of Public Act 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3101 et seq.) the city commission may from time to time amend, or change by ordinance, the number, shape, or area of districts established on the zoning map or the regulations set forth in this chapter but no such amendment or change shall become effective unless the ordinance proposing such amendment or change shall first be submitted to the planning commission for approval, disapproval or suggestions and such planning commission shall have been allowed a reasonable time for consideration and report. 
(b)  Any person desiring a change in zoning of property shall petition the city commission in writing, stating the reasons for such change. 
(c)  Before submitting its recommendations and report to the city commission, the planning commission shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed amendment or change and shall give notice as set forth in subsection (d) below. 
(d)  The notices shall be given not less than 15 days before the date of the hearing on a proposed zoning amendment and notices shall be sent to: 
(1)  The applicant. 
(2)  The owner (or other owners) of the property, if different. 
(3)  If the zoning amendment is for less than 11 adjacent properties: the owners of all real property within 300 feet of the boundary for the property for which the approval has been requested, as shown by the latest assessment roll, regardless of whether the owner and property is located in the zoning jurisdiction or not. 
(4)  If the zoning amendment is for less than 11 adjacent properties: occupants of any structures within 300 feet of the boundary for the property for which the approval has been requested, regardless of whether the owner and property is located in the zoning jurisdiction or not. 
(5)  The general public by publication in a newspaper which circulates in the city. 
(6)  Members of the planning commission, or legislative body and planning commission if the hearing is being held by the legislative body. 
(e)  The notice shall include: 
(1)  The nature of the zoning amendment being requested. 
(2)  The property(ies) for which the zoning amendment has been made. 
(3)  If the zoning amendment is for less than 11 adjacent properties, also a listing of all existing street addresses within the property(ies) which is(are) subject of the zoning amendment. (Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such addresses currently exist. If there are no street addresses another means of identification may be used.) 
(4)  The location where the application documents can be viewed and copied prior to the date the zoning amendment hearing. 
(5)  The date, time and location of when the hearing on the zoning amendment will take place. 
(6)  The address at which written comments should be directed prior to the hearing on the zoning amendment. 
(7)  For members of the planning commission only, a copy of the request for the zoning amendment, the draft of the zoning amendment, and supporting documents in the record. 
(f)  Upon presentation of a protest petition meeting the requirements of this section, an amendment to a zoning ordinance which is the object of the petition shall be passed by a two-thirds vote. The protest petition shall be presented to the city commission before final legislative action on the amendment and shall be signed by one of the following: 
(1)  The owners of at least 20 percent of the area of land included in the proposed change. 
(2)  The owners of at least 20 percent of the area of land included within an area extending outward 100 feet from any point on the boundary of the land included in the proposed change. 
For purposes of this subsection, publicly owned land shall be excluded in calculating the 20 percent land area requirement. 
(Code 1985, § 5.94; Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
State Law reference- Zoning amendment procedure, MCL 125.584. 
Sec. 52-33. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  First offense. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall build or alter any building or use in violation of any detailed statement or plan submitted and approved under this chapter shall be guilty of a civil infraction and be liable to a civil fine up to the sum of $500.00, in accordance with any costs and expenses permitted by law. 
(b)  Second offense. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, as noted in subsection (a) of this section, for a second time within a three-year period shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable for a criminal fine of not more than $500.00 and/or up to 90 days' incarceration in the county jail. 
(c)  Continuing offenses. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(d)  Assisting in violations. The owner of any building or premises, or part thereof, where anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed or shall exist, any architect, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in connection therewith, and who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and, upon conviction, shall be fined as provided in this section. 
(e)  Immediate threats to public health, safety and welfare. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter in such a way as to create an immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable for a criminal fine of not more than $500.00 and/or up to 90 days' incarceration in the county jail. Whether a particular violation of this chapter constitutes an immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare shall be a matter within the sole discretion of the city manager. 
(Code 1985, § 5.93) 
Sec. 52-34. - Public, personal and mailed notice. 
(a)  Public notification. All applications for development approval requiring a public hearing shall comply with the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act. PA 110 of 2006 and the other provisions of this section with regard to public notification. 
(1)  Responsibility. When the provisions of this ordinance or the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act require that notice be published, the city clerk shall be responsible for preparing the content of the notice, having it published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and mailed or delivered as provided in this section. 
(2)  Content. All mail, personal and newspaper notices for public hearings shall: 
a.  Describe the nature of the request. Identify whether the request is for a rezoning, text amendment, special land use, planned unit development, variance, appeal, ordinance interpretation or other purpose. 
b.  Location. Indicate the property that is the subject of the request. The notice shall include a listing of all existing street addresses within the subject property. Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such addresses currently exist within the property. If there are no street addresses, other means of identification may be used such as a tax parcel identification number, identifying the nearest cross street, or including a map showing the location of the property. No street addresses must be listed when 11 or more adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning, or when the request is for an ordinance interpretation not involving a specific property. 
c.  When and where the request will be considered. Indicate the date, time and place of the public hearing(s). 
d.  Written comments. Include a statement describing when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. Include a statement that the public may appear at the public hearing in person or by counsel. 
e.  Handicap access. Information concerning how handicap access will be accommodated if the meeting facility is not handicap accessible. 
(3)  Personal and mailed notice. 
a.  General: When the provisions of this ordinance or state law require that personal or mailed notice be provided, notice shall be provided to: 
1.  The owners of property for which approval is being considered, and the applicant, if different than the owner(s) of property. 
2.  Except for rezoning requests involving 11 or more adjacent properties or an ordinance interpretation request that does not involve a specific property; to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of the property subject to the request, regardless of whether the property or occupant is located within eh boundaries of the city. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification. Notification need not be given to more than one occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses, or organizations, one occupant of each unit or spatial area shall receive notice. In the case of a single structure containing more than four dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure. 
3.  All neighborhood organizations, public utility companies, railroads and other persons which have requested to receive notice pursuant to section 52-35, Registration to receive notice by mail. 
4.  Other governmental units or infrastructure agencies within one mile of the property involved in the application. 
b.  Notice by mail/affidavit. Notice shall be deemed mailed by its deposit in the United States mail, first class, properly addressed, postage paid. The city clerk shall prepare a list of property owners and registrants to whom notice was mailed, as well as of anyone to whom personal notice was delivered. 
(4)  Timing of notice. Unless otherwise provided in the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006, or this chapter where applicable, notice of a public hearing shall be provided as follows: For a public hearing on an application for a rezoning, text amendment, special land use, planned unit development, variance, appeal, or ordinance interpretation, not less than 15 days before the date the application will be considered for approval. (This means it must be published in a newspaper of general circulation and for those receiving personal notice, received by mail or personal notice, not less than 15 days before the hearing.) 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-35. - Registration to receive notice by mail. 
(a)  General. Any neighborhood organization, public utility company, railroad or any other person may register with the city clerk to receive written notice of all applications for development approval pursuant to section 52-34, Public, personal and mailed notice, or written notice of all applications for development approval within the zoning district in which they are located. The city clerk shall be responsible for providing this notification. Fees may be assessed for the provision of this notice, as established by the legislative body. 
(b)  Requirements. The requesting party must provide the city clerk information on an official form to ensure notification can be made. All registered persons must reregister biannually to continue to receive notification pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Editor's note- Ord. of 9-5-2006 added provisions designated as § 52-53.2 to the Code. At the editor's discretion and after consultation with the city, these provisions were redesignated as § 52-35 to maintain the organizational continuity of the Code. 
Secs. 52-36-52-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-002, adopted Feb. 6, 2012, repealed div. 2, §§ 52-51-52-53, which pertained to the planning commission and derived from the original codification and an ordinance adopted Sept. 5, 2006. For similar provisions, see ch. 51. 

Secs. 52-51-52-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of 9-5-2006 amended div. 3 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former div. 3 derived from Code 1985, §§ 5.86 and 5.86. 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions, § 2-91 et seq. 

Sec. 52-71. - Created. 
    There shall be a zoning board of appeals appointed by the city commission, with all the powers granted, and organized and controlled by the provisions of Public Act 110 of 2006. (MCL 125.3101, et seq.) 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-72. - Special exceptions. 
(a)  The zoning board of appeals shall consist of five members. One member shall be a member of the planning commission. One member may be a member of the city commission, but if so, this member may not serve as chairperson of the zoning board of appeals. The remaining regular members and any alternate members shall be selected from the city electors, and shall be representative of the population distribution and of the various interests present within the city. An employee or contractor of the city commission shall not serve on the zoning board of appeals. 
(b)  The city commission may appoint not more than two alternate members for the same term as regular members to the zoning board of appeals. An alternate member may be called as specified to serve as a member of the zoning board of appeals in the absence of a regular member if the regular member will be unable to attend one or more meetings. An alternate member may also be called to serve as a member for the purpose of reaching a decision in a case in which the member has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest. The alternate member appointed shall serve in the case until the final decision is made. The alternate member has the same voting rights as a regular member of the zoning board of appeals. 
(c)  A member of the zoning board of appeals may be paid a reasonable per diem and reimbursed for expenses actually incurred in the discharge of his duties. 
(d)  A member of the zoning board of appeals may be removed by the city commission for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon written charges and after a public hearing. A member shall disqualify himself or herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of interest. Failure of a member to disqualify himself or herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of interest constitutes malfeasance in office. 
(e)  The terms of office for members appointed to the zoning board of appeals shall be for three years, except for members serving because of their membership on the planning commission or city commission, whose terms shall be limited to the time they are members of those bodies. When members are first appointed, the appointments may be for less than three years to provide for staggered terms. A successor shall be appointed not more than one month after the term of the preceding member has expired. Vacancies for unexpired terms shall be filled for the remainder of the term. 
(f)  The zoning board of appeals shall adopt rules of procedure for conduct of its meetings and the implementation of its duties. The zoning board of appeals shall annually elect a chairperson, a vice chairperson, and a secretary. A quorum shall be deemed to constitute a majority of the regular members of the zoning board of appeals. A majority shall be necessary to conduct business. 
(g)  Meetings of the zoning board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chairperson, or as set forth in the rules of procedure adopted by the zoning board of appeals. The chairperson or acting chairperson may administer oaths and compel attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public and conducted pursuant to the requirements of the Open Meetings Act, PA 267 of 1976. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-73. - Jurisdiction. 
    The zoning board of appeals shall act upon questions as they arise in the administration of this chapter. The zoning board of appeals shall perform its duties and exercise its powers as provided in the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, P.A. 110 of 2006, being MCL 125.3101, et seq.. The zoning board of appeals shall not have the power to alter or change the zoning district classification of any property, nor make any change in the terms of intent of this chapter, but does have the power to act on those matters for which this chapter provides an administrative review, interpretation, variance or temporary land use permit. Within this capacity, the zoning board of appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination of the zoning administrator, planning commission, or any official administering or enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-74. - Authorized appeals. 
(1)  Administrative review. The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order, requirement, permit, decision or refusal made by the zoning administrator or by any other official or by the planning commission in administering or enforcing the provisions of this chapter. This authority shall not include review of PUD decisions of the planning commission. 
(2)  Interpretation of the chapter. The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide upon requests to: 
(a)  Interpret the provisions of this chapter when it is alleged that certain provisions are not clear or that they could have more than one meaning. In deciding upon such requests, the zoning board of appeals shall ensure that its interpretation is consistent with the intent and purpose of the chapter, the article in which the language in question is contained and all other relevant provisions in the chapter. 
(b)  Determine the precise location of the boundary lines between zoning districts when there is dissatisfaction with a decision made by the zoning administrator. 
(c)  Classify a use which is not specifically mentioned as a part of the use regulations of any zoning district so that it conforms to a comparable permitted or prohibited use, in accordance with the purpose and intent of each district. Where there is no comparable permitted or prohibited use, the zoning board of appeals shall so declare, the effect being that the use is not permitted in the city, until or unless the text of the ordinance is amended to permit it. 
(d)  Grant permission, and set the duration of, any temporary uses permitted within the city under the terms of this chapter. 
(3)  Variance. The zoning board of appeals shall have the power to authorize specific variances from site development requirements such as lot area and width regulations, building height and bulk regulations, yard width and depth regulations, off-street parking and loading space requirements, and sign requirements of this chapter, provided that all the required findings listed below are met and the record of proceedings of the zoning board of appeals contains evidence supporting each conclusion: 
(a)  The strict enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would cause an unnecessary hardship and deprive the owner of rights enjoyed by all other property owners within the same zoning district. 
(b)  There are conditions and circumstances unique to the property which are not similarly applicable to other properties in the same zoning district. 
(c)  The conditions and circumstances unique to the property were not created by the owner, or his predecessor. 
(d)  The requested variance will not grant special privileges that are denied other properties similarly situated in and in the same zoning district. 
(e)  The requested variance will not be contrary to the spirit and intent of this zoning ordinance. 
(4)  Conditions. The zoning board of appeals may impose conditions on an affirmative decision. These may include conditions necessary to ensure that public services and facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads caused by the land use or activity, to protect the natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy, to ensure compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and to promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. Conditions imposed shall do all of the following: 
(a)  Be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety, and welfare, as well as social and economic wellbeing of those who will use the land use or activity under consideration, residents, and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed land use, or activity, and the community as a whole. 
(b)  Be related to valid exercise of the police power and purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity. 
(c)  Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of the zoning regulations; be related to the standards established in the chapter for the land use or activity under consideration and be necessary to ensure compliance with those standards. 
(d)  The conditions imposed shall be recorded in the record of the approval action and shall remain unchanged except upon the mutual consent of the approving authority and the landowner. The approving authority shall maintain a record of changes granted in conditions. 
(5)  Rehearing. No rehearing on an application denied by the zoning board of appeals shall be reconsidered except upon the grounds of newly discovered evidence of a falsehood previously relied upon which is found upon inspection by the zoning board of appeals to be valid. A rehearing shall be processed in the same manner as the original application, including payment of the required fee. A request for rehearing shall be made on behalf of the applicant by either the city commission, the zoning board of appeals or the zoning administrator, within 14 days. 
(6)  Reapplication. After 14 days following a decision by the zoning board of appeals have expired, no application for a variance, ordinance interpretation, or appeal shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of the last denial, except upon proof of changed conditions found upon inspection by the zoning board of appeals to be valid. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-75. - Manner of taking appeal. 
    Notice of appeal. A demand for a zoning appeal can be filed by: 
(a)  A person aggrieved, or 
(b)  An officer, department, board, or bureau of the state or local unit of government, 
(c)  Appeal requests for ordinance interpretation may be filed by written notice of appeal with the city on forms established for that purpose and accompanied by such information as is necessary to decide such request. At a minimum, six copies of the information required to be submitted for a land use permit (or a site plan) in article VII shall be submitted. Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the city shall promptly transmit the records concerning the appealed action, as well as any related information to the chairperson of the zoning board of appeals. 
(d)  All appeals shall be filed not later than 21 days after the decision, order, requirement, permit, or refusal made by the zoning administrator or by any other official or by the planning commission in administering or enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 2018-004 , 5-7-2018) 
Sec. 52-76. - Hearing on appeal. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, or of an application for ordinance interpretation, or variance request, the chairperson of the zoning board of appeals shall schedule a reasonable time and date for a public hearing. 
(b)  The notices shall be given not less than 15 days before the date of the hearing on a proposed zoning amendment. 
(1)  Notices shall be sent to: 
a.  The individual demanding the appeal. 
b.  The owner (or other owners) of the property, if different. 
c.  If the appeal or variance involves more than 11 adjacent properties. The owners of all real property within 300 feet of the boundary for the property for which the approval has been requested, as shown by the latest assessment roll, regardless of whether the owner and property is located in the zoning jurisdiction or not. 
d.  If the appeal or variance involves less than 11 adjacent properties. Occupants of any structures within 300 feet of the boundary for the property for which the approval has been requested, regardless of whether the owner and property is located in the zoning jurisdiction or not. 
e.  The general public by publication in a newspaper which circulates in the city. 
f.  Members of the planning commission, or legislative body and planning commission if the hearing is being held by the legislative body. 
(2)  The notice shall include: 
a.  The nature of the zoning amendment being requested. 
b.  The property(ies) for which the appeal or variance has been made. 
c.  If the appeal or variance involves less than 11 adjacent properties, also a listing of all existing street addresses within the property(ies) which is(are) subject of the zoning amendment. (Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such addresses currently exist. If there are no street addresses another means of identification may be used.) 
d.  The location where the demand for appeal can be viewed and copied prior to the date the zoning amendment hearing. 
e.  The date, time and location of when the hearing before the appeals board will take place. 
f.  The address at which written comments should be directed prior to the hearing. 
g.  For members of the appeals board only, a copy of the demand for appeal, the entire record on the case, the staff report, and supporting documents in the record. 
(c)  The appeals board shall hold a hearing on the demand for appeal. 
(1)  Representation at hearing. Upon the hearing, any party or parties may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(2)  Standards for variance decisions by the appeals board. The appeals board shall base its decisions on variances from the strict requirements of this chapter so that the spirit of this chapter is observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done based on the following standards: 
a.  For dimensional variances. A dimensional variance may be granted by the zoning board of appeals only in cases where the applicant demonstrates in the official record of the public hearing that practical difficulty exists by showing all of the following: 
1.  That the need for the requested variance is due to unique circumstances or physical conditions of the property involved, such as narrowness, shallowness, shape, water, or topography and is not due to the applicants personal or economic difficulty. 
2.  That the need for the requested variance is not the result of actions of the property owner or previous property owners (self-created). 
3.  That strict compliance with regulations governing area, setback, frontage, height, bulk, density or other dimensional requirements will unreasonably prevent the property owner from using the property for a permitted purpose, or will render conformity with those regulations unnecessarily burdensome. 
4.  That the requested variance is the minimum variance necessary to do substantial justice to the applicant as well as to other property owners in the district. 
5.  That the requested variance will not cause an adverse impact on surrounding property, property values, or the use and enjoyment of property in the neighborhood or zoning district. 
b.  For use variances. A use variance may be granted by the zoning board of appeals only in cases where the applicant demonstrates in the official record of the public hearing that undue hardship exists by showing all of the following: 
1.  The building, structure, or land cannot be reasonably used for any of the uses permitted by right or by special use permit in the zoning district in which it is located. 
2.  That the need for the requested variance is due to unique circumstances or physical conditions of the property involved, such as narrowness, shallowness, shape, water, or topography and is not due to the applicants personal or economic hardship. 
3.  That the proposed use will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood. 
4.  That the need for the requested variance is not the result of actions of the property owner or previous property owners (self-created). 
(d)  If the demand for appeal is for a variance the appeals board shall either grant, grant with conditions, or deny the application. The appeals board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. A majority vote of the membership of the appeals board is necessary to grant a dimensional variance and rule on an interpretation of the ordinance. A two-thirds majority vote of the membership of the appeals board is necessary to grant a use variance. The decision shall be in writing and reflect the reasons for the decision. 
(1)  At a minimum the record of the decision shall include: 
a.  Formal determination of the facts. 
b.  The conclusions derived from the facts (reasons for the decision). 
c.  The decision. 
(2)  Within eight days of the decision the record of the decision shall be certified and a copy delivered by first class mail to the person demanding the appeal, the administrator, and other parties. 
(e)  Any person having an interest affected by such decision shall have a right to appeal to circuit court within 30 days of the certified decision of the appeals board, as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Secs. 52-77-52-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 52-101. - Districts established. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into the following six classes of districts: 
R-1 Single-family district R-2 Multiple-family district C-1 Commercial district C-2 Commercial district I Industrial district IP Industrial park district  
(Code 1985, § 5.2) 
Sec. 52-102. - District boundaries. 
    The boundaries of these districts are indicated upon the zoning map of the city, as amended, which is on file in the office of the city clerk and made a part of this chapter. Except where designated on such map, the district boundary lines are intended to follow lot lines, the centerlines of streets or alleys, railroad right-of-way lines, section lines, one-quarter section lines, one-eighth section lines or the corporate limit line, all as they existed at the time of the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(Code 1985, § 5.3) 
Sec. 52-103. - Zoning certificates of compliance. 
    No dwelling, building or structure subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be erected, altered, enlarged or moved upon a premises from another premises until a: 
(1)  Zoning compliance certificate has been issued pursuant to the site plan review provisions contained in article VII; and 
(2)  Building permit has been issued by the appropriate code enforcement officer. 
(Code 1985, § 5.11) 
Sec. 52-104. - Continuing existing uses. 
    Any building, structure or use lawfully existing upon the effective date of this Code may be continued. 
(Code 1985, § 5.12) 
Sec. 52-105. - Use of rear dwellings for residential purposes. 
    No building in the rear of a principal building and on the same lot therewith shall be used for residential purposes. 
(Code 1985, § 5.13) 
Sec. 52-106. - Residential lot width. 
    Any lot used for residential purposes shall have a width of at least 75 feet facing on a dedicated street. 
(Code 1985, § 5.14) 
Sec. 52-107. - Accessory building front lot line setback. 
    No part of a detached accessory building shall be nearer to the front lot line than the front of the main building upon a parcel, when the lot or an adjoining lot is located in a residential district. 
(Code 1985, § 5.15; Ord. No. 2007-02, 3-6-2007) 
Sec. 52-108. - Accessory building height and setbacks. 
    Accessory buildings shall not exceed 28 feet in height and shall be distant at least six feet from any other separate structure on the same lot and shall not be closer than three feet to any lot line. In no case shall an accessory building for the storage of vehicles be closer to any street line than 20 feet. 
(Code 1985, § 5.16) 
Sec. 52-109. - Reduction or division of required yard. 
    No lot shall be divided or reduced so as to make the required area or dimensions less than the minimum required by this chapter, nor shall any yard required for a principal building be included as a part of a yard required under this chapter for any other building. 
(Code 1985, § 5.17) 
Sec. 52-110. - Yard requirements along zoning boundary line. 
    A lot having a side yard line along any zoning boundary line of a less restricted district shall have a side yard for the more restricted district. 
(Code 1985, § 5.18) 
Sec. 52-111. - Vision clearance on corner lots. 
    On any corner lot on which front and side yards are required, no wall, fence, structure, sign, tree, shrub or hedge may be maintained as to cause danger to traffic by obstructing the view. 
(Code 1985, § 5.19) 
Sec. 52-112. - Front yards on lots running through the block. 
    In any district where a lot runs through a block from street to street and where a front yard is required, such front yard shall be provided along each street lot line that is not a side lot line. 
(Code 1985, § 5.20) 
Sec. 52-113. - Projections. 
    Projections extending beyond the main wall of a building and attached thereto shall be considered as part of the building and such projections shall not occupy any of the minimum required yards or open spaces, except as follows: 
(1)  Chimneys, flues, cornices, eaves, bays, ornamental features and other similar features may project not more than three feet into any required yard. 
(2)  Terraces, steps, uncovered porches or other similar features shall not be higher than three feet above the average finished grade and shall not be located less than five feet from any lot line. 
(Code 1985, § 5.21) 
Sec. 52-114. - Height limit exceptions. 
    Exceptions to height limits set forth in this chapter include church spires, belfries, cupolas, chimneys, smokestacks, flagpoles, communication towers, masts, aerials and antennae, water towers, elevator bulkheads, monuments, cooling towers and necessary mechanical appurtenances. No structure which, by definition or category, qualifies for a height limit exception may impede or interfere with aviation traffic patterns or routes, or cause an unreasonable danger or safety risk to airborne craft. 
(Code 1985, § 5.22) 
Sec. 52-115. - Lot width and area exceptions. 
    Dwellings may be constructed on any officially plotted lot and recorded lot which is less than the minimum width or area, or both, required by this chapter, provided that the yard setbacks shall comply with this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 5.23) 
Sec. 52-116. - Driveway and parking lot surfacing. 
    All driveway approaches on paved streets and off-street parking lots shall be surfaced with asphalt, bituminous aggregate, cement or seal coat and maintained so as to be dustfree and prevent sand or gravel from entering the street and storm drainage system. 
(Code 1985, § 5.24) 
Sec. 52-117. - Attachment of commercial communication antennas to existing structures. 
    Communication antennas may be appended or attached to any existing structure within districts zoned C-1, C-2, I or IP. A formal application for appendage or attachment of antennas to existing structures must be submitted in accordance with the procedures outlined in article VII. 
(Code 1985, § 5.25) 
Sec. 52-118. - Private garages or accessory buildings. 
    Private garages or accessory buildings attached to a building for a residence may be constructed within the R-1 or R-2 district with the following provisions: 
(1)  If any portion of the garage protrudes beyond the remainder of the building line of the front of the house, that portion of the garage shall become the front building line of the structure from which the front yard setback requirements shall be measured. 
(2)  If an attached garage is converted to living space or quarters, it must meet all setback requirements for that particular zoning district. 
(3)  The height of any garage shall not exceed the maximum building height stipulated for the respective zoning district. 
(4)  Private garages must be constructed of materials which will render it permanent in nature. No temporary or portable structures may be used to shelter vehicles within any residential district. 
(Code 1985, § 5.26; Ord. No. 2008-01, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 52-119. - Change of use and occupancy permits for commercial or industrial purposes. 
(a)  No change of use of any land or existing building or structure to be used for commercial (business) or industrial purposes shall be made. No change of occupants shall be made, and no building or structure erected shall be occupied in whole or in part until the owner or occupant has obtained a zoning compliance certificate/occupancy permit from the city manager, stating the use and/or building complies with the provisions of this chapter. A fee, as established and reviewed from time to time by the city commission, shall accompany each application. 
(b)  No building or structure to be used for commercial (business) or industrial purposes, erected and subsequently altered, shall be used or changed in use following such alteration until the owner has obtained a zoning compliance certificate/occupancy permit from the city manager, stating that the use or building complies with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Occupancy permits shall be applied for and issued within ten days after the lawful erection or alteration of the building is complete or, in the case of an existing structure, before the new use commences. A record of all occupancy permits shall be kept on file in the office of the city manager and copies shall be furnished, upon request, to any person having proprietary or tenancy interest in the land or building affected. 
(d)  The city manager shall have the power to revoke or cancel any occupancy permit in case of failure or neglect to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or in case of any false statement or misrepresentation made in the application. The owner or his agent shall be notified of such revocation in writing, and any further misuse of the land or building shall be deemed a violation. 
(e)  The city manager may, upon request, issue a temporary occupancy permit for part of a dwelling, building, structure or premises prior to completion in full, but such temporary certificate shall not remain in force for a period in excess of one year, nor more than ten days after full completion. 
(Code 1985, § 5.27) 
Sec. 52-120. - Display of handbills. 
    The display of handbills shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  No handbill shall be displayed within any public right-of-way of the city, upon any public land, ground or building within the city or upon any public utility apparatus or structure within the city without the specific permission and approval of the city manager. 
(2)  Only handbills promoting or advertising not-for-profit, community or public events shall be approved for display. 
(3)  All handbills approved for display shall include a "Must Be Removed By" date, and shall be removed by the responsible individuals/organizations not later than the stipulated date. 
(4)  Political handbills are excluded from the requirement to obtain permission from the city manager prior to being posted; however, the responsible party/individual shall remove the handbills within one week (seven days) of the political election or event. 
(Code 1985, § 5.28) 
Sec. 52-121. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Any use of property that does not conform to the regulations prescribed in this chapter and which shall have been in existence prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be referred to as a nonconforming use. 
(b)  Any nonconforming use of land or buildings may be continued for indefinite periods of time, and subject to such regulations as the zoning board of appeals may require for immediate preservation of the adjoining property and the ultimate removal of the nonconforming use. The zoning board of appeals may grant a change of occupancy from one nonconforming use to another, provided, the use is within the same or higher classification as the original nonconforming use; provided, however, that such change of use and occupancy will not tend to prolong and continue the nonconforming use. A nonconforming use once changed from a lower to a higher classification use shall not be changed to a lower classification use, and such prior classification use shall be considered abandoned. 
(c)  A nonconforming use shall not be extended or rebuilt in case of obsolescence or total destruction by fire or other cause. In case of partial destruction of a building by fire or other cause, not exceeding 50 percent of its value, the building may be reconstructed. If the destruction is greater than 50 percent and less than the total of the building, the zoning board of appeals may grant a permit for repair after a public hearing and having due regard for the property rights of the persons affected when considered in the light of the public welfare and the character of the area surrounding the designated nonconforming use and the conservation and preservation of property. 
(d)  A nonconforming use of land or the nonconforming use of a structure shall be lost when the following occurs: 
(1)  The nonconforming use ceases for a period of more than six months; or 
(2)  There is evidence of intent, or some act or omission, on the part of the owner or user which manifests his or her voluntary decision to abandon the nonconforming use. 
(Code 1985, § 5.80; Ord. No. 2012-002, 2-6-2012) 
State Law reference- Nonconforming uses and structures, MCL 125.583a. 
Sec. 52-122. - Prohibition of marihuana establishments. 
    The city of Clare ordains that pursuant to the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, Section 6.1, the city elects to prohibit marihuana establishments within its boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 2018-008 , 11-5-2018) 
Secs. 52-123-52-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT 

Sec. 52-141. - Purpose; uses. 
(a)  The R-1 single-family district classification is intended primarily for single-family residential homes and special uses that are compatible with single-family dwelling neighborhoods. 
(b)  Only the following principal uses are permitted in R-1 districts: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings not to exceed one single-family dwelling per lot. 
(2)  Public and parochial schools. 
(3)  Churches, convents and rectories. 
(4)  Family day cares. 
(5)  State licensed residential facilities, as required by section 3b of Public Act No. 207 of 1921 (MCL 125.583b). 
(c)  The following special uses are, when approved, permitted in R-1 districts: 
(1)  Parks, playgrounds, golf courses, tennis courts and similar public nonprofit recreational uses. 
(2)  Fire stations and water towers. 
(3)  Community center buildings. 
(4)  Cemeteries. 
(5)  Hospitals, provided, the site shall have an area of two acres or more and the buildings are located 50 feet from property lines. 
(6)  Planned residential unit developments. 
(7)  Group day cares. 
(8)  Home occupation/home professional offices. 
(9)  Cooperative or for-profit markets selling agricultural produce or farm products to consumers (nonwholesale) on a period basis, that do not operate more than eight days in any calendar month. 
(d)  Except for home occupation/home professional offices, the city planning commission shall be the approval authority for all special uses; and the city manager shall be the approval authority for all home occupation/home professional office special uses. The process for approval of special uses shall be as outlined in sections 52-342 and 52-343. 
(Code 1985, § 5.31) 
Sec. 52-142. - Accessory uses and buildings. 
    The following accessory uses and buildings are permitted in R-1 single-family districts: 
(1)  Private garages. 
(2)  Accessory buildings. 
(3)  Home occupations, when carried on by the occupants within the dwelling and not in an accessory building. 
(4)  Signs, as follows: 
a.  One bulletin board for a church or school, not exceeding 12 square feet in area, when located ten feet from all property lines. Such signs may be illuminated, provided the source of light is not visible. 
b.  One temporary, unlighted real estate sign, not exceeding eight square feet in area, advertising the sale, rental or lease of only the premises on which the sign is maintained, either located flat against the building or ten feet from any street line. 
c.  One wall sign on the premises of a legal nonconforming use, not to exceed 20 square feet in area. Such sign may be illuminated, provided the source of light is not visible. 
d.  Except for yard sale signs and similar one-day event signs (e.g., open houses, graduation parties, etc.), all off-premises signs, including real estate signs, are prohibited within city rights-of-way, unless approved by the city manager. Such one-day event signs shall be removed not later than the day after the event being signed. 
e.  Political signs and posters associated with elections and election campaigns may be erected within public rights-of-way and on private property without approval; however, the respective individuals/parties are responsible for removing the signs within one week after the scheduled election/political event. 
(Code 1985, § 5.32) 
Sec. 52-143. - Building height, area and yards. 
    The following restrictions apply in R-1 single-family districts: 
(1)  Maximum building height, 28 feet. 
(2)  Minimum front yard, 25 feet. 
(3)  Minimum rear yard, 25 feet. 
(4)  Minimum side yard, nine feet (three feet for a garage). 
(5)  Minimum side yard corner lot, 12 feet. 
(6)  Minimum lot width, 75 feet, except as provided in section 52-115. 
(7)  Minimum lot area, 10,500 square feet. 
(8)  Minimum square feet for any dwelling, 720 square feet. 
(Code 1985, § 5.33; Ord. No. 2013-001, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 52-144. - Residential design requirements. 
    The following design requirements for residential parcels shall be applied: 
(1)  Exterior building design. Additions to existing buildings must compliment the current residence's design with regard to height, proportion, scale, materials, and type of openings. 
(2)  [ Accessory buildings ] must compliment any primary use building with regard to height, proportion, scale, materials, and design. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02, 3-6-2008) 
Sec. 52-145. - [Medical marijuana provisions.] 
    The following provisions shall apply to medical marijuana use as provided by state law. 
(1)  Qualifying patients and qualifying care-givers as registered with the state may exercise their right to use, possess or cultivate medical marijuana in conformity with state law. 
(2)  The medical marijuana use, possession and cultivation shall comply at all times with the Michigan Medical Marijuana Act and the General Rules of the Michigan Department of Community Health as they may be amended from time to time. 
(3)  All medical marijuana plants cultivated shall be contained within a fully enclosed, locked facility, inaccessible on all sides and equipped with locks or other security devices that permit access only by the primary caregiver or qualifying patient cultivating the plants. 
(4)  Cultivation shall be conducted so as not to create unreasonable dust, glare, noise, odors, or light spillage beyond the parcel and shall not be visible from an adjoining public way. 
(5)  The principal use of the parcel shall be a dwelling and shall be in actual use as such. Any registered primary caregiver shall operate at his or her own primary residence. 
(6)  Space allocated to marijuana cultivation shall not exceed 120 square feet but not greater than ten percent of total available living space. If medical marijuana is to be grown in an unattached building such as a pole barn or garage, the area allocated to marijuana cultivation shall not exceed ten percent of the unattached building, i.e., a garage or shed. 
(7)  No transfer of medical marijuana to qualifying patients other than qualifying patients residing on the parcel shall occur. 
(8)  Except as provided by the Medical Marijuana Act regarding caregivers recouping costs for cultivation and providing marijuana, there shall be no commercial cultivation or patient to patient transfer of marijuana for any type of consideration, cash or otherwise. This provision is intended to prohibit any type of medical marijuana dispensary or commercial activity. 
(9)  No vested rights. A property owner shall not have vested rights or nonconforming use rights that would serve as a basis for failing to comply with this section or any amendment of this section. 
(10)  No activities licensed by the State under Public Act 281 of 2016 shall be conducted in a residential zone. 
(Ord. No. 2011-004, 3-7-2011; Ord. No. 2016-002 , 12-5-2016) 
Secs. 52-146-52-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - R-2 MULTIPLE-FAMILY DISTRICT 

Sec. 52-161. - Purpose; uses. 
(a)  The R-2 multiple-family district is intended primarily for multiple-family dwellings and such uses as professional offices. 
(b)  Only the following principal uses are permitted in R-2 districts: 
(1)  R-1 district uses, except as modified in this section. 
(2)  Multiple-family dwellings. 
(3)  Mobile home parks. 
(4)  State licensed day care centers. 
(c)  The city planning commission shall be the approval authority for all special uses. The process for approval of special uses shall be as outlined in sections 52-342 and 52-343. The following special uses are, when approved, permitted in R-2 districts: 
(1)  All special uses permitted in an R-1 district. 
(2)  Medical, dental, legal, architectural, accounting, engineering and real estate offices, title companies, group day cares, insurance offices, barbershops and beauty salons. 
(3)  Funeral homes and mortuaries. 
(4)  Institutes of higher education, technical colleges and trade schools, but not including those operated as a part of the criminal justice process or related to any federal, state or local penal laws or institutions. 
(Code 1985, § 5.41) 
Sec. 52-162. - Accessory uses and buildings. 
    The following accessory uses and buildings are permitted in R-2 multiple-family districts: 
(1)  Accessory uses and buildings permitted in the R-1 district, except as modified in this section. 
(2)  Signs as set forth in section 52-142(4). 
(3)  New buildings or conversions of existing dwellings which conform with the character of the neighborhood in which they are located. 
(Code 1985, § 5.42) 
Sec. 52-163. - Building height, area and yards. 
    The following restrictions apply in the R-2 multiple-family districts: 
(1)  Maximum building height, 28 feet. 
(2)  Minimum front yard, 25 feet. 
(3)  Minimum side yard, nine feet, except as required in section 52-303. 
(4)  Minimum rear yard, 25 feet, except as required in section 52-303. 
(5)  Minimum side yard corner lot, 12 feet. 
(6)  Minimum lot width, 75 feet, except as provided in section 52-115. 
(7)  Minimum lot area, 10,500 square feet, except as provided in section 52-115. 
(8)  Common open space of at least 40 percent of the total land area suitable for development within a multifamily development, and it shall be distributed more or less uniformly throughout the site area. The term "common open space" shall mean lands within the multifamily development to be used for park, recreation or 
environmental amenities. Such lands shall not include public or private streets, driveways or parking areas. Within such lands, only facilities and structures for recreational purposes may be constructed, with the total impervious area of roofs and paving constituting not more than ten percent of the total open space. 
(9)  Minimum square feet for any dwelling, 720 square feet. 
(Code 1985, § 5.43; Ord. No. 2013-001, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 52-164. - Screening requirements. 
    In the R-2 multiple-family district, screening requirements shall be followed as indicated in section 52-304. 
(Code 1985, § 5.45) 
Sec. 52-165. - R-2 design requirements. 
    The following design requirements for residential parcels shall be applied: 
(1)  Exterior building design. Additions to existing buildings must compliment the current residence's design with regard to height, proportion, scale, materials, and type of openings. 
(2)  [ Accessory buildings ] must compliment any primary use building with regard to height, proportion, scale, materials, and design. 
(Ord. No. 2007-002, 3-6-2008) 
Sec. 52-166. - [Medical marijuana provisions.] 
    The following provisions shall apply to medical marijuana use as provided by state law. 
(1)  Qualifying patients and qualifying care-givers as registered with the state may exercise their right to use, possess or cultivate medical marijuana in conformity with state law. 
(2)  The medical marijuana use, possession and cultivation shall comply at all times with the Michigan Medical Marijuana Act and the General Rules of the Michigan Department of Community Health as they may be amended from time to time. 
(3)  All medical marijuana plants cultivated shall be contained within a fully enclosed, locked facility, inaccessible on all sides and equipped with locks or other security devices that permit access only by the primary caregiver or qualifying patient cultivating the plants. 
(4)  Cultivation shall be conducted so as not to create unreasonable dust, glare, noise, odors, or light spillage beyond the parcel and shall not be visible from an adjoining public way. 
(5)  The principal use of the parcel shall be a dwelling and shall be in actual use as such. Any registered primary caregiver shall operate at his or her own primary residence. 
(6)  Space allocated to marijuana cultivation shall not exceed 120 square feet but not greater than ten percent of total available living space. If medical marijuana is to be grown in an unattached building such as a pole barn or garage, the area allocated to marijuana cultivation shall not exceed ten percent of the unattached building, i.e. a garage or shed. 
(7)  No transfer of medical marijuana to qualifying patients other than qualifying patients residing on the parcel shall occur. 
(8)  Except as provided by the Medical Marijuana Act regarding caregivers recouping costs for cultivation and providing marijuana, there shall be no commercial cultivation or patient to patient transfer of marijuana for any type of consideration, cash or otherwise. This provision is intended to prohibit any type of medical marijuana dispensary or commercial activity. 
(9)  No vested rights. A property owner shall not have vested rights or nonconforming use rights that would serve as a basis for failing to comply with this section or any amendment of this section. 
(10)  No activities licensed by the State under Public Act 281 of 2016 shall be conducted in a residential zone. 
(Ord. No. 2011-004, 3-7-2011; Ord. No. 2016-002 , 12-5-2016) 
Secs. 52-167-52-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - C-1 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of 9-5-2006 amended div. 4 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as herein set out. The former div. 4 derived from Code 1985, §§ 5.51, 5.52, and 5.54-5.58. 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 12. 

Sec. 52-181. - Purpose; uses. 
(a)  The C-1 commercial district classification is intended primarily for retail sales carried on within a building and service businesses. 
(b)  Only the following principal uses without drive-through service to customers are permitted in C-1 districts: 
(1)  Retail uses up to 49,999 square feet of gross floor area, as follows: 
a.  Automobile sales and services. 
b.  Bake shops. 
c.  Camera shops. 
d.  Candy stores. 
e.  Clothing stores. 
f.  Dairy stores. 
g.  Department store. 
h.  Drive-in restaurants. 
i.  Drugstores. 
j.  Florist shops. 
k.  Furniture stores. 
l.  Grocery stores or supermarkets. 
m.  Hardware stores. 
n.  Home appliance stores. 
o.  Jewelry stores. 
p.  Liquor, beer and wine sales. 
q.  Meat markets. 
r.  Paint and wallpaper stores. 
s.  Plant materials and seed stores. 
t.  Print shops. 
u.  Produce markets. 
v.  Restaurants. 
w.  Shoe stores. 
x.  Sporting goods stores. 
y.  Taverns. 
z.  Used merchandise housed within a building. 
aa.  Variety stores. 
(2)  Service businesses, as follows: 
a.  Automobile courts. 
b.  Banks. 
c.  Barbershops. 
d.  Beauty shops. 
e.  Broadcasting stations. 
f.  Cleaning and dying. 
g.  Day care centers, state licensed. 
h.  Frozen food lockers. 
i.  Motels. 
j.  Laundries, self-service. 
k.  Parking lots. 
l.  Pet grooming. 
m.  Professional and business offices. 
n.  Public utility substations. 
o.  Shoe repair shops. 
(3)  Commercial recreation facilities, as follows: 
a.  Auditoriums. 
b.  Bowling alleys. 
c.  Clubs and lodges. 
d.  Dancehalls. 
e.  Golf course, miniature. 
f.  Golf driving ranges. 
g.  Theaters. 
(4)  Commercial schools, as follows: 
a.  Art schools. 
b.  Business schools. 
c.  Dance studios. 
d.  Music studios. 
e.  Professional studios. 
f.  Trade schools. 
(5)  Community facilities, as follows: 
a.  Public and parochial schools. 
b.  Churches, convents and rectories. 
c.  Community center buildings. 
d.  Fire stations and water towers. 
e.  Hospitals. 
(6)  Service stations, provided they are not within 100 feet of any building or ground of any school, public playground or institution dependent on children. No pump island shall be within 12 feet of a street line. There shall be a concrete curb, six inches in height, installed along all street lines except across authorized driveways. There shall be no open oil-draining pits. 
(7)  Tourist homes, boardinghouses and convalescent homes. 
(8)  Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, massage parlors or cabarets (referred to in this section as "adult entertainment establishments") via a special use permit when the following conditions are met: 
a.  No adult entertainment establishment may be established, operated or maintained within 1,000 feet of an R-1 or R-2 residential zoning district or within 1,000 feet of any church, state-licensed day care facility, public library, public park, preschool, elementary school, middle school or high school. 
b.  No adult entertainment establishment may be established, operated or maintained within 500 feet of any other adult entertainment establishment. 
c.  Distance limitations shall be measured in a straight line from the respective parcel or lot line of both the subject parcels and/or parcels zoned R-1 or R-2, or occupied by special uses specified in this subsection. 
d.  If employees or patrons of an adult entertainment establishment promote, offer, solicit, allow or engage in acts of prostitution on the premises, the special use permit may be suspended or revoked. No criminal charge need be brought for suspension or revocation of the special use permit to occur. The acts described in this subsection may be shown to have occurred by a preponderance of the evidence. 
e.  A permit shall be required to establish, operate or maintain an adult entertainment establishment. Such permit shall be approved by the city commission subsequent to review and recommendation of approval of the planning commission of the city. Any required fees for such permit shall be set and determined by the city commission. 
(9)  Any other building use or service similar to the uses listed in this section in the type of service or goods sold or similar in the effect upon adjacent areas in more restricted use districts, except those uses listed in C-2 and I districts. 
(c)  Residential and multifamily uses on the second floor within blocks 16, 21, 22, 27 and 28, original plat of the city, shall be permitted as a special use, subject to the following imposed conditions for each use and subject to the review and approval of the planning commission. 
(1)  The special use application shall include a layout for each floor of the building and shall contain plans for dealing with tenant parking. 
(2)  The main entrance and exit for each apartment shall not interfere with the use of the main floor. 
(3)  Residential units shall comply with all building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical codes. Provisions regarding access and egress for each apartment shall comply with existing codes. 
(4)  Any apartment or use not conforming with this special regulated use at the time of the adoption of Ordinance No. 1996-2 shall be referred to as a nonconforming use. 
(d)  Any use permitted within any of the subsections noted above which contains a drive-through service or retail facility shall be permitted in C-1 as a special use, subject to article IV of this Code [zoning chapter]. 
(e)  Retail uses shall be defined to include retail sales distribution or storage of fireworks as defined in section 22-50, including all subsections, as provided by state law. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 2012-006, 11-5-2012; Ord. No. 2018-005 , 9-4-2018) 
Sec. 52-182. - Accessory buildings and uses. 
    Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the uses listed in section 52-181 are permitted in the C-1 commercial district. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-183. - Building height, area and yards. 
    In the C-1 commercial district, the following restrictions shall apply (unless more stringent requirements are set forth elsewhere in this chapter): 
(1)  Maximum building height, 35 feet, except the maximum height for projects abutting an R-1 district shall be limited to 18 feet. 
(2)  Minimum front yard, 15 feet, except where 60 percent of the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings that have observed a common front yard lesser in depth than required in this subsection. New buildings shall not be erected closer to the street line than the average building line so established. 
(3)  Minimum rear yard, 15 feet, except as required in section 52-303, and except when a lot abuts an alley in the rear, no rear yard shall be required. 
(4)  Minimum side yard, none, except as required in section 52-303. 
(5)  Minimum lot width, none. 
(6)  Minimum lot area, none. 
(7)  Minimum square feet for any dwelling, 720 square feet. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 2013-001, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 52-184. - Screening requirements. 
    In the C-1 commercial district, screening requirements shall be followed as indicated in section 52-304, unless more stringent requirements are set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-185. - Nonconforming residential use or structures. 
    Any nonconforming residential use or residential building in the C-1 commercial district which has been destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or public enemy may be reconstructed to a character similar to the original structure without increasing any nonconformity or changing the original use, unless to a conforming use. The restoration shall be commenced within six months of the date of the full or partial destruction and shall be diligently carried on to completion within one year after the commencement of the restoration. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-186. - Outdoor storage. 
    Outdoor storage in the C-1 commercial district shall be regulated as follows, unless more stringent requirements are imposed elsewhere in this chapter: 
(1)  Retail uses permitted by subsection 52-181(b)(1) may store goods held for resale to the public outdoors, provided that such storage does not present a detriment to the district, neighborhood or parcel by its appearance, manner, maintenance, etc. Storage that attracts wildlife or nuisance species of animals, including, but not limited to, seagulls, mice, rats, deer or raccoons, shall be deemed a substantial detriment to the C-1 district. 
(2)  Outdoor storage of goods not held for resale to the public, including, but not limited to, pallets, packaging and parts, is permitted by all uses permitted under section 52-181, provided that such storage is wholly and completely enclosed by a fence that presents a visual barrier or screen. Screen fences shall: 
a.  Not more than 12 feet in height, except in the DDA district which shall be contingent on securing planning commission approval. 
b.  Be constructed and maintained in a workmanlike manner; 
c.  Present a solid or semisolid visual barrier, including, but not limited to, a wooden fence rather than chain link. 
(3)  Uses permitted by section 52-181 that involve motor vehicles, except motor vehicle dealers licensed by the state that hold motor vehicles for resale to the public (to which subsection (1) of this section applies), may store motor vehicles outdoors for a period of not more than 30 days. One extension of 30 days may apply if rendered necessary by an unavoidable delay in receiving repair parts, including, but not limited to, acts of God, acts of war or work stoppages, if awaiting specific repair parts for which an order has been placed. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 2012-004, 6-18-2012) 
Secs. 52-187-52-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - C-2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of 9-5-2006 amended div. 5 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former div. 5 derived from Code 1985, §§ 5.61-5.63 and 5.65-5.68. 

Sec. 52-211. - Purpose; uses. 
(a)  The C-2 commercial district classification is intended primarily for warehouses, businesses that require large open and enclosed storage areas, and light industrial uses which possess few, if any, nuisance characteristics. 
(b)  Only the following principal uses are permitted in C-2 districts: 
(1)  Retail uses up to 50,000 square feet. 
(2)  Animal hospitals. 
(3)  Beverage bottling distributors. 
(4)  Body shops. 
(5)  Building contractors' storage lots. 
(6)  Coal yard storage. 
(7)  Commercial greenhouses 
(8)  Dairy plants. 
(9)  Electrical contractors. 
(10)  Elevators. 
(11)  Farm machinery sales and repairs. 
(12)  Lumber and building materials sales and storage. 
(13)  Machine shops. 
(14)  Mobile home sales. 
(15)  Newspaper printing. 
(16)  Pet boarding. 
(17)  Plumbing contractors. 
(18)  Public garages. 
(19)  Railway sidings and switches. 
(20)  Road contractor storage lots. 
(21)  Truck terminals. 
(22)  Used car sale lots. 
(23)  Warehouses. 
(24)  Welding shops. 
(25)  Woodworking shops. 
(Ord. No. 2017-001 , 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 52-212. - Accessory buildings and uses. 
    Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the uses listed in section 52-211 are permitted in the C-2 commercial district. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-213. - Building height, area and yards. 
    In the C-2 commercial district, the following restrictions apply (unless more stringent requirements are set forth elsewhere in this chapter): 
(1)  Maximum building height, 35 feet. 
(2)  Minimum front yard, 15 feet. 
(3)  Minimum rear yard, 15 feet, except as required in section 52-303, and except when a lot abuts an alley in the rear, no rear yard shall be required. 
(4)  Minimum side yard, none, except as required in section 52-303. 
(5)  Minimum lot width, none. 
(6)  Minimum lot area, none. 
(7)  In the case of the erection of a building for residential purposes, the height, area, yard, and square footage requirements shall be the same as R-2 district requirements. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 2013-001, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 52-214. - Screening requirements. 
    In the C-2 commercial district, screening requirements shall be followed as indicated in section 52-304, unless a more stringent requirement is set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-215. - Nonconforming residential use or structures. 
    Any nonconforming residential use or building in the C-2 commercial district, which has been destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or public enemy, may be reconstructed to a character similar to the original structure without increasing any nonconformity or changing the original use, unless to a conforming use. The restoration shall be commenced within six months of the date of the full or partial destruction and shall be diligently carried on to completion within one year after the commencement of the restoration. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-216. - Outdoor storage. 
    Outdoor storage in the C-2 commercial district shall be regulated as follows, unless more stringent requirements are imposed elsewhere is this chapter: 
(1)  Retail uses permitted by subsection 52-211(b) may store goods held for resale to the public outdoors, provided that such storage does not present a detriment to the district, neighborhood or parcel by its appearance, manner, maintenance, etc. Storage that attracts wildlife or nuisance species of animals, including, but not limited to, seagulls, mice, rats, deer or raccoons, shall be deemed a substantial detriment to the C-2 district. 
(2)  Outdoor storage of goods not held for resale to the public, including, but not limited to, pallets, packaging and parts, is permitted by all uses permitted under section 52-211, provided that such storage is wholly and completely enclosed by a fence that presents a visual barrier or screen. Screen fences shall: 
a.  Not be less than five feet, nor more than 12 feet in height; 
b.  Be constructed and maintained in a workmanlike manner; 
c.  Present a solid or semisolid visual barrier, including, but not limited to, a wooden fence rather than chain link. 
(3)  Uses permitted by section 52-211 that involve noncommercial motor vehicles, except motor vehicle dealers licensed by the state that hold motor vehicles for resale to the public (to which subsection (1) applies), may store noncommercial motor vehicles outdoors for a period of not more than 30 days. One extension of 30 days may apply if rendered necessary by an unavoidable delay in receiving repair parts, including, but not limited to, acts of God, acts of war or work stoppages, if awaiting specific repair parts for which an order has been placed. 
(4)  Uses permitted by section 52-211 that involve commercial motor vehicles, heavy equipment, including railway cars, etc., may store fully operable, commercial motor vehicles and heavy equipment outdoors, provided that such storage does not present a detriment to the district, neighborhood or parcel by its appearance, manner, maintenance, etc. To fall within this subsection, commercial vehicles or heavy equipment must be licensed by the state, when and where a license is applicable to its use. Inoperable commercial motor vehicles or heavy equipment shall be regulated under subsection (2). To determine whether a specific piece of equipment or vehicle is operable, the city manager or his designee is authorized to and may require the owner to demonstrate its operation, without advance notice. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-217. - Special uses. 
    Retail business in excess of 50,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-218. - Reserved. 
Sec. 52-219. - Sidewalks and pathways. 
(a)  An eight-foot-wide pathway constructed of concrete, or a similar durable material deemed acceptable by the planning commission and the City of Clare Engineer, shall be required across the frontages of all properties abutting major roads as defined in the city's master plan. All properties that are not considered a major road shall be required to maintain a five-foot-wide sidewalk across the frontage. Properties abutting the following roads shall be required to maintain a ten-foot-wide nonmotorized vehicle pathway. 
(b)  The city planning commission may reduce the width of the pathway from eight feet to five feet when it is determined that the majority of the pathway in a particular area already maintains an established width. 
(c)  The pathway shall be constructed in either the proposed road right-of-way when the full dedication of the proposed road right-of-way is a requirement of the city, or the existing road right-of-way and in both instances, with the interior non road edge of the sidewalk being located one foot within the outer most edge of the right-of-way, unless another location is identified and improved by the city engineer. 
(d)  Pathways shall consist of eight feet of concrete and two feet of brick pavers as part of the pathway design. 
(e)  In the event of a conflict between this provision and the requirements of the complete streets system, the planning commission shall have the ultimate say as to which provisions serve the public interest most closely. 
( Ord. No. 2014-010 , 11-17-2014) 
Sec. 52-220. - Building exteriors. 
(a)  The exterior of all buildings, except any approved agricultural uses, shall be constructed of clay, brick or other comparably durable decorative building materials as approved by the planning commission. 
(b)  Building frontages should be constructed with a minimum 90 percent brick or similarly durable material as determined by the planning commission. The remaining ten percent of the service material may be a color integrated block, EIFS, factory finish, seam metal or other similar materials as determined by the planning commission. 
(c)  EIFS, block or similar materials that are susceptible to stinging shall not be utilized where signs may be installed as determined by the planning commission. 
(d)  EIFS and similar materials that are susceptible to contacted damage shall not be utilized in areas below eight feet from the established grade. 
(e)  Buildings having brick exterior shall not be reconstructed, remodeled, altered or painted if the building is currently unpainted without prior approval of the planning commission. 
( Ord. No. 2014-010 , 11-17-2014; Ord. No. 2017-001 , 5-15-2017) 
Secs. 52-221-52-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 12. 

Sec. 52-241. - Purpose; use. 
(a)  The I industrial district classification is primarily intended for moderate to heavy industrial uses with some nuisance characteristics. Residential construction is not permitted in the I district. 
(b)  Only the following principal uses are permitted in the I district: 
(1)  C-2 district uses, except that no building shall be erected or converted for use as a school, hospital, clinic or dwelling, except such as are integral to operations in connection with such businesses and industries permitted within the I district. 
(2)  Communication towers, except as provided in section 52-117. 
(3)  Fertilizer manufacture. 
(4)  Machinery assembly. 
(5)  Machinery manufacture. 
(6)  Structural steel fabricating shops. 
(7)  Any other building or use not listed in this subsection (b), provided it is a lawful use. 
(c)  The following special uses are, when approved, permitted in the industrial district. 
(1)  The special uses licensed and permitted under Public Act 281 of 2016, being medical marijuana growers, transporters, safety compliance facilities, provisioning centers and processing centers are permitted as a special use in accordance with the specific requirement set forth elsewhere in this ordinance, in particular section 52-351. 
(Code 1985, § 5.71; Ord. No. 2017-002 , 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 52-242. - Accessory buildings and uses. 
    Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the uses listed in section 52-241 are permitted in the I industrial district. 
(Code 1985, § 5.72) 
Sec. 52-243. - Building height, area and yards. 
    The following restrictions apply in the I industrial district, unless more stringent requirements are set forth elsewhere in this chapter: 
(1)  Maximum building height, 35 feet. 
(2)  Minimum front yard, 15 feet. 
(3)  Minimum rear yard, 15 feet, except as required in section 52-303, and except when a lot abuts an alley in the rear, no rear yard shall be required. 
(4)  Minimum side yard, none, except as required in section 52-303. 
(5)  Minimum lot width, none. 
(6)  Minimum lot area, none. 
(Code 1985, § 5.73; Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-244. - Outdoor storage. 
    Outdoor storage in the I industrial district shall be regulated as follows, unless more stringent requirements are set forth elsewhere in this chapter: 
(1)  Retail uses permitted by section 52-241 may store goods held for resale to the public outdoors, provided that such storage does not present a detriment to the district, neighborhood or parcel by its appearance, manner, maintenance, etc. Storage that attracts wildlife or nuisance species of animals, including, but not limited to, seagulls, mice, rats, deer or raccoons, shall be deemed a substantial detriment to the I district. 
(2)  Outdoor storage of goods not held for resale to the public, including, but not limited to, pallets, packaging and parts, is permitted by all uses permitted under section 52-241, provided that such storage is wholly and completely enclosed by a fence that presents a visual barrier or screen. Screen fences shall: 
a.  Not be less than five feet, nor more than 12 feet in height; 
b.  Be constructed and maintained in a workmanlike manner; 
c.  Present a solid or semisolid visual barrier, including, but not limited to, a wooden fence rather than chain link. 
(3)  Uses permitted by section 52-241 that involve noncommercial motor vehicles, except motor vehicle dealers licensed by the state that hold motor vehicles for resale to the public (to which subsection (1) applies), may store noncommercial motor vehicles outdoors for a period of not more than 30 days. One extension of 30 days may apply if rendered necessary by an unavoidable delay in receiving repair parts, including, but not limited to, acts of God, acts of war or work stoppages, if awaiting specific repair parts for which an order has been placed. 
(4)  Uses permitted by section 52-241 that involve commercial motor vehicles, heavy equipment, including railway cars, etc., may store fully operable, commercial motor vehicles and heavy equipment outdoors, provided that such storage does not present a detriment to the district, neighborhood or parcel by its appearance, manner, maintenance, etc. To fall within this subsection, commercial vehicles or heavy equipment must be licensed by the state, when and where a license is applicable to its use. Inoperable commercial motor vehicles or heavy equipment shall be regulated under subsection (2). To determine whether a specific piece of equipment or vehicle is operable, the city manager or his designee is authorized to and may require the owner to demonstrate its operation, without advance notice. 
(Code 1985, § 5.74; Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-245. - Signs and sandwich boards. 
    The construction of signs and the display of sandwich boards and handbills in the I industrial district shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  Signs. No sign shall be constructed, erected or displayed within any public right-of-way, upon any public land, ground or building, or upon any public utility apparatus or structure within the city without the specific permission and approval of the city planning commission. The administrative process and procedures for such approval shall be in accordance with the site plan application process outlined in article VII. 
(2)  Off-premises signs. Off-premises signs are prohibited unless approved by the city planning commission and/or except as outlined under section 52-142(4). 
(3)  Sandwich boards. Sandwich boards shall: 
a.  Be constructed of durable, weather-resistant material. 
b.  Be professionally lettered and painted, and appropriately maintained. 
c.  Be freestanding. 
d.  Only be displayed during the operating hours of the respective business or commercial activity. 
e.  Not exceed five feet in height or three feet in width. 
f.  Be displayed within one block of the respective business location. 
g.  Not be an impediment or obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
h.  Not be erected within 20 feet of another sandwich board. 
(Code 1985, § 5.75) 
Secs. 52-246-52-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - IP INDUSTRIAL PARK DISTRICT[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 12. 

Sec. 52-271. - Boundaries; purpose; uses. 
(a)  The district boundaries for the IP industrial park district shall be as identified and stipulated on the adopted zoning map of the city, as amended. 
(b)  The IP district classification is primarily intended for wholesale, commercial, light, medium and heavy industrial uses. Residential construction is not permitted in the IP district. The term "light industry" refers to those manufacturing processes that are attractively built and landscaped, and have little negative external influence to impose upon surrounding land uses. The terms "medium industry" and "heavy industry" refer to those that have progressively more negative external effects on surrounding land uses. In addition to the actual manufacturing processes, the transportation system, employee and service vehicle traffic and the total socio-economic and environmental impact of the operation of the plant on surrounding land uses will be used to determine whether or not proposed uses are permitted in the IP district. 
(c)  Uses licensed and permitted under Public Act 281 of 2016 being Medical Marihuana Growers, Processors, Safety Compliance Facilities, Provisioning Centers, and Processing Centers are permitted as a special use as long as the facility is licensed by the State and meets the following requirements: 
(1)  Uses licensed under the Public Act noted above are permitted only in IP district zoned property located south of M-115. No facilities shall be permitted in IP zoned property north of M-115. 
(2)  All medical marihuana licensed activities shall comply at all times with the Medical Marijuana Act, Public Act 281 of 2016 and the General Rules of the Michigan Department of Community Health, as they may be amended from time to time. 
(3)  Cultivation shall be conducted so as not to create dust, glare, noise, odors, or light spillage beyond the parcel and shall not be visible form an adjoining public way. 
(4)  A medical marijuana cultivation facility shall not be located within 1,000 feet of an R-1 or R-2 residential zoning district or within 1,000 feet of any church, state-licensed day care facility, public library, public park, preschool, elementary school, middle school, high school or public recreation facility. 
(5)  A medical marijuana cultivation facility shall obtain a zoning compliance certificate and if the applicant is not the owner of the parcel, such certificate shall include the property owners' consent to the use of the parcel as a medical marijuana cultivation facility. 
(6)  No transfer of medical marijuana shall occur except medical marijuana plants pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marijuana Act. 
(7)  No medical marijuana cultivation facility may be established, operated or maintained within 500 feet of any other medical marijuana cultivation facility. 
(8)  Distance limitations shall be measured in a straight line from the respective parcel or lot line of both the subject parcels and/or parcels zoned R-1 or R-2, or occupied by special uses specified in this subsection (b)(8). 
(9)  No person under 18 years will be admitted to the facility without his or her parent or legal guardian. 
(d)  The following principal uses are prohibited in the IP district: 
(1)  Manufacturing, refining or storage of asphalt, tar, concrete, gas, coke, coal, tar, petroleum products, hazardous chemicals, explosives and/or fertilizer. 
(2)  Forges, foundries and/or metal stamping plants. 
(3)  Tanning and curing of leather and hides. 
(4)  Stockyards, slaughterhouses and rendering plants. 
(5)  Junkyards and auto wrecking. 
(6)  Paper and pulp manufacturing. 
(7)  Processing of radioactive materials. 
(e)  Commercial office buildings that have as their primary customer base typical industrial park tenants or have an established business relationship akin to typical industrial park tenants are permitted as a special use in the IP district, when approved. Such special use must be recommended by the Clare Industrial Development Corporation before being considered for approval by the city planning commission. 
(f)  No vested rights. A property owner shall not have vested rights or nonconforming use rights that would serve as a basis for failing to comply with this section or any amendment of this section. 
(Code 1985, § 5.75; Ord. No. 2011-004, 3-7-2011; Ord. No. 2016-002 , 12-5-2016; Ord. No. 2017-002 , 5-15-2017; Ord. No. 2018-003 , 4-7-2018) 
Sec. 52-272. - Accessory buildings and uses. 
    Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the uses described in section 52-271(a) and (b) are permitted in the IP industrial park district, and the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  All manufacturing operations shall be carried on within fully enclosed buildings and no outside activity shall be carried on except the parking, loading or unloading of motor vehicles and trains, without prior written approval of the Clare Industrial Development Corporation. 
(2)  Outdoor storage of equipment, raw materials, semifinished or finished products and the byproducts of manufacturing will only be permitted on rear yards, provided that such areas are screened from view from the street and adjoining property. 
(3)  The location and construction of all accessory buildings must be approved by the industrial development corporation and the building inspector. 
(4)  Temporary buildings are prohibited, except during the course of construction. 
(Code 1985, § 5.76) 
Sec. 52-273. - Building height, area and yards. 
    The following restrictions apply in the IP industrial park district: 
(1)  Maximum building height, 50 feet. No building can be set closer to property lines than the maximum height of such building. 
(2)  Minimum front yard, 50 feet. Front yards must be landscaped and maintained as a greenbelt. Driveways, sidewalks or other means of access to buildings and the interior of the property and public or utility rights-of-way are permitted in front yards. 
(3)  Minimum side yards, 25 feet. All loading docks must be located at the side or rear of buildings. 
(4)  Minimum rear yard, 25 feet, except lots adjacent to a railroad siding. 
All front, side and rear yard restrictions apply to underground storage tanks. 
(Code 1985, § 5.77) 
Sec. 52-274. - Miscellaneous requirements. 
(a)  Before a building permit for an IP industrial park site will be issued, the owner and/or builder must submit the following material to the Clare Industrial Development Corporation for review and comment: 
(1)  A detailed site plan of the area, showing the location of all buildings, improvements, signage, walls or fencing, lighting and landscaping. 
(2)  Engineering/architectural plans for all buildings and utilities (i.e., water, sewer, storm drainage, gas and electricity). 
(3)  A description of the operation, including, but not limited to, the type of activity, number and type of employees, hours of operation, manpower and training requirements, water and sewer usage, energy consumption, solid waste disposal needs, air pollution, noise and vibration levels at the street, handling of hazardous materials and any health or safety hazards. 
(b)  Any industrial park building permit shall become null and void if construction has not begun within one year from date of approval. Building construction must begin 12 months from the date of property acquisition and be completed within 12 months from the start of construction. 
(c)  All principal structures must be of new steel or other metal, masonry and glass construction, and all exposed concrete block or metal must be painted within 60 days after date of occupancy, except the materials not normally painted or prefinished. 
(d)  Walls and fences must be built within setback requirements and require prior approval of the industrial development corporation and the building inspector. 
(e)  Except for directional signs, all signs must be mounted flat against buildings and illuminated by lighting which is not visible from the street or be freestanding and be illuminated by lighting which is not visible from the street. Before any sign shall be erected within the city industrial park, the industrial development corporation shall review the sign design and provide a recommendation for approval of the sign to the city. Billboards or other advertising signs are prohibited. Signs offering a building for sale or lease are allowed and can be located within front yards, provided that the sign is not more than 12 square feet. Such restrictions shall not apply to the industrial development corporation. 
(f)  When an industrial park site fronts on two streets, the industrial development corporation will determine which side of the property is the front yard. 
(g)  Solid or liquid wastes shall not be stored in open areas, except in containers or a manner approved by the industrial development corporation and the city manager. 
(h)  Reasonable wear and tear excepted, all industrial park buildings and grounds shall be maintained and repaired in a good and sufficient condition to maintain the property in an aesthetically pleasing manner and in accordance with standards developed and approved by the industrial development corporation. Property damaged by any cause shall be repaired by the property owner as promptly as the extent of damage will permit. Vacant buildings shall be properly secured against damage from weather, fire and/or vandalism. The industrial development corporation shall have the right to enter vacant, damaged or unmaintained property to perform necessary maintenance and repairs to eliminate nuisance conditions. The cost of any such work shall become a lien against the property involved. 
(Code 1985, § 5.79; Ord. No. 2012-003, 6-18-2012) 
DIVISION 8. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT DESIGN DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 52-275. - Intent. 
    The intent of these development design standards is to establish a regulatory zoning tool for an effective facade improvement program that will create self-sustaining, self-funded and long lasting benefit to the community of Clare, specifically the downtown development district. The general goals of the development facade standards are stated below: 
(1)  Goals. The four primary goals of the design standards are as follows: 
a.  Improve appearance. The goal is to encourage commercial property owners to improve the exterior appearance of their properties in a cost effective, affordable manner. 
b.  Encourage development. The goal is to encourage development and renovation within downtown Clare. 
c.  Preserve history. The goal is to preserve historical structures and streetscape in the downtown development district. 
d.  Promote civic pride. The goal is to promote civic pride in the beauty of the city. 
(2)  Objectives. The goals stated above can be achieved by following certain principals or objectives. The principals or objectives are described below with specific improvement examples that are strongly encouraged by these design standards. 
a.  Maintain a unified historic appearance. Ill-conceived additions that detract from the building's original style shall be removed. If a building has historic character, the intent shall be to reveal the building's original form, materials and style. An example of this type of improvement would be to remove plywood covering transom or storefront display windows. 
b.  Preserve historic features. Historic preservation is a goal of the Clare community for the downtown development district. Significant historic features and attractive elements, whether historic or otherwise, shall be preserved and restored if needed. For example, if there is a decorative iron cornice, with a piece missing, then every effort shall be made to replace the missing piece and to preserve the original cornice. 
c.  Increase visibility. Storefronts shall be made of clear, transparent glass so that the inside of the store is visible. For example, dark tinted, opaque glass shall be replaced with clear glass and solid coverings over existing windows shall be removed. These changes will project a feeling of comfort for the potential customer and will create a more attractive, brighter commercial or retail space. 
d.  Use high quality materials. High quality building materials, such as stone and brick, shall be used whenever possible as they project importance, integrity and substance. Typically, the cost of the high quality building materials is greater initially but the materials will last a great deal longer than cheaper materials and there will be a substantial savings in the long term. For example, use stone or brick rather than fake plaster (E.F.I.S.) or concrete block. Use real wood rather than plastic wood or chip board. 
e.  Incorporate rich architectural details. The buildings shall include historical details to help give the architecture human scale. 
f.  Use historically accurate colors. The building faces or facades shall be beautiful with balanced features and attractive colors that are compatible and historically accurate. The application of too many colors on one building face may not be historically accurate or appealing. 
g.  Install tasteful lighting. Storefront lighting shall highlight the attractive architectural features of the building and be adequate for the customer to feel safe. The use of tasteful building lights that gently cast light on the wall, is preferable to the flashing or bright floodlight approach. 
h.  Relate to surrounding buildings. Buildings, whether old or new, shall relate to the existing buildings on the street in form and proportion. The buildings shall be set on the zero lot line, close to the street and shall be in proportion to the height of adjacent buildings where possible to create a continuous street corridor. To illustrate, a very tall building shall not be built next to a single story building. 
i.  Maintain human scale. The downtown buildings are to be a two-story minimum height but not to exceed four stories in order for the downtown to have a comfortable scale that people can relate to. See Illustration 52-275. 

ILLUSTRATION 52-275 
j.  Present an inviting building entryway. Entrances shall distinguish a building front by creating interest for the potential customer in the proper context of the historical design. Building entryways were historically recessed and often protected with an awning to provide some shelter from the elements. 
k.  Use original proportions. The renovated storefronts shall fit into the existing original opening. To illustrate, an existing historical building storefront if expanded shall keep the existing storefront in place and simply add another second "duplicate" building storefront so it looks like there are now two building storefronts rather than one giant one. Likewise, replacement windows shall respect the original historic window opening sizes. 
l.  Create attractive window displays. Window displays shall be attractive and interesting to customers. To encourage the shopper to come inside, the business shall place its most interesting products in the window in an artistic manner that makes the customer stop and then venture inside. These window displays also tell potential customers what is sold inside. Window displays shall be rotated on a regular basis to maintain interest. 
m.  Minimize signage. Too many signs of different styles, fonts and wording are confusing to the person walking by. The signage shall be simple and shall communicate the business type inside without bombarding the customer with too many words. 
n.  Modify security features. Security features are important to store owners but these features shall not scare away the customer. Bars over storefront windows and doors project an image of crime and lack of safety. Rather than using exterior security gate measures, stores shall use security glass and/or hidden roll up security gates at the back of the window displays. 
o.  Maintain property. Broken windows and doors, litter and graffiti project an image of poverty and apathy. Broken windows and doors, for instance, shall be fixed immediately and graffiti shall be removed from the walls or walks. Litter shall be removed from the storefront area as soon as it happens to say, "We care about the community". Flower displays, boxes and planters also help to add warmth, color, and establish ownership to building fronts. 
(Ord. No. 2008-01, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 52-276. - Development design standards. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of these standards is to establish clear and concise written and graphic principles for the area known as the downtown development district. The boundary of the City of Clare Downtown Development District is as defined by the map identified as Illustration 52-276(a) and is incorporated by reference. The purpose of the standards is as follows: 
(1)  To promote good, consistent design for new development and for redevelopment. 
(2)  To recognize that the historic McEwan Street in Clare is a unique and valuable main street resource to the community. 
(3)  To encourage business and building owners to improve the exterior appearance of their stores and buildings with modifications ranging from cleaning off graffiti to replacing storefront windows, doors and lighting. 
(4)  To assist business and building owners in the determination of which building modifications are most appropriate for their property. 
(5)  To ensure the economic viability of the commercial area within Clare by addressing alterations that will help draw customers into their businesses such as the restoration of storefronts with large, uncluttered display windows. 
(6)  To encourage and direct development and renovation within downtown Clare such that the development will have the physical qualities necessary to produce the desired, attractive city character. 
(7)  To preserve, promote and protect the integrity of the historic buildings, structures, streetscape and neighborhoods in the downtown area through restoration of original historic elements and the removal of elements that cover the original architectural details. 
(8)  To direct building development and renovation in such a way that new buildings are compatible with their surrounding context. 
(9)  To encourage building development and renovation so that new buildings and structures will enhance the pedestrian (people on foot) oriented nature of the downtown area. 
(10)  To foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past. 


ILLUSTRATION 52-276 (a) Boundary of DDA District
(b)  Definitions. Terms used throughout this section shall take their commonly accepted meanings unless defined herein. When there are conflicts between the definitions herein and those of other sections, the definitions of this section shall take precedence. 
    Alteration means any addition or modification of any portion of the exterior of a building or designated feature that is visible from the public street, sidewalk, alley or park which changes the architectural style, arrangement, texture, or materials of the building or feature or significantly changes the color. 
    Awning means a roof like cover located at the top of the store front and above windows meant to give shelter from the elements. 
    Bracket means an overhanging member that projects from a structure (as a wall) and is usually designed to support a vertical load or to strengthen an angle. 
    Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof and walls, and intended for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. A building shall include tents, mobile homes, manufactured housing, storage sheds, garages, greenhouses, pole barns, semi-trailers, vehicles situated on a parcel and used for the purposes of a building and similar structures. A building shall not include such structures as signs, fences, smokestacks, canopies or overhangs but shall include structures as storage tanks, produce silos, coal bunkers, oil cracking towers, or similar structures. 
    Building alignment or line means a line usually parallel to a front, rear or side property line beyond which a structure may not extend. This line is located at the point of the foundation of a principal building nearest to the front, rear or side lot line and generally does not apply to uncovered entrance platforms, porches, terraces or steps. 
    Building height means the vertical distance measured from the established grade at the center of the building at the front building line to the highest point of the roof surface in a flat roof, to the deck line for a mansard roof, to the mean height level between the eaves and the ridge for hip, gable and gambrel roofs. See Illustration 52-276(a)(6). 

ILLUSTRATION 52-276(a)(6)
    Bulkhead means the bottom part of the storefront face that is typically one to two feet high and carries the storefront display window. 
    Canopy means a permanent roof like cover located at the top of the store front entry door meant to give shelter from the elements. It is constructed of non-rigid materials except for the supporting framework. 
    Cantilever means a projecting beam or part of a structure supported only at one end. 
    Construction means the act of adding or remodeling an exterior addition to an existing structure or the erection of a new principal or accessory structure on a lot or property. See Illustration 52-276(b). 

ILLUSTRATION 52-276(b)
    Corbel means an architectural member that projects from within a wall and supports a weight, especially one that is stepped upward and outward from a vertical surface. 
    Cornice means a horizontal trim band of metal or wood that adds a decorative top crown to a storefront, (storefront cornice), or to the top of the wall where the wall meets the roof, (upper cornice). 
    Demolition means the act of razing or destroying, whether entirely or in part, a resource. Demolition includes but is not limited to demolition by neglect. 
    Display window means the window glazing and framing designed to allow for street and sidewalk viewing of window displays and products. 
    Dormer means a vertically set window on a sloping roof; the roofed structure housing such a window. 
    Exterior architectural appearance means the architectural character and general composition of the exterior of a structure, including, but not limited to, the kind, color, texture and dimension of the building material, and the type, design, color and character of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and accessory elements. See Illustration 52-276(b-2). 

ILLUSTRATION 52-276(b-2)
    Facade means the exterior wall of a building exposed to public view. 
    Fenestration means the arrangement, proportioning and design of windows and doors in a building. 
    Front lot line means the line(s) which separates the lot from the existing street right-of-way or approved private road easement that provides access to the lot. In the case of a corner lot, the line separating the narrowest side from the street. 
    Front yard means the open space or minimum horizontal distance extending from the full width of the lot between a building or required setback and the front lot line. 
    Gable roof means a roof having a gable at one or both ends; a ridged roof that slopes up from only two walls. A gable is the triangular portion of the end of a building from the eaves to the ridge. 
    Hardscape means any exterior paving such as driveways, sidewalks, patios and terraces which are constructed of a brick paver, stone, compacted gravel, concrete or bituminous concrete surface. 
    Hipped roof means a roof with four uniformly pitched sides; a roof which rises by inclined planes from all four sides of a building. 
    Historic district means an area or group of areas not necessarily having contiguous boundaries, that contains a resource or a group of resources that are related by history, architecture, archeology, engineering or culture. 
    Historical feature, significant means any structure or site which is located in a designated local historic district or listed in the state or national register of historic places. 
    Historic preservation means the identification, evaluation, establishment and protection of resources significant in history, architecture, archeology, engineering or culture. 
    Landscaping means any modification or embellishment of the plant cover or hardscape pavement of a property or resource. 
    Lintel means a horizontal architectural member spanning and usually carrying the load above an opening such as a window or doorway. 
    Major architectural change means a change in the roof pitch, structural additions or removals, covering or replacement of decorative trim or exterior trim which is not similar in texture, dimension or proportion to the original, and changes to door and window opening. 
    Marquee means a permanent roof-like structure or canopy, supported by and extending from the face of the building. A marquee sign is a sign attached to or supported by a marquee structure. The structure extends from part or all of a building face, and is constructed entirely of noncombustible materials. Generally it is flat on the top and the bottom and may have a business or building name displayed. 
    Masonry means the building block units such as brick or stone which make up the wall surface. Masonry units are laid in one of many patterns and may be laid in decorative, ornamental patterns to accent special parts of the building like the windows. 
    Massing means the combination of the different elements creating the bulk and shape of the building. 
    Mezzanine means a low-ceilinged story between two main stories of a building; especially an intermediate story that projects in the form of a balcony. 
    Mural means a design or representation which is painted or drawn on the exterior of a structure and which does not advertise a business, product, service or activity. 
    Non-residential means any resource containing commercial, office, institutional uses or mixed uses. 
    Opaque means the blocking of the passage of light. 
    Ordinary maintenance means the keeping of a resource in good condition through ongoing minor intervention, undertaken from time to time, in its exterior condition. Ordinary maintenance does not change the exterior architectural appearance of the resource except through the elimination of the usual and expected effects of time and weathering. Ordinary maintenance, such as repainting, repairing broken windows and caulking does not constitute "work" for the purposes of this section. (See "work" definition). 
    Outdoor display means outdoor displays, sales or storage that are accessory to a permitted commercial use or a business operated substantially outside of any building including retail sales of garden supplies and equipment (including but not limited to, trees, shrubbery, plants, flowers, seed, topsoil, trellises, and lawn furniture); sales of building and lumber supplies; automobiles, recreational vehicles, boats, mobile homes, garages, swimming pools, playground equipment, mowing equipment, farm implements, construction equipment and similar materials or equipment, rental and leasing establishments; and year-round flea markets, farmer's markets, roadside stands, and auctions. 
    Painting means applying a different color of paint or stain over what is currently visible on the exterior of the resource. (See "repainting" definition). 
    Parapet means the extension of a false front or wall above a roof line. The parapet low wall or railing is often used to protect or decorate the edge of a platform or roof and is sometimes this is called a parapet wall. 
    Parking lot, off-street means a facility providing vehicular parking spaces, along with adequate drives and aisles for maneuvering to provide access for entrance and exit for the parking of more than three vehicles. 
    Picture window means a large window whose bottom ledge is not more than waist high, which includes a dominant fixed sash area, though a movable sash may also be enclosed by the frame. 
    Rear lot line means the lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line of the lot. In the case of a triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped parcel, it means an imaginary line ten feet in length entirely within the lot or parcel, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line. 
    Rear yard means a yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the required setback. 
    Recessed entry means an entry that is set back from the front building line to allow for protection of the door from the elements and to prevent doors swinging out into the sidewalk area. 
    Rectilinear means characterized by straight lines. 
    Repair means to restore a decayed or damaged resource to a good and sound condition by any process. Repairs which do not change the exterior architectural appearance of a resource except through the elimination of the usual and expected effects of time and weathering do not constitute "work". (See "work" definition). 
    Repainting means applying the same color paint or stain as currently exists on the exterior of a resource as a part of ordinary maintenance. Repainting does not constitute "work" for the purpose of this chapter. 
    Residential means any resource which is used as a dwelling for one or more families that does not contain commercial, office, or institutional uses other than that which is permitted as a bed and breakfast, home business or home occupation. 
    Ridge line means the horizontal line at the junction of the upper edges of two sloping roof surfaces. 
    Roof decks means the flat portion of a roof, used as a terrace. 
    Roof line means the contour or shape of a roof. 
    Sash means the framework in which panes of glass are set in a window or door; also, such a framework together with its panes forming a usually moveable part of a window. 
    Scale means the size of the structure or building relative to the size of the surrounding structures. 
    Setback means the minimum distance between a property line and a building, or portion thereof, as required by ordinance or code. 
    Side lot line means any lot line that is not a front lot line or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot, or lots, is an interior lot line. 
    Side yard means a yard between a main building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard. 
    Sign means any device, structure, fixture, figure, symbol, banner, pennant, flag, balloon, logo, or placard consisting of written copy, symbols, logos and/or graphics, designed for the purpose of bringing attention to, identifying or advertising an establishment, project, goods, services, or other message to the general public. Unless otherwise indicated, the definition of "sign" includes interior and exterior signs which are visible from any public street, sidewalk, alley, park, or public property, but not signs which are primarily visible to and directed at persons within the premises upon which the sign is located. 
    Sign area means the allowable area for signs shall be measured by calculating the square footage of the sign face and any frame of other materials or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate it from the background against which it is placed as measured by enclosing the most protruding points or edges of a sign within a parallelogram or rectangle. When a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in calculating the area of the sign except that where two such faces are placed back to back, only the larger face shall be considered, provided that both faces are part of the same structure, contain the same message and are separated by no more than two feet. 
    Storefront means the front side of a business establishment or building facing the main street. See Illustration 52-276(b-3). 

ILLUSTRATION 52-276(b-3)
    Story means that part of a building, except a mezzanine as defined herein, included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the next floor, or if there is no floor above, then the ceiling next above. A story thus defined shall not be counted as a story when more than 50 percent, by cubic content, is below the height level of the adjoining ground. A basement is not counted as a story. See Illustration 52-276(b-4). 

ILLUSTRATION 52-276(b-4)
    Transition line means a horizontal line extending the full width of the facade expressed by a one foot material change, a trim line or a balcony a minimum of two and one-half feet in depth. 
    Transom window means the panes of glass above the display window and entry separated by a horizontal bar of wood allowing for the addition of natural light into the building. 
    Window lintel means the top horizontal structural beam over a window which supports the weight of the wall above it. Typically the window lintel is made of steel, stone or wood. 
    Window panes means a flat sheet of glass, cut to size for glazing a window, door, etc. The glass pane is often of a small size. 
    Window sill means the bottom, horizontal member of a window frame made typically of stone, brick or wood. 
    Work means any activity which changes the exterior architectural appearance of a resource. 
(Ord. No. 2008-01, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 52-277. - Conflicts between standards. 
    The standards noted below apply to the downtown development district. When there are conflicts between the standards herein and those of other sections, the standards of this section shall take precedence. Except as otherwise noted, buildings and facades in Downtown Clare shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Building entrances. Building entrances shall follow the following standards: 
a.  All buildings shall have at least one public, pedestrian entrance that faces the main street on the frontage line and is directly accessible from the sidewalk. In the event that the building faces upon a public space, the building face on the public space shall also be treated as a building front face. 
b.  All buildings shall retain the original building entrance, if historically accurate. 
c.  Rear entrances are permitted, only if there is a primary entrance from McEwan Street or the main street. The rear building entrances shall be decorative, attractive and well-maintained. 
d.  Entrances with recessed doors are encouraged for protection from the elements and from doors swinging out into the sidewalk area. 
e.  Doors: 
1.  Doors shall use transparent glass. 
2.  Doors for new construction shall be between seven and eight feet in height. Doors measuring six feet, eight inches high and over shall have a glass transom with a minimum height of 12 inches above the door. 
3.  Front entrance doors shall be constructed out of wood, glass, steel, fiberglass or as approved by the city, provided it is compatible with the historic character of the district. 
4.  Aluminum store fronts are prohibited. 
5.  The building entry may be either centered or off centered. 
6.  Entrances must be barrier-free and accessible to the physically challenged. See Illustration 52-277(a). 

ILLUSTRATION 52-277(a)
(2)  Building placement. The placement of buildings shall follow these standards: 
a.  Buildings shall be built at "build-to" lines with no minimum setbacks (zero setbacks along McEwan Street or other main streets), or the average setback of other buildings on the block as determined by the city. The upper third and fourth stories may be recessed to help maintain a human scale. 
b.  A side setback between buildings in the downtown district is not required in Clare. 
c.  The setback requirements may be adjusted where strict adherence would serve no good purpose or where the overall intent of downtown Clare would be better served by allowing an alternative setback, provided the conditions listed in subsections 1. through 3. below are found to exist. Such modification may be made by the city if all of the following are found to exist: 
1.  That a modification in setback, or waiver of a setback altogether, will not impair the health, safety or general welfare of the city as related to the use of the premises or adjacent premises; 
2.  That waiver of the setback along a common parcel line between two premises would result in a more desirable relationship between a proposed building and an existing building; and 
3.  The adherence to a minimum required setback would result in the establishment of non-usable land area that could create maintenance problems. See Illustration 52-277(b). 

ILLUSTRATION 52-277(b)
(3)  Building height and mass. The various elements of building heights shall be as follows: 
a.  The minimum height of all new buildings shall be two stories or 24 feet. 
b.  The maximum height of a two-story building shall be 34 feet. 
c.  The minimum height of a three-story building shall be 35 feet. 
d.  The maximum height of a three-story building shall be 46 feet. 
e.  The minimum height of a four-story building shall be 47 feet. 
f.  The maximum height of a four-story building shall be 61 feet. No buildings within the downtown shall exceed four stories in height. 
g.  The city may allow the construction or renovation of a one-story building if the architectural style includes a parapet or other appropriate architectural embellishments that are compatible with adjacent buildings in particular and downtown Clare in general. In such instances, the city may allow the minimum height of the one story building to be 18 feet in height. 
h.  All stories shall contain habitable commercial, office, or residential spaces. 
i.  First floor height of all two-story buildings or greater shall be a minimum of 12 feet. 
j.  A transition line shall be provided between the first and second stories. 
k.  Height exceptions: Special architectural features (e.g. corner towers, entry treatments, chimneys, steeples, belfries, turrets, flagpoles, parapet walls, etc.) will be allowed to exceed the above height requirements if: 
1.  The feature is located at a corner (the intersection of two public right(s)-of-way); or, 
2.  The building is located at a designated "gateway"; or 
3.  The feature is deemed to be necessary to the type, use, or style of the building in question. 
4.  Special architectural features shall not exceed the height of the remainder of the building by more than 35 percent. 
5.  The height of any new building shall not exceed the height of any immediately adjacent new or existing two-story, three-story or four-story building by more than 15 percent unless the building is on a significant corner property and is approved by the city. See Illustration 52-277(c). 

ILLUSTRATION 52-277(c)
(4)  Front facade design. All building facades that face a street shall conform to the following design criteria: 
a.  Street face: Walls facing a public street shall include windows and architectural features customarily found on the front facade of a building such as awnings, cornice work, edge details or decorative finish materials. Blank walls shall not face a public street. Significant protrusions (more than six inches), such as awnings, cornice lines, details at the top of windows and sills are encouraged to create shadow lines or bands on the facade. Any building that terminates a view shall provide distinct and prominent architectural features of enhanced character and visibility to reflect the importance of the building's location. 
b.  Storefront opening: The storefront opening shall be a rectangular opening ten feet to 12 feet high and approximately 70 percent of the width of the storefront or bay. The opening shall be almost entirely glass (window or showcases) with few subdivisions to help maintain visual contact between the street and the building interior. The glass framing system shall be wood or metal (aluminum or pre-painted steel). Recessed openings are required. 
c.  Facade pattern: Large, long facades shall be subdivided into bays, through the location and arrangement of openings and architectural treatments that are compatible in size and scale to existing buildings. The maximum length without modulation shall be 30 feet. The bay width shall be 16 feet to 30 feet. 
d.  Facade width to height ratio: 
1.  One-story buildings: Single bay facades or individual bays of multiple bay facades, are not to exceed 1:2 (height to width) without the city approval. 
2.  Two-story buildings: Single bay facades or individual bays of multiple bay facades, are not to exceed 1:1 (height to width) without the city approval. See Illustration 52-277(d). 

ILLUSTRATION 52-277(d)
e.  Roof type: Many of the roof configurations in the downtown are "flat" (less than 3:1 roof slope), some with parapets that conceal the roof itself: 
1.  Existing flat roofs and parapets shall be maintained. 
2.  All new retail/office or mixed use buildings shall have flat roofs and parapets. 
3.  Sloping roofs, gabled 6:12 (height to width)or hipped may be allowed as special architectural features, particularly for residential townhouse development subject to review and approval by the city. 
4.  Parapets may be stepped. 
5.  Mansard roofs, geodesic domes and A frames are prohibited. 
f.  Fenestration or window and door openings: All facades visible from the street must be glazed with transparent glass consistent with section 52-275(2)c.: 
1.  First floor window area: minimum 40 percent of facade to 70 percent maximum. 
2.  Second floor window area: minimum 25 percent of facade to 60 percent maximum. 
3.  Butt-joint glazing is prohibited. 
4.  The use of shutters shall generally not be used on commercial buildings. The city can waive this requirement, if it determines that it is in the best interest of the city and the downtown to do so. 
5.  Mullion systems are encouraged. 
6.  Windows and doorways shall be integrally designed. 
7.  Facade openings including windows, doors, porches and colonnades shall be vertical in proportion. 
8.  Sliding doors and windows are prohibited along frontage lines. See Illustration 52-277(d-2). 

ILLUSTRATION 52-277(d-2)

ILLUSTRATION 52-277(d-2) cont.
g.  Building materials: 
1.  Buildings: The buildings are to be constructed from permanent materials that will weather handsomely over time, such as brick, stone, masonry, or other natural materials. The use of bare metal, aluminum or vinyl siding, mirrored glass and plastic shall not be allowed. Imitation stucco (Dry-Vit, Sto-Wall, E.I.F.S. and other brands) shall not be allowed below 11-foot height. Imitation stucco type products may be allowed above 11-foot height with special city approval provided the architecture is in character with the historic nature of the district. The use of metal panels, wood siding, and cement board siding shall not be allowed. The city may grant special approval of metal panels, wood siding or cement board siding in circumstances where the architecture is in keeping with the historic nature of the district. 
2.  Facade frame: The facade frame, or wall, shall be brick or stone masonry constructed principally in a single plane. The top of the parapet wall shall be flat or step slightly to accentuate end piers unless a sloped roof is allowed by the city. The facade frame shall be capped by a stone coping. Brick or stone shall be laid primarily in running bond with decorative detail. 
i.  Brick: Shall be standard modular brick with common tooled mortar joints. Untooled joints, or irregular shaped brick are prohibited. Brick color (commonly red or tan) and texture (smooth or glazed to rough) shall be compatible with original brick facades in downtown Clare. Decorative CMU or stucco may be used, subject to review and approval by the city, on rear or side facades. 
ii.  Stone: Stone materials shall be smooth finish stone (limestone or sandstone). The stone shall be light to medium buff color. Pre-cast limestone manufactured to simulate traditional limestone or sandstone may be used with city approval. 
iii.  Metal: Aluminum or painted sheet steel may be permitted after review and approval by the city. Color and finish shall coordinate with that of the window framing system. 
3.  Parapet cap: 
i.  Brick: The brick shall be standard modular brick with common tooled mortar joints. Untooled joints or irregular shaped brick are prohibited. Brick color (commonly red) and texture (smooth or glazed to rough) shall be compatible with original brick facades in downtown Clare. Decorative CMU or stucco may be used, subject to review and approval by the city, on rear or side facades. 
ii.  Stone: The stone shall be smooth finish stone (limestone or sandstone). The stone shall be light to medium buff color. Pre-cast limestone to simulate traditional limestone or sandstone may be used with the city approval. 
iii.  Metal: Metal shall be aluminum or painted sheet steel if permitted after review and approval by the city. The color and finish shall match that of window framing system. 
4.  Storefront opening: 
i.  Framing system: Wood is preferable, however, aluminum or pre-painted steel storefront glazing system is acceptable. 
ii.  Glass: Glass shall be clear. Reflective, mirror, heavily tinted, or unusually colored glass is prohibited. 
5.  Canopies: 
i.  Fascia trim: Fascia trim shall be natural finish aluminum, bronze or painted metal. 
ii.  Soffit: The soffit shall be metal or cement plaster. 
iii.  Support rods: The support rods shall be metal and shall not block pedestrian movement. 
iv.  Design: Canopies shall be narrow in elevation, six inches to 12 inches and flat or slightly angled. Typically, the canopies shall be flat or slightly angled so that the overall height dimension does not exceed 18 inches. Canopies shall be self supporting or supported by tension rods. Canopy projections shall be limited to 48 inches. Canopies shall be designed as an integral component of the building. 
6.  Awnings: 
i.  Design: Awnings shall be traditional in design and must be made from fabric or similar material, rather than metal, plastic or rigid fiberglass. Awnings shall not be made of high gloss, shiny or translucent materials. 
ii.  Size: Awnings shall be proportional to the window opening and compatible in height, length, depth and bulk with the building facade. Awnings shall not obscure the architectural features of the building but rather the awnings shall respect the overall building facade. The awning shall match the width of the storefront or window opening. 
iii.  Shape: An awning that is triangular in section sloping outward and down from the top of the awning (type A) or half round (type B) shall be used. The city may approve other awning shapes, such as round top, box or other unusual shapes, where such shape is appropriate to the integral architectural design of the facade. See Illustration 52-277(d-3). 

ILLUSTRATION 52-277(d-3)
iv.  Frame: The frame shall be a traditional historic frame. Wood or metal support structures shall be painted or bronzed. 
v.  Fabric: Fabric shall be standard cloth fabrics in either solid, stripe or patterns. 
vi.  Color: Color shall be a solid through color with the underside of the awning the same color as the exposed face. A maximum of three colors on the awning shall be allowed. Awning colors must be complementary and compatible wit the building facade. 
vii.  Location: Awnings shall not cover distinctive architectural features of the building facade. All awnings shall be attached directly to the building, rather than supported by columns or poles. First floor awnings shall not be located higher than the midpoint between the highest level of the first floor and the window sill of the second floor. First floor awnings may encroach upon the frontage line but must avoid street trees and must provide a minimum clearance of eight feet of vertical clearance from the sidewalk surface grade. Awnings must be setback a minimum of two feet from the road curb and generally shall project no more than five feet from the building. Upper floor awnings shall be permitted only on vertically proportioned windows, provided the awning is only the width of the window and encroaches on the frontage line no more than three feet and is not used as a back lit sign. 
viii.  Lighting: Internally illuminated or back-lit awnings are prohibited. 
ix.  Awning signage: Awnings with lettering, symbols and/or other graphics shall be considered signage and shall be subject to the city's signage regulations. See Illustration 52-277(d-4). 

ILLUSTRATION 52-277(d-4)
7.  Balconies, railings and porch structures: Balconies, railings and porch structures shall be metal, stone, wood or pre-cast limestone. 
8.  Windows: 
i.  Second story windows shall maintain the height and width of the original historic window openings. 
ii.  Window muttons shall be wood or metal and shall be painted or bronzed. 
iii.  Curtains or blinds are permissible for second story windows in storage areas. 
iv.  Window opening shall not be blocked or covered with a solid materials on the first floor. 
9.  Security systems: 
i.  Security systems shall not cover distinctive architectural features on the facade. 
ii.  Laminated glass or security film must be installed on the inside of the window or door glass. 
iii.  Security bars, solid metal security gates or solid roll-down windows shall be prohibited. 
iv.  Link or grill type security devices shall be permitted only if installed from inside, within the window or door frames. With special permission by the city, link or grill type security devices may be installed on the outside if the coil box is recessed and concealed behind the building wall. Security grills shall be recessed and concealed during normal business hours. Models that provide a sense of transparency, in light colors, are encouraged. Other types of security devises fastened to the exterior walls are prohibited. The preferred location for the link or grill type of security system is behind the window display so merchandise is still visible after hours. 
v.  Burglar alarms or security cameras shall not be visible from the street. 
vi.  Any exterior security lighting shall be installed per the lighting section of these design standards and must meet the lighting requirements of the city. 
h.  Building colors: Exterior colors shall be compatible with the colors on adjacent buildings and are subject to prior review and approval by the city. Proposed colors shall be specified on the plans. Historic paint colors are encouraged and typically no more than three colors shall be used without permission from the city. Gaudy or fluorescent colors are prohibited. The painting of brick or stone of existing unpainted buildings or proposed building construction shall generally not be allowed. The city may approve the painting of unpainted existing buildings or proposed building construction where the building painting is in keeping with the historic and architectural character of the city. The removal of paint on building surfaces shall be performed in such a way that the original masonry and mortar is not damaged. 
i.  Air conditioners and other utility systems: Air conditioning units shall not be permitted on the front facade of any building or building facade where there is a pedestrian entry. Air conditioning units on side or rear walls shall be flush with the building walls and screened with decorative grills. In no instance shall the air conditioning drain onto walkways. 
j.  Mechanical equipment: Roof top mechanical equipment shall be hidden from view for adjacent properties and from the rights-of-way. 
(5)  Side and rear facade design. Whenever a side or rear facade is visible from a public street, or if parking is located at the side or rear of the building, the facade shall be designed to create a pleasing appearance, in accordance with the following design criteria: 
a.  Design: Rear and side storefronts should be similarly designed as front facades described above. 
b.  Parapet: If a parapet is used, the top of the parapet wall shall be flat or step slightly to accentuate end piers. If no parapet is used, downspouts shall be located at the outer sides of the facades, not in the middle of the facade. 
c.  Materials: Materials and architectural features similar to those present on the front of the building should be used on the side or rear facade. Acceptable materials include brick, stone and precise limestone. Decorative CMU (concrete masonry unit) or stucco may be permitted with permission by the city. The buildings are to be constructed from permanent materials that will weather handsomely over time, such as brick, stone, masonry, or other natural materials. The use of bare metal, aluminum siding, mirrored glass and plastic shall not be allowed. Imitation stucco (Dry-Vit, Sto-Wall, E.I.F.S. and other brands) shall not be allowed below 11-foot height. Imitation stucco type products may be allowed above 11-foot height with special city approval provided the architecture is in character with the historic nature of the district. The use of metal panels, wood siding, and cement board siding shall not be allowed. The city may grant special approval of metal panels, wood siding or cement board siding in circumstances where the architecture is in keeping with the historic nature of the district. 
d.  Building colors: Exterior colors shall be compatible with the colors on adjacent buildings and are subject to prior review and approval by the city. Proposed colors shall be specified on the plans. Historic paint colors are encouraged and typically no more than three colors shall be used without permission from the city. Gaudy or fluorescent colors are prohibited. The painting of brick or stone of existing unpainted buildings or proposed building construction shall generally not be allowed. The city may approve the painting of unpainted existing buildings or proposed building construction where the building painting is in keeping with the historic and architectural character of the city. The removal of paint on building surfaces shall be performed in such a way that the original masonry and mortar is not damaged. 
e.  Service areas: Trash receptacle and service areas shall be completely screened with landscaping, a fence, a wall, or a combination thereof. 
f.  Open space: Open areas shall be landscaped with lawn, ground cover, ornamental shrubs and trees. On every site involving new development or redevelopment, foundation plantings adjacent to the building may be required at the discretion of the city. The species and design shall be identical to or compatible with the landscaping schematic for the downtown development district. 
g.  Streetscape: The area within the right-of-way between the curb and building shall be identical to or compatible with the streetscape scheme of the downtown development district. 
h.  Roof top mechanical equipment: Roof top mechanical equipment shall be hidden from view for adjacent properties and for the rights-of-way. 
(6)  Lighting. Exterior lighting must be placed so that sidewalks and parking areas are properly lighted to facilitate the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles and provide a secure environment. Exterior lighting can also be used to tastefully highlight special architectural features of buildings. 
a.  Type: Pole lighting shall be compatible with the historic-style street lamps. Floodlights, wall pack units, other types of unshielded lights, and lights where the lens is visible outside of the light fixture shall be prohibited, except where historical-style lighting is used that is compatible with historic-style street lamps. Lighting style shall be compatible with the historic character of the area. 
b.  Lighting source: The lighting source shall not be directly visible from adjoining properties. The lighting shall be shielded so as to direct the light onto the site and away from adjoining properties. 
c.  Intensity: In parking areas, the light intensity shall average a minimum of 1.0 foot candle, measured five feet above the surface. In pedestrian areas, the light intensity shall average 2.0 foot candles, measured five feet above the surface. The intensity of light shall not exceed ten feet candles at any location within the site and 1.0 foot candle at any lot boundary, except where it abuts a residential district or use where a maximum of 0.5 foot candle is permitted. Lighting shall not be flashing, pulsating or project unshielded glare onto the sidewalks or roadways. 
d.  Height: The maximum height of light poles to the top of the fixture shall be 20 feet high. See Illustration 52-277(f) and (f-2). 

ILLUSTRATION 52-277(f)

ILLUSTRATION 52-277(f-2)
(7)  Parking. Parking and parking lot design shall comply with the standards below: 
a.  Parking lot: No new parking lot shall be created nor any existing parking lot expanded in front of a building unless the city determines that parking in front of the building would be acceptable for either of the following reasons: 
1.  Front yard parking is required to maintain the continuity of front building setbacks in the block while making efficient use of the site; or 
2.  Front yard parking is required for the purposes of traffic safety and to minimize driveway curb cuts where the new parking lot is proposed to connect with one or more parking lots on adjoining parcels. 
b.  Parking: Parking located in front or on the side of a building shall be screened from the road with a 30 inches to four-foot high decorative brick, stone or other masonry wall complementing the adjacent buildings. A continuous evergreen hedge or decorative ornamental fence may be allowed with the city approval. Screen wall openings for vehicular and pedestrian access shall have a maximum width of 25 feet. Sight clearance must be maintained. Any required fencing shall be decorative iron rather than chain-link fence. See Illustration 52-277(g)(2). 

ILLUSTRATION 52-277(g)(2)
c.  Pavement: Paving shall be confined to the minimum area necessary to comply with the city parking requirements, in order to maximize the amount of land area left for landscaping and open space. 
d.  Parking spaces: Parking spaces located adjacent to residential buildings and uses shall require the following: 
1.  A six-foot high decorative brick wall shall be required between non-residential and residential uses. 
2.  Wherever feasible, a five-foot wide opening(s) shall be provided in the wall to encourage and connect to existing or future pedestrian pathway systems located on adjacent parcels. 
(8)  Landscaping. New landscaping shall comply with the city standards, in addition to the standards below: 
a.  Street trees: 
1.  Spacing: On every site involving new development or re-development, street trees shall be provided at 25- to 40-foot intervals. 
2.  Variety: The species of street tree and exact locations shall be as specified on the future streetscape plan. In the event that future streetscape plan has not been prepared, then any of the following street trees shall be planted within the road right-of-way at 25- to 40-foot intervals: Norway Maple, Red Maple, Cleveland Pear, Aristocrat Pear or Little Leaf Linden. 
3.  Street tree plan: A street tree plan shall be submitted for review and approval for any modifications that do not fit into subparagraph b. below. See Illustration 52-277(h). 

ILLUSTRATION 52-277(h)
b.  Landscape plan: On every site involving new development or total redevelopment, a landscape plan shall be submitted for review and approval. 
c.  Window boxes: Window boxes with attractive, live floral displays are encouraged. The window boxes shall be placed below the windows and their width shall be proportionate to the individual window width. 
(9)  Sidewalk displays. Sidewalk displays shall be permitted directly in front of a business establishment provided at least five feet of clearance is maintained along pedestrian circulation routes. Displays are required to comply with the following: 
a.  Size: Display cases shall be located against the building wall and shall not be more than two feet deep. The display area shall not exceed 50 percent of the length of the storefront. 
b.  Hours and materials: Display cases shall be permitted only during normal business hours, and shall be removed at the end of the business day. Cardboard boxes, pallets and plastic containers shall not be used for sidewalk displays. 
c.  Maintenance and style: Sidewalk displays shall maintain a clean, litter-free and well-kept appearance at all items and shall be compatible with the colors and character of the storefront from which the business operates. 
(10)  Courtyards and plazas. 
a.  Design: Exterior public and semi-public spaces, such as courtyards or plazas, shall be designed to enhance surrounding buildings and provide functional amenities for the users. 
b.  Composition: Exterior public or semi-public spaces shall include textured paving, landscaping, lighting, fountains, street trees, benches, trash receptacles and other items of street furniture, as appropriate. 
c.  Edges: Courtyards shall have recognizable edges defined on at least three sides by buildings, walls, elements of landscaping, and elements of street furniture, in order to create a strong sense of enclosure. 
d.  Integration: Courtyards and plazas shall be connected to the public sidewalk pathway system. 
(11)  Outdoor cafe/cafes, outdoor eating areas and open front restaurant (i.e. window service). 
a.  Size: Any outdoor eating area outside of the building footprint shall not exceed 15 percent of the gross floor area of the ground floor level of the principal building. 
b.  Location: Outdoor eating areas (with the exception of sidewalk cafes) shall be located no closer than five feet from any street right-of-way or any vehicular parking or maneuvering areas and shall provide the minimum five feet of clearance space for pedestrian circulation. Such eating areas shall be separated from all vehicular parking and maneuvering areas by means of a greenbelt, wall, or architectural feature. 
c.  Location and screening: The outdoor eating area shall not be located within 50 feet or any properties used or zoned for single-family residential purposes. The area shall be completely screened from view from all single-family residential properties by an obscuring wall or greenbelt, in compliance with this division. 
d.  Maintenance: The outdoor eating area shall be kept clean and devoid of litter at all times. Fences or landscaping shall be provided to control blowing debris. 
e.  Vending machines: All vending machines and arcades shall be located within a completely enclosed building. 
f.  Outdoor sidewalk cafes: Outdoor sidewalk cafes shall be subject to the following standards: 
1.  A minimum of five feet of sidewalk along the curb and leading to the entrance to the establishment must be maintained free of tables, chairs and other encumbrances to allow for pedestrian circulation. If the sidewalk is not wide enough to allow for a five-foot wide clearance for circulation, the cafe/cafes shall not be permitted. Planters, posts with ropes, or other removable enclosures are encouraged and shall be used to define the area occupied by the outdoor seating. 
2.  Pedestrian circulation and access to store entrances shall not be impaired. Thus, a boundary (maximum encroachment width and length) into the public sidewalk shall be established, with an accessible aisle being maintained between this line and the curb, in accordance with the provisions of the National Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and Michigan Barrier Free Requirements. 
3.  The operators of the outdoor cafe/cafes shall be responsible for a clean, litter-free, and well-kept appearance within and immediately adjacent to the area of the tables and chairs. Additional outdoor trash receptacles shall be required. Trash shall be emptied from any outdoor receptacles associated with an outdoor cafe/cafes on a daily basis. Outdoor cafe/cafes trash receptacles shall be removed from the sidewalks between November 1 and March 30. Written procedures for cleaning and trash containment and removal responsibilities of the cafe/cafes must be noted on the site plan to the satisfaction of the city. 
4.  Tables, chairs, planters, trash receptacles, and other elements of street furniture shall be compatible with the architectural character of the adjacent buildings. If table umbrellas will be used, they shall complement building colors. 
5.  Additional signs shall not be permitted, beyond what is permitted for the existing restaurant. 
6.  The hours of operation for the outdoor seating area shall be established and noted on the plan. 
7.  Preparation of food and beverages shall be prohibited in this outdoor area. The sale and consumption of alcohol are governed by the Michigan Liquor Control Act and any applicable local ordinance. 
8.  Liability issues for use of the public sidewalk shall be addressed and reviewed by the city attorney. 
(l2)  Mechanical equipment. 
a.  Mechanical equipment: All air conditioning units, HVAC systems, exhaust pipes or stacks, elevator housing and satellite dishes and other telecommunications receiving devices shall be thoroughly screened from view from the public right-of-way and from adjacent properties, by using walls, fences, roof elements, penthouse-type screening devices or landscaping. 
b.  Fire escapes: Fire escapes shall not be permitted on a building's front facade. In buildings requiring a second means of egress pursuant to the local building codes, internal stairs or other routes of egress shall be used. 
(13)  Service access. 
Service alley: A service alley or designed loading space shall be reserved at the rear of the building. 
(Ord. No. 2008-01, 3-3-2008; Ord. No. 2009-004, 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 52-278. - Miscellaneous requirements. 
(a)  Before a building permit for a DDA parcel will be issued, the owner and/or builder must submit the following material to the downtown development authority/main street board for review and comment: 
(1)  A detailed site plan of the area, showing the location of all buildings, improvements, signage, walls or fencing, lighting and landscaping. 
(2)  Engineering/architectural plans for all buildings and utilities (i.e., water, sewer, storm drainage, gas and electricity). 
(3)  A description of the operation, including, but not limited to, the type of activity, number and type of employees, hours of operation, manpower and training requirements, water and sewer usage, energy consumption, solid waste disposal needs, air pollution, building entrances and placement, front facade, rear facade, lighting, courtyards and plazas. 
(b)  Any DDA/main street district building permit shall become null and void if construction has not begun within one year of date of approval. 
(c)  All principal structures must conform to the development design standards applicable to the downtown development/main street district. 
(d)  After review the downtown development authority/main street board shall issue its recommendation and report to the city planning commission for its use in evaluating the site plan pursuant to this chapter, section 52-411 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2008-01, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 52-279. - Sign review standards. 
    Sign review and approval is required by the City of Clare for all users in downtown Clare in accordance with the City of Clare Zoning Ordinance article IX, Signs. For projecting signs, suspended signs and wall signs, sign review and approval shall be reviewed and approved by the City of Clare in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance and the additional requirements below. In the event that there is a conflict between the article IX sign regulations and the standards noted herein, these downtown sign review standards shall govern. Signs erected within downtown Clare shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Permit. No sign shall be erected within said district without first securing a permit from the city official. 
(2)  Drawing submittal. Upon request for a permit to erect a sign within said district, the applicant shall provide a drawing indicating the location on the building to which the sign is intended to be attached. If the sign is intended to be unattached, the applicant shall provide a drawing indicating the location of the sign in relation to the building and street right-of-way or curb. 
(3)  Prohibited signs. Prohibited signs as indicated in section 52-440 of article IX are those that: 
a.  Contain or are an imitation of an official traffic sign or signal or contain words such as "stop", "go slow", "caution", "danger", "detour", "warning", or similar words or any other words, phrases, symbols or characters, in such a manner as may interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. 
b.  Are of a size, location, movement, content, coloring or manner of illumination, including but not limited to flashing lights, which may be confused with or construed as a traffic control device or which hide from view any street sign or signal. 
c.  Advertise an activity, business product or service once conducted or available on the premises upon which the sign is located, but which is no longer conducted or available on such premises. The owner of such premises shall have signs removed within 30 days after termination of the activity, business, product or service which the sign advertises. 
d.  Are applied graffiti with the intent to deface the building. Graffiti shall be removed immediately in a manner that does not destroy the integrity of the existing building materials. 
(4)  Location. 
a.  The erection of poles in the public rights-of-way of the downtown DDA district is prohibited except that such prohibition shall not apply to: 
1.  Public utilities that require the erection of poles to provide services rendered by them. 
2.  The erection of poles for installation of traffic control signs or devices. 
3.  A public or private entity has been granted permission by the governing body with jurisdiction over the roadway. 
b.  No sign shall be erected which shall be less than eight feet from ground level measured vertically from the bottom of said sign to ground level. 
c.  Business signs may be located on the second story facade of the building so long as the minimum height requirements established elsewhere are met and the sign is not closer than three feet below the roof line of the building. (The sign must be at least three feet below the roof line.) 
d.  No sign shall be erected within a distance of ten feet measured horizontally from any fire hydrant, traffic light or street lighting poles, nor shall any sign be erected in any location where, by reason of traffic conditions, fire or explosion hazards, it would imperil public safety or interfere with the function of the fire department. 
e.  Signs shall be prohibited from extending, in any manner, into or over public rights-of-way traveled, or intended for use by motorized vehicles. However, projecting or canopy signs shall not extend more than four feet over the public right-of-way in the downtown DDA district not intended for use by motorized vehicles. 
f.  Signs shall be located either in the panel situated above the awning or transom windows, on the canvas awning, on the window or door glass, on the transom window area or on a small projecting sign. 
g.  No wall, canopy or projecting sign shall extend above the roof or parapet of the structure to which it is attached by more than one foot. See Illustration 52-279(d). 
ILLUSTRATION 52-279(d)

(5)  Sign size. 
a.  The total surface area of all wall signs shall not exceed one and one-half square feet per lineal foot of building frontage, not to exceed 100 square feet. The sign size shall fit the existing features of the building and shall not cover up architectural details. 
b.  The total area of freestanding ground signs shall not exceed one-half of a square foot per lineal foot of lot frontage, not to exceed 25 square feet for a single face sign, 50 square feet for a double face sign, or a total of 50 square feet of surface for any other sign configuration. 
c.  If a facade is shared by more than one premise, the total sign area available to the façade under the terms of these standards shall be allocated so that the sign area available to each premise bears the same proportion that the facade area bears to the total facade area. 
(6)  Projecting signs. Individual projecting signs to be mounted perpendicular to building facade shall be permitted subject to the following: 
a.  The signboard shall not exceed eight square feet. 
b.  Business signs may be located on the second story facade of the building so long as the minimum height requirements established elsewhere are met and the sign is not closer than three feet below the roof line of the building. (No signs shall be mounted on the roof line or roof top.) 
c.  The distance from the ground to the lower edge of the signboard shall be eight feet minimum. 
d.  The distance from the building wall to the signboard shall not exceed six inches. 
e.  The width of the signboard shall not exceed three feet. 
f.  The height of the lettering, numbers or graphics shall not exceed eight inches. 
g.  The outside edge of a projecting sign shall not extend more than four feet from the face of the building that it is attached to or one-third of the sidewalk width whichever is less. See Illustration 52-279(f). 
ILLUSTRATION 52-279(f)

(7)  Lettering. Applied letters may substitute for wall-mounted signs, if constructed of painted wood, painted cast metal, bronze, brass or black anodized aluminum. Applied plastic letters shall not be permitted. The height of applied letters shall not exceed eight inches. 
(8)  Wall-mounted signs. Wall-mounted signs shall be permitted subject to the following: 
a.  The sign shall be affixed to the front facade of the building, and shall project outward from the wall to which it is attached no more than six inches. 
b.  The area of the signboard shall not exceed five percent of the ground floor building facade area, or 24 square feet, whichever is less. 
c.  The maximum permitted height is 15 feet above the front sidewalk elevation, and shall not extend above the base of the second floor windowsill, parapet, eave or building facade. 
d.  The height of the lettering, numbers or graphics shall not exceed eight inches. 
e.  The sign shall be granted to commercial uses occupying buildings facing on public streets only and shall not be allocable to other uses. 
f.  Wall-mounted signs shall be limited to one sign per business. See Illustration 52-279(h). 
ILLUSTRATION 52-279(h)

(9)  Painted window or door signs. Painted window or door signs shall be permitted, provided the following standards are met: 
a.  The sign shall not exceed 20 percent of the window or door area, or four square feet, whichever is less. 
b.  The sign shall be silk-screened, hand painted, or may be of vinyl materials. 
c.  The painted window door signs shall be limited to one sign per business, painted on either the window or the door, but not on both. 
d.  The painted window or door signs may be in addition to only one of the following: a wall-mounted sign, a freestanding sign, an applied letter sign, a projecting sign or a valance awning sign. 
e.  Painted or vinyl signs shall be professional in appearance. See Illustration 52-279(i). 
ILLUSTRATION 52-279(i)

(10)  Awning signs. Awnings or canopies used to advertise a business shall be made of cloth or materials resembling cloth. Awning signs shall be permitted for ground floor uses only provided the following standards are met: 
a.  If acting as the main business sign, it shall not exceed ten square feet in area, and the height of the lettering, numbers or graphics shall not exceed eight inches. 
b.  If acting as an auxiliary business sign, it shall be located on the valance only, shall not exceed four square feet in area, and the height of the lettering, numbers or graphics shall not exceed four inches. No awning sign shall extend vertically or horizontally beyond the limits of the awning. 
c.  Limited to two such signs per business, on the valance. 
d.  If acting as the main business sign, it shall not be in addition to a wall-mounted sign. 
e.  Internally illuminated awning signs are prohibited. Indirect awning lighting is permitted after review and approval by the City of Clare. See Illustration 52-279(i). 
(11)  Freestanding signs. One freestanding sign may be provided, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The building where the business to which the sign refers to shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from the street line. 
b.  The area of the signboard shall not exceed three square feet. 
c.  The height of the lettering, numbers or graphics shall not exceed four inches. 
d.  The height of the top of the signboard, or of any posts, brackets or other supporting elements shall not exceed six feet from the ground. 
e.  The signboard shall be constructed of wood, with wood or cast iron brackets, and shall be architecturally compatible with the style, composition, materials, colors and details of the building. 
f.  The sign shall be located within four feet of the main entrance to the business and its location shall not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular circulation. 
g.  Freestanding signs shall be limited to one sign per building and shall not be in addition to wall-mounted, applied letters or projecting signs. 
(12)  Corner business signage. Businesses located in corner buildings are permitted one sign for each street frontage. 
(13)  Service entry signage. Businesses with service entrances may identify these with one sign not exceeding two square feet. 
(14)  Directional signage. One directional sign, facing a rear parking lot, may be erected. This sign may be either wall-mounted on the real facade, projecting or freestanding, but shall be limited to four square feet in area. 
(15)  Restaurant and cafe signage. In addition to other signage, restaurants and cafes shall be permitted the following, limited to one sign per business: 
a.  A wall-mounted display featuring the actual menu as used at the dining table, to be contained within a shallow wood or metal case, and clearly visible through a glass front. The display case shall be attached to the building wall, next to the main entrance, at a height of approximately five feet, shall not exceed a total area of two square feet, and may be lighted. 
b.  A sandwich board sign, as follows: 
1.  The area of the signboard, single-sided, shall not exceed five square feet. The height shall not exceed five feet and the width shall not exceed three feet. 
2.  The signboard shall be professionally constructed of durable, weather-resistant materials such as wood, chalkboard or finished metal. 
3.  Letters must be professionally painted or hand written. 
4.  The sign shall be located within four feet of the main entrance to the business and its location shall not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular circulation. 
5.  The information displayed shall be limited to daily specials and hours of operation. 
6.  The sign shall be removed at the end of the business day. 
7.  The sign shall not be erected within 20 feet of another sandwich board. 
(16)  Address signage. Each business shall identify the number of its address within the signboard. One sign facing each street or parking lot shall be permitted. 
(17)  Sign design standards. 
a.  Signs affixed to the exterior of a building shall be architecturally compatible with the style, composition, materials, colors and details of the building, as well as with other signs used on the building or its vicinity. 
b.  Signs shall fit within the existing facade features, shall be confined to signable areas, and shall not interfere with door and window openings, conceal architectural details or obscure the composition of the facade where they are located. Signs shall be placed on a façade only in a manner historically appropriate to the style of the building. 
c.  Whenever possible, signs located on buildings within the same block-face shall be placed at the same height, in order to create a unified sign band. 
d.  Wood and painted metal are the preferred materials for signs. Flat signs shall be framed with raised edges. Signs using wood shall use only high-quality exterior grade wood with suitable grade finishes. Sign materials shall be durable in nature. 
e.  Sign colors shall be compatible with the colors of the building facade. A dull or matte finish is recommended, for it reduces glare and enhances legibility. 
f.  Signs shall be spot-lighted (indirect lighting such as gooseneck light fixtures) with a diffused light source. Spot-lighting shall require complete shielding of all light sources; light shall be contained within the sign frame and shall not significantly spill over to other portions of the building, or site. Warm fluorescent bulbs may be used to illuminate the interior of display cases. Neon signs are not allowed. 
g.  Signs shall be mounted so that the method of installation is concealed. Signs applied to masonry surfaces shall be mechanically fastened to mortar joints only and not directly into brick or stone. Drilling to provide electrical service shall also follow the same rule. 
h.  Signage quantity shall be kept to a minimum and temporary signage shall be removed when in disrepair. 
(Ord. No. 2008-01, 3-3-2008; Ord. No. 2009-001, §§ 1, 2, 5-4-2009; Ord. No. 2009-004, 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 2010-002, 7-19-2010; Ord. No. 2014-003 , 8-4-2014; Ord. No. 2014-008 , 10-6-2014) 
Secs. 52-280-52-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 

Sec. 52-301. - Swimming pools. 
(a)  Pools used for swimming or bathing shall be in conformity with the requirements of this section; provided, however, these regulations shall not be applicable to any such pool less than 24 inches deep or having a surface area less than 250 square feet, except where such pools are permanently equipped with a water recirculating system or involve structural materials. 
(b)  A swimming pool or appurtenances thereto shall not be constructed, installed, enlarged or altered until a permit has been obtained from the building inspector. 
(c)  All pools shall be located so as to comply with accessory structure setbacks. Each pool shall be enclosed by a fence or wall with a height of at least four feet and sufficient to make such body of water inaccessible to small children. Such enclosure, including gates therein, must not be less than four feet above the underlying ground. All gates must be self-latching with latches placed four feet above the underlying ground or otherwise made inaccessible from the outside to small children. A natural barrier, hedge, pool cover or other protective device approved by the planning commission may be used as long as the degree of protection afforded by the substituted devices or structures is not less than the protection afforded by the enclosure, gate and latch described in this subsection. 
(d)  All swimming pool installations shall comply with the state construction code and all standard codes referred to therein. 
(Code 1985, § 5.101) 
Sec. 52-302. - Fences and walls. 
(a)  All fences and walls shall be of standard materials, design and construction. 
(b)  Essential retaining walls which do not extend above the ground, being retained by more than 18 inches, are permitted in any yard in all zoning districts. 
(c)  Fences or walls not exceeding six feet in height are permitted in rear and side yards of R-1 and R-2 zoning districts, except in the DDA district which shall be contingent upon securing downtown development authority approval. 
(d)  Subject to building inspector approval, decorative fences up to four feet in height and not more than 50 percent solid are permitted in front yards of R-1 and R-2 zoning districts. Subject to building inspector approval, decorative fences up to four feet in height and not more than 50 percent solid are permitted in front yards of C-1 zoning districts. 
(e)  Fences or walls not exceeding 12 feet in height are permitted in all yards in C-1, C-2, I-1 and IP zoning districts, except that all fences located in front yards of such districts, which exceed four feet in height, shall be contingent on securing planning commission approval. 
(Code 1985, § 5.102; Ord. No. 2012-004, 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 52-303. - Setback requirements for districts abutting the R-1 district. 
    Where all other zoning districts abut the R-1 district, all structures shall be at least 30 feet from any perimeter boundary line, except that such structures in excess of 40 feet in length shall be set back an additional foot for every five feet of building length parallel to such boundary line. 
(Code 1985, § 5.103) 
Sec. 52-304. - Screening requirements for districts abutting single-family residentially zoned or used property. 
(a)  Construction. Screening shall be constructed and maintained along all adjoining boundaries with single-family residentially zoned or used property. An obscuring screen shall be a berm, wall, landscaping or other screening device, or combination thereof, that obstructs 75 percent of the field of vision from the ground to a height of six feet, when viewed from a distance of five feet or more. Open spaces within such screening shall not exceed a one square foot. Such screen shall be constructed in accordance with one or a combination of the following: 
(1)  Berm. A berm (mound of earth) no less than six feet high and contoured to a gradient of no less than three to one. The berm will be planted with grasses and/or shrubs and trees so as to be attractively landscaped. 
(2)  Wall or solid fence. A solid wall or fence with a finished surface fronting on the residential district. All materials shall be new or other material if approved by the building inspector. 
(3)  Landscape buffer. A landscape buffer not less than six feet in width, consisting of not less than 75 percent evergreen material. Plant material shall be of a variety which shall maintain an obscuring screen. 
(b)  Ingress and egress. Any and all screens constructed along boundaries adjoining the R-1 district shall be constructed to within 20 feet of any and all roads which would otherwise bisect such boundary, or no closer than 20 feet to any point at which a vehicle is required to stop before proceeding onto another drive or road. 
(c)  Planning commission and city commission modifications. Any of the requirements of this section may be waived or modified through site plan approval, provided the planning commission or city commission first makes a written finding that specifically identified characteristics of the site or site vicinity would make required fencing or screening unnecessary or ineffective, or where it would impair vision at a driveway or street intersection. 
(d)  Zoning board of appeals modifications. The zoning board of appeals, in its sole discretion, may waive or modify the requirements of this section where the public interest would not be served by strict application or the requirements would constitute an undue hardship or burden upon property owners. 
(Code 1985, § 5.104) 
Sec. 52-305. - Off-street parking requirements generally. 
(a)  The following off-street parking requirements are established for all zoning districts within the city: 
NUMBER OF MINIMUM PARKING SPACES PER UNIT OF MEASURE RESIDENTIAL ** Residential, one-family and two-family 2 for each dwelling unit Residential, multiple-family 21/2 for each dwelling unit Roominghouse/boardinghouse 1 for each occupant Housing for the elderly 11/2 for every 2 bedrooms Mobile home park As required under the Michigan Administrative Code, Rules R125.1925 and R125.1926 INSTITUTIONAL AND RECREATIONAL ** Church, temple and synagogue 1 for each 3 seats based on the maximum seating capacity in the main place of assembly Hospital and clinic 1 for each 4 beds, and if outpatient service is provided, there shall be an additional off-street parking space for each 50 square feet of usable floor area in the waiting room and 1 space for each examining room, dental chair, office, laboratory, X-ray, therapy room or similar outpatient areas Convalescent or nursing home 1 for every 2 bedrooms Elementary and junior high schools 1 for each teacher/employee in addition to the requirements of assembly areas (1 for each 3 seats based on maximum seating capacity) Library or museum 1 for each 300 square feet of usable floor area, plus 1 for each 2 employees Nursery school, day nursery or child care center 1 for each employee and 1 for each 300 square feet of usable floor area Private club or lodge hall 1 for each 65 square feet of usable floor area Senior high school 1 for each 3 persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load established by the single state construction code Stadium, sport arena or similar place of outdoor assembly 1 for each 3 seats or 6 feet of benches Theater and auditorium 1 for each 4 seats, plus 1 for each 2 employees BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL ** Auto wash (automatic) 1 for each employee and stacking space equal to 5 times the maximum capacity of the auto wash, determined by dividing the length of each wash line by 20 Auto wash (self-service or coin-operated) 2 for each wash stall, plus the wash stall itself and, in addition, stacking space equal to 3 times the length of each wash stall Barbershop or beauty parlor 11/2 for each chair Bowling alley 5 for each bowling lane, plus spaces required for accessory uses Class I restaurant 1 for each 21/2 occupants based on the maximum rated occupancy established by the fire marshal, building inspector or the single-state construction code; however, occupancy may not be set in excess of available parking area Dancehall, pool or billiard parlor, roller skating rink, exhibition hall and assembly hall without fixed seats 1 for each 100 square feet of usable floor area Drive-in restaurant 1 for each 50 square feet of customer services area*, plus 10 stacking spaces for each drive-in or drive-thru transaction station (stacking spaces will not extend onto any public street or interfere with ingress and egress to parking spaces). *Customer service area is synonymous with the definition of usable floor area. Establishments for the sale and consumption on the premises of beverages, food or refreshments 1 for each 65 square feet of usable floor area Furniture, carpet and major household appliances and equipment; repair shop; show-room of plumber, decorator, electrician or similar trade shoe repair; and other similar uses 1 for each 800 square feet of household usable floor area (for that floor area used for service processing, 1 additional space for reach 2 employees) Gasoline or service filling station 1 for each 300 square feet of usable floor space in sales room and 1 for each service stall Laundromat and coin-operated dry cleaner 1 for each 2 washing and dry cleaning machines Laundry (drive-in/drive-thru) Mortuary establishment Motel, hotel or other commercial lodging establishment 1 for each occupancy unit, plus 1 for each employee, plus those required for accessory uses Motor vehicle sales and service establishment 1 for each 200 square feet of usable floor space of sales room and offices and 1 for each auto service stall/bay Nightclub, bar and tavern 1 for each 2 occupants based on the maximum rated occupancy established by the fire marshal, building inspector or the single state construction code; however, occupancy may not be set in excess of available parking area Restaurant and other establishment for sale and consumption on the premises of beverages, food or refreshments, except class I restaurants, nightclubs, bars or taverns 1 for each 3 occupants based on the maximum rated occupancy established by the fire marshal, building inspector or the single state construction code; however, occupancy may not be set in excess of available parking area Retail store, except as otherwise specified in this table 1 for each 150 square feet of useable floor area Retail or shopping center with less than 250,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area 1 for each 150 square feet of useable floor area Retail or shopping center with 250,000 or more of gross leasable floor area 1.0 for each 200 square feet of gross floor area, plus spaces required for any grocery store, bookstore or restaurant if included Self-service food market, supermarket, convenience and party store 1 for each 100 square feet of useable floor area Wholesale establishments and warehouse clubs 1.0 for each 500 square feet of gross floor area OFFICES ** Financial institution 1 for each 100 square feet of usable floor area, plus 3 stacking spaces for each drive-thru window (stacking spaces will not extend onto any public street or interfere with ingress and egress to parking spaces) Business office or professional office (except as indicated below) 1 for each 200 square feet of usable floor area Professional office of doctor, dentist, lawyer, architect or similar profession 1 for each 150 square feet of usable floor in waiting room; 1 for each examining room, dental chair, laboratory, office or similar use area INDUSTRIAL ** Industrial or research establishment and related accessory offices 5, plus 1 for every l1/2 employees in the largest working shift or spaces, plus 1 for every 550 square feet of usable floor area, whichever is greater Warehouse and wholesale establishment and related accessory offices 5, plus 1 for every employee in the largest working shift, or 5, plus 1 for every 1,700 square feet of usable floor area, whichever is greater ** Exceptions granted as stipulated in section 52-306 for commercial buildings.  
(b)  The planning commission shall have the authority to restrict excessive parking area within its sound discretion. 
(c)  Where parking facilities exceed 200 parking spaces, the planning commission may elect to require facilities for horse-and-buggy parking within its sound discretion. 
(Code 1985, § 5.105; Ord. of 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 2014-003 , 8-4-2014) 
Cross reference- Stopping, standing and parking, § 44-31 et seq. 
Sec. 52-306. - Collective parking. 
(a)  The collective provision of off-street parking for two or more structures or uses is permitted provided that the number of spaces provided collectively is not less than the sum of the requirements for various individual uses, except as provided below. 
(b)  The total of such off-street parking facilities required for joint or collective use may be reduced by the planning commission in accordance with the following rules and standards: 
(1)  Uses for which the collective off-street parking facilities are to serve do not operate during the same hours of the day or night. 
(2)  Not more than 50 percent of the off-street parking facilities required for theaters, churches, bowling alleys, dance halls, and establishments for sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages, food, or refreshments may be supplied by off-street parking facilities provided for other buildings. 
(3)  The required off-street parking for a particular use may be reduced by its proportionate share of any publicly-owned parking lot within 300 feet of street travel, or for which it has been assessed. 
(c)  The amount of parking for nonresidential uses may be reduced by the planning commission by up to 50 percent upon a finding that patrons will be able to walk to the use from nearby residential areas, patrons are parked at other uses and visiting several uses, and/or on-street parking is available. 
(d)  Where an applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the planning commission that the minimum number of required parking spaces exceeds the amount necessary for the proposed use, the commission may approve construction of a lesser number of parking spaces, subject to the following: 
(1)  The banked parking shall be shown on the site plan and set aside as landscaped open space. 
(2)  The banked parking shall be constructed upon request by the chief building official, after the department of building and code enforcement documents three incidents of problem parking on the site within any one-year period. 
(3)  Banked parking shall be located in areas which are suitable for future parking and comply with ordinance requirements. 
(Code 1985, § 5.106; Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Cross reference- Stopping, standing and parking, § 44-31 et seq. 
Sec. 52-307. - Location, layout and construction standards of off-street parking areas. 
    Whenever off-street parking is required, it shall be located, laid out and constructed in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  A site plan must be reviewed and approved in accordance the procedures outlined in article VII in the event of the following types of improvements: 
a.  New buildings; 
b.  Additions to buildings which increase the exterior dimensions or usable floor area; 
c.  Alterations to the site, including changes in the parking layout, driveway, landscaped areas, screening walls and public walkways; and 
d.  Changes in usage that increase the number of required parking spaces. 
(2)  Residential off-street parking areas shall be parking bays, driveways or garages and shall be located on the premises they serve. 
(3)  Off-street parking for other than residential uses shall be either on the same lot or within 400 feet of the building it serves, measured from the nearest point of the building to the nearest point of the off-street parking lot. The parking area shall be constructed on property owned, rented or leased by the property owner of the nonresidential business or dwelling. 
(4)  Plans for the layout of off-street parking shall conform to the minimum requirements specified in the following table, except that they may be modified by handicap parking regulations found in Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.): 
Pattern Maneuvering Lane Width 
(feet) Parking Space Width 
(feet) Parking Space Length 
(feet) 0* 12 8 23 30-53** 13 9 18 54-75** 16 9 18 76-90** 21 9 18  * Signifies parallel parking ** Signifies diagonal parking angles  
(5)  Off-street parking areas for other than residential uses shall include spaces for the handicapped in accordance with the provisions of Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.). 
(6)  All maneuvering lanes in off-street parking areas must be wide enough to permit at least one-way traffic. 
(7)  A clearly defined and marked driveway shall be provided for each parking area. 
(8)  All parking areas, other than those for single-family and duplex units, shall provide adequate access by means of maneuvering lanes so that backing directly onto a street is unnecessary. 
(Code 1985, § 5.107) 
Cross reference- Stopping, standing and parking, § 44-31 et seq. 
Sec. 52-308. - Vehicle storage and parking. 
    No vehicle shall be parked in any portion of a front yard within the city unless in a prepared driveway or parking area of aggregate or hard surfaced material. The parking or storage of a commercial vehicle, excluding an emergency vehicle, of more than two-ton capacity is prohibited within any residential district. The parking and storage of a recreational vehicle, including a trailer, camper, boat or other similar object shall be permitted only in a required side or rear yard. 
(Code 1985, § 5.108; Ord. No. 2008-01, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 52-309. - Additional off-street parking requirements. 
(a)  Minimum required off-street parking spaces shall not be replaced by any other use until equal parking facilities are provided elsewhere. 
(b)  When units or measurements determining the number of required parking spaces result in a fractional space, any fraction shall require one parking space. 
(c)  For the purpose of computing the number of parking spaces required, the definition of the term "usable floor area" set forth in section 52-2 shall apply. 
(d)  For the purposes of calculating parking under the site plan review where detailed floor drawings are not available, the following shall apply: 
(1)  Commercial buildings. Usable floor area shall equal 75 percent of the gross floor area. 
(2)  Office buildings, other than medical office buildings. Usable floor area shall equal 80 percent of the gross floor area. 
(3)  Medical offices. Usable floor area shall equal 85 percent of the gross floor area. 
(e)  Off-street parking existing at the effective date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall not change for an existing building or use and shall not be reduced to an amount less than that required for a similar new building or new use. 
(f)  Any permissible expansion, alteration or change of use which increases the required number of parking spaces shall be required to provide the required increase in the number of parking spaces, subject to appropriate review and approval. Any deficiency in the existing parking shall be corrected at such time. 
(g)  Two or more buildings may collectively provide the required off-street parking, provided the required number of spaces shall equal the sum of the required spaces computed separately, except when it can be demonstrated that the operating hours of the uses do not overlap. Based upon recommendation of the city planning commission, the city commission may grant an exception to the individual provisions for those particular uses. 
(h)  All driveway approaches on paved streets and off-street parking lots in all zoning districts shall be surfaced with asphalt, bituminous aggregate, cement or seal coat and maintained so as to be dustfree and prevent sand or gravel from entering the street and storm drainage system. 
(Code 1985, § 5.109) 
Sec. 52-310. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of 9-5-2006 deleted § 52-310, which pertained to exterior lighting and derived from Code 1985, § 5.110. 
Sec. 52-311. - Docks and other structures at water's edge. 
    No dock or other structure of a similar nature shall extend 20 feet past the water's edge of any waterway or be more than six feet in width. 
(Code 1985, § 3.84) 
Sec. 52-312. - Unoccupied mobile homes. 
    No person shall park or permit the parking of any unoccupied mobile home outside of a duly licensed mobile home park, except the parking of unoccupied mobile homes in any accessory private garage building or in any rear yard is permitted; provided no living quarters shall be maintained or any business practiced in such mobile homes; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall be construed to hinder or prevent any person from engaging in the business of handling mobile homes for sale, resale or storage, subject to such regulations as may be prescribed by this Code relative to zoning or regulations of such business. 
(Code 1985, § 5.151(3); Ord. No. 2002-012, 11-4-2002) 
Sec. 52-313. - Mechanical equipment and utilities. 
(a)  Ground-mounted mechanical equipment, such as blowers, ventilating fans, and air conditioning units are permitted only in nonrequired side yards and in any rear yard, as determined by the building official/zoning administrator. 
(b)  Mechanical equipment shall be placed no closer than three feet to any lot line in the commercial zones. 
(c)  Any ground-, building-, or roof-mounted mechanical equipment or utilities, including water and gas meters, utility boxes, transformers, elevator housings, stairways, tanks, heating, ventilation and air conditioning equipment (HVAC), and other similar equipment, shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  All such equipment shall be screened by a solid wall, fence, landscaping, and/or architectural features that are compatible in appearance with the principal building. 
(2)  Roof-mounted equipment shall not exceed a height of ten feet above the surrounding roof surface, and shall occupy no more than 15 percent of the total roof area. All roof-mounted mechanical units must be screened so they are not visible from ground level, even if not specifically addressed as part of site plan review. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-314. - Nonresidential design requirements. 
    The following design requirements for non-residential buildings shall be applied during site plan review as outlined in article VII, Site Plan Review. 
(a)  Exterior building design. 
1.  Buildings shall possess architectural variety, but enhance the overall cohesive community character. All buildings shall provide architectural features, details, and ornaments such as archways, colonnades, cornices, recesses, projections, wall insets, arcades, window display areas, peaked roof lines, or towers. 
2.  Building walls and roofs over 50 feet in length shall be broken up with varying building lines, windows, gables, and/or architectural accents such as pilasters, columns, dormers, and awnings. 
3.  Window area shall make up at least 20 percent or more of the exterior wall area facing the principal street(s) from which access is gained. 
4.  In addition, a portion of the on-site landscaping shall abut the walls so that the vegetation combined with the architectural features significantly reduce the visual impact of the building mass as viewed from the street. Additional landscaping requirements of this chapter must also be satisfied. 
5.  Except in Industrial (I) and Industrial Park (IP) zones, overhead doors shall not face a public street or residential district. The planning commission can modify this requirement upon a determination that there is no reasonable alternative and the visual impact will be moderated through use of building materials, architectural features and landscaping beyond that required in article VIII, Landscape Standards and Tree Replacement. 
6.  Additions to existing buildings must complement the current building design with regard to height, proportions, scale, materials, and rhythm of openings. 
(b)  Building materials. 
1.  Durable building materials which provide an attractive, quality appearance must be utilized. 
2.  The predominant building materials should be quality materials that are characteristic of Michigan such as earth-toned brick, decorative tilt-up panels, wood, native stone, and tinted/textured concrete masonry units and/or glass products. 
3.  Other materials such as smooth-faced concrete block, undecorated tilt-up concrete dryvit panels, or prefabricated steel panels should only be used as accents and not dominate the building exterior of the structure. 
4.  Metal roofs may be allowed if deemed by the planning commission to be compatible with the overall architectural design of the building. 
(c)  Building and sign colors. 
1.  Exterior colors shall be of low reflectance, subtle, neutral, or earth-tone colors. The use of high-intensity colors such as neon, metallic, or fluorescent for the facade and/or roof of the building are prohibited except as approved by the planning commission for building trim. 
2.  The use of trademark colors not meeting this requirement shall be approved by the planning commission. 
3.  Mechanical and service features such as gutters, ductwork, service doors, etc. that cannot be screened must be of a color that blends in with the color of the building. 
(d)  Roof design. 
1.  Roofs should be designed to reduce the apparent exterior mass of a building, add visual interest, and be appropriate to the architectural style of the building. 
2.  Variations in architectural style are highly encouraged. Visible roof lines and roofs that project over the exterior wall of a building enough to cast a shadow on the ground are highly encouraged, with a minimum overhang of 12 inches. 
3.  Architectural methods shall be used to conceal flat roof tops and mechanical equipment. 
4.  Overhanging eaves, peaked roofs, and multiple roof elements are highly encouraged. 
(e)  Customer entrances. Clearly defined, highly visible customer entrances may be included in the design. Features such as canopies, porticos, arcades, arches, wing walls, and integral planters are highly encouraged to identify such entrances. 
(f)  Community amenities. Community amenities such as patio/seating areas, water features, art work or sculpture, clock towers, pedestrian plazas with park benches, or other features located adjacent to the primary entrance to the building(s) are highly encouraged and may be calculated as part of the landscaping requirement. The planning commission, in its sound discretion, may limit the amount of amenities that may be calculated as part of the landscaping requirement. 
(g)  Signs. Signs shall be in accordance with article IX, Signs. All sign bases shall be constructed of materials compatible with the architecture of the building(s) located on the premises. 
(h)  Natural features. Buildings shall be sited to protect existing natural areas such as steep natural grades, trees, significant groupings of healthy vegetation (shrubs and trees), and rock outcroppings. To the extent practical, these areas shall be incorporated into the overall site plan. 
(i)  Building location and orientation. New buildings shall have at least one principal building entrance oriented parallel toward the front lot line. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 2014-008 , 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 52-315. - Performance standards. 
    No land use otherwise allowed shall be permitted within a zoning district that does not conform to the following standards of use, occupancy, and operation. These performance standards are hereby established as the minimum requirements to be maintained. 
(a)  Smoke. 
1.  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the emission of any smoke from any source, excepting smoke from a chimney for a fireplace of wood/coal-burning stove in a residential structure, to a density greater than that density described as No. 1 of the Ringelmann chart; provided that the following exceptions shall be permitted: smoke, the shade or appearance of which is equal to, but not darker than No. 2 of the Ringelmann chart, for a period, or periods, aggregating four minutes in any 30-minute period. 
2.  Method of measurement. For the purpose of grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann chart, as now published and used by the United States Bureau of Mines, which is hereby made a part of this chapter, shall be the standard. However, the umbra scope readings of smoke densities may be used when correlated with the Ringelmann chart. 
(b)  Radioactive, toxic and hazardous materials. Radioactive materials and wastes, including electromagnetic radiation such as X-ray machine operation, shall not be emitted in excess of quantities established as safe by the U.S. Bureau of Standards, when measured at the property line. All transportation, including by rail, of radioactive materials, hazardous waste, and toxic waste shall be within permissible standards set by the federal government. 
(c)  Noise. Operations or activities which exceed the maximum sound-intensity levels defined below shall be prohibited. A sound level meter and an octave band analyzer shall be used to measure the intensity and frequency of the sound or noise levels encountered by day and/or by night. Sounds with very short duration, which cannot be accurately measured with a sound level meter, shall be measured by an impact noise analyzer; and the maximum levels indicated in the following table may be exceeded by no more than five decibels. Where questions on noise arise, the current standards recognized by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development shall apply. 
Maximum Permitted Sound Intensity Levels in Decibels Octave Bank 
Cycles/Second Day Night 00 to 74 76 70 75 to 149 70 62 150 to 299 64 56 300 to 599 57 49 600 to 1,199 51 44 1,200 to 2,399 45 39 2,400 to 4,799 38 33 4,800 and above 36 31  
(d)  Light. Exterior lighting shall be installed so that the nearest surface of the source of light shall not be visible from the nearest residential district boundary and it shall be so arranged to reflect light away from any residential use. In no case shall the intensity of light exceed ten footcandles within any lot or one footcandle at any property line. See also article X. 
(e)  Glare. Glare from any process (such as or similar to arc welding or acetylene torch cutting) which emits harmful rays shall be performed in such a manner as not to extend beyond the property line and as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines. See also article X. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-316. - Waste receptacles and enclosures. 
(a)  Waste receptacles, including dumpsters or compactors, shall be required for all nonresidential uses unless interior facilities are provided. 
(b)  All outdoor waste receptacles shall be enclosed on three sides and screened. The enclosure shall be constructed of brick or decorative concrete material, consistent with the building materials of the principal building. 
(c)  The enclosure shall also include a gate, made of wood, vinyl, or other high-quality material, as determined by the planning commission, on the fourth side. If the waste receptacle is a dumpster it must have an enclosing lid or cover, which must be kept closed except for necessary access. 
(d)  The enclosure shall have a minimum height of six feet or one foot above the height of the waste receptacle, whichever is greater. The enclosure must be spaced at least three feet from the waste receptacle. 
(e)  Except in Industrial (I) and Industrial Park (IP), waste receptacles and enclosures shall be located in the rear yard, not closer than three feet from the rear lot line, or nonrequired side yard, unless otherwise approved by the planning commission and shall be as far as practical, but in no case be less than 20 feet, from any residential district. If practical, the back side of the waste receptacle enclosure should be placed against the building. In this circumstance the wall may act as one side of the enclosure. In the Industrial (I) and Industrial Park (IP) Districts, the waste receptacle may be located in any yard so long as the screening requirements are met. 
(f)  Waste receptacles shall be easily accessed by refuse vehicles without potential to damage automobiles parked in designated parking spaces or interfering with the normal movement of vehicles on or off the site. 
(g)  The waste receptacle base shall be at least nine feet by six feet in area, constructed of six inches of reinforced concrete pavement. The base shall extend six feet beyond the waste receptacle pad or gate to support the front axle of a refuse vehicle. 
(h)  The unloading of waste receptacles shall only occur between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 2014-008 , 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 52-317. - Private road standards. 
(a)  The city may allow private roads only when meeting the standards of this section. The regulations for private roads contained herein shall not apply to approved private roads within platted subdivisions regulated by the city subdivision control ordinance, as amended or internal access drive to parking within approved site plans for multiple-family developments or commercial access drives. 
(b)  Private roads are reviewed and approved by the city commission after a recommendation from the planning commission. Documentation accepted by the city commission must support that the property possess unusual configuration and/or topography which would render construction of public streets under city standards for grades, radii, width, and/or materials impractical. 
(c)  An easement for private road access, for not more than two residential structures, shall be provided of not less than 24 feet in width for roads and utilities serving two or fewer lots or single-family residential units and not less than 66 feet in width for roads serving more than two homes. This easement shall be recorded with the Clare County Register of Deeds office and a copy of the recorded easement provided to the building official/city manager. 
(d)  Any lot gaining access from a private road shall have at least the minimum lot frontage required herein for the zoning district in which the lot is located. The frontage for the lot shall be measured at the point between the lot lines designated by the building official/city manager as the side lot lines. 
(e)  Any lot created on a private road along with accompanying buildings, shall comply with all site development standards applicable to the zoning district in which it is located. The easement for the private road shall not be included in the minimum lot width and lot area requirements. 
(f)  The maximum length of any private road cul-de-sac shall not exceed the city standard for public roads. 
(g)  The minimum roadway width of any private driveway, leading only to a single family residence, shall be at least 18 feet, however if such roadway is within 300 feet of a fire hydrant, such width may be reduced to 14 feet upon approval of the City of Clare Fire Department. 
(h)  The surface and base material and construction of any private road shall be of asphalt, concrete or an equivalent approved by the city commission. 
(i)  Issuances of a building permit for the placement of buildings/structures on lots and/or parcels on a private road shall not be considered a guarantee or warranty that adequate access exists to the lot for emergency vehicles. The city assumes no responsibility for the maintenance of or improvements to private roads. 
(j)  The applicant shall submit a joint maintenance agreement or master deed in recordable form that runs with the land, binds benefiting parcels, and allows the city to make any repairs or conduct any maintenance it deems necessary, and charge the property owners or homeowners association served by the private road for such service. 
(k)  The applicant shall provide a recorded statement running with the land informing purchasers of lots accessed by the private road that the access road is private. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 2016-001 , 6-6-2016) 
Sec. 52-318. - Residential occupancy. 
(a)  Intent. This section is intended to reasonably regulate the number of persons who can live in a residential dwelling unit. The city finds that occupancy limits are needed to provide density control; preserve and enhance residential neighborhoods as stable, quiet places for citizens to live and raise children; protect safety and welfare; and maintain property values. Such limits are also needed to insure that there are adequate public and private facilities including adequate offstreet parking, utilities, and adequate lot size to accommodate the residents of each dwelling unit without impairing the character of the neighborhood. The city also finds there are a number of residential living arrangements other than the traditional biological family arrangement. This section is intended also to accommodate those alternative living arrangements. 
(b)  A dwelling unit may not be occupied by more persons than one of the following family living arrangements: 
(1)  One or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship living as a single housekeeping unit, in all districts. 
(2)  Four persons plus their offspring living as a single housekeeping unit, in all districts. 
(3)  Six persons living as a single housekeeping unit in any district except R-1 districts. 
(4)  A functional family living as a single housekeeping unit which has received a special exception use permit as provided elsewhere in this chapter. 
(c)  In this section, offspring means descendants, including natural offspring, adopted children, foster child and legal wards. 
(d)  In this section, functional family means a group of people plus their offspring, having a relationship which is functionally equivalent to a family. The relationship must be of a permanent and distinct character with a demonstrable and recognizable bond characteristic of a cohesive unit. Functional family does not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, organization or group of students or other individuals where the common living arrangement or basis for the establishment of the housekeeping unit is temporary. 
(e)  In addition to the standards set forth elsewhere in this chapter, a permit for a functional family is subject to the following standards and regulations: 
(1)  It must meet the definition of this section. 
(2)  Two offstreet parking spaces must be provided. Additional parking spaces may be required by the planning commission if any of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The property is located more than 300 feet from a bus stop. 
b.  Street parking available for visitor parking is limited. 
c.  The petitioner intends to park more than two vehicles regularly on the site and there is limited area available for tandem parking in a driveway. 
In order for the planning commission to determine if adequate parking will be provided, the petitioner must submit a plan indicating the location of proposed offstreet parking and an analysis of public parking and transit facilities provided within a 300-foot radius of the parcel. The planning commission may defer the provision of up to 40 percent of the required spaces if shown on the approved plan for the permit. If the building official determines that some or all of the deferred parking spaces are needed, these spaces must be installed. Any person aggrieved by the building official's determination may appeal as provided elsewhere in this chapter. 
(3)  This permit shall apply only to the functional family type which obtained the permit and shall be limited to the number of persons specified in the permit. 
(4)  There is a contact person who will act as head of household in relating to the city. 
(f)  The zoning board of appeals may grant a variance from the standards of this section if it is reasonably necessary to give a handicapped person (as defined in 42 USC section 3602) equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. 
(g)  The occupancy limits of this section do not apply to rooming or boarding houses, fraternity or sorority houses, student cooperatives, emergency shelters, or convalescent homes. 
(Ord. No. 2011-004, 3-7-2011) 
Sec. 52-319. - Wireless telecommunications towers. 
(a)  Purpose and goals. The purpose of this section is to establish guidelines for the siting, use, and maintenance of wireless telecommunications towers and antennas. The goals of this section are to: 
(1)  Protect residential areas, park or recreation areas, and protect future land uses from potential adverse impacts of towers and antennas. 
(2)  Protect the public health and safety. 
(3)  Permit telecommunications facilities within city boundaries as required by law. 
(4)  Minimize the total number of towers throughout the city by encouraging the joint use of existing and new tower sites. 
(5)  Require users of towers and antennas to configure or shield them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas. 
(6)  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure. 
(7)  Provide for the maintenance of existing facilities as well as timely removal of obsolete, unused or abandoned facilities. 
In furtherance of these goals, the city shall give due consideration to the city's master plan, zoning map, existing and future land uses, and sensitive areas in approving sites for the location of towers and antennas. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  New Towers and Antennas. All new towers and antennas in the City shall be subject to these regulations, except as provided in subsections (b)(2), (b)(3), and (b)(4), below. 
(2)  Amateur radio station operators. This section shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator. Amateur radio towers will be governed by maximum heights for non-attached structures in appropriate districts, as required elsewhere in this Ordinance. 
(3)  Receive only antennas. This section shall not govern any receive only antenna or tower installed and used by an individual to receive a fixed-wireless data signal at only a single location, except receive only antennas or towers shall meet the following conditions: 
a.  A tower or antenna is permitted only as an accessory use in all districts. 
b.  The tower or antenna height shall not exceed 50 feet. 
c.  The tower shall be setback from all property lines the minimum of the tower height or the underlying setbacks of the district, whichever is greater. 
d.  Guy wires are not permitted on the tower. 
e.  The tower shall be equipped with an anti-climbing device. 
f.  No ground equipment or additional buildings are permitted to accommodate the tower or antenna. 
g.  No antenna or structure shall extend more than six feet horizontally from the tower. 
h.  A certificate of zoning compliance is required prior to constructing the tower. 
i.  The antenna or tower shall not be used to retransmit a data signal to multiple individuals' locations. 
(4)  Preexisting towers and antennas. Towers and antennas that existed prior to enactment of this Ordinance shall not be required to meet the requirements of this section, other than the applicable requirements of subsections (c)(12), (c)(13), (c)(16), (c)(17), (c)(18), (g), and (h). 
(c)  General requirements. 
(1)  Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use of an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot. 
(2)  Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with district development regulations, including but not limited to setback requirements, road frontage requirements, lot coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within such lot. 
(3)  Inventory of existing sites and justification of new sites. Each application for an antenna and/or tower shall provide to the city an inventory of existing towers, antennas, or sites approved for towers or antennas, that are either within the jurisdiction of the city or within three miles of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The city may share such information with other applicants applying for siting approvals under this Ordinance, provided however that the city is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. In addition, the applicant shall supply a written statement from an independently hired radio frequency professional that justifies the need for the proposed new site by describing the unsuitability of existing towers for the proposed use. 
(4)  Height. Overall heights for new towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Maximum height for a single-user tower is 150 feet. A single-user tower must have a foundation capable of supporting a tower with a height of 195 feet, to facilitate possible future tower height extension in the event of colocation by other users. 
b.  Maximum height for a tower with allowances for multiple users is 195 feet. The applicant must provide written assurance, verifying that there are reasonable provisions (including the tower, the equipment structure plan, and site location) for colocation by two other users. In addition, the applicant must provide written assurance that permission to colocate will be granted for compensation at the prevailing market rate. Suitability of this documentation will be assessed by the zoning administrator (for certificate of zoning compliance) or by the planning commission during site plan review. 
(5)  Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply to all new towers: 
a.  Towers must be setback a distance equal to at least the height of the tower from an adjoining lot line, except in an industrial district where the setback from an adjoining lot line will be half the tower height. These setback requirements are in addition to meeting the requirements of C-7. 
b.  Accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements. 
(6)  Road frontage. For the entire lot, including a sub-parcel on which a tower or antenna is sited, there shall be a minimum of 150 feet of road frontage. 
(7)  Separation distances. New towers shall be located a minimum of 400 feet from any existing residential dwelling on adjacent properties. 
(8)  Tower and antenna appearance. Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
b.  At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend them into the natural setting and surrounding buildings. 
c.  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
(9)  Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the landscaping surrounding towers: 
a.  Towers and accompanying facilities shall be landscaped in a manner that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from property used (or potentially to be used) for residences. A landscaping plan shall be submitted for approval by the zoning administrator (certificate of zoning compliance) or by the planning commission (site plan review). 
b.  Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property perimeter may provide sufficient buffer. 
(10)  Security. Towers shall be equipped with anti-climbing devices and enclosed by security fencing not less than eight feet in height. The fence may be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device, at the discretion of the owner. 
(11)  Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, all available lighting options must be presented to the zoning administrator (certificate of zoning compliance) or to the planning commission (site plan review). 
(12)  State or federal requirements. All towers and antennas must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this Ordinance shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense, as required in section 52-319(g). 
(13)  Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local building codes and the applicable standards for towers. If, upon inspection, the city concludes that a tower fails to comply with applicable codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then, upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 60 days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into compliance within said 60 days shall constitute grounds for removal of the tower or antenna at owner's expense, as required in section 52-319(g). 
(14)  Engineering certification and liability insurance. Application for tower or antenna siting approval must be accompanied by a signed certification from an independently hired State of Michigan licensed professional engineer. The engineer shall certify integrity of the design and indicating how the tower or antenna would fall in event of such occurrence. Application for tower or antenna siting approval must also include evidence of at least 1,000,000 U.S. dollars of general liability insurance to cover the applicant, land owner, city and damage to other persons or property that may result from unforeseen events or circumstances. The city shall be notified of any notice cancellations or changes in liability insurance. 
(15)  Measurements. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities located in the city irrespective of municipal, county, and state jurisdictional boundaries. 
(16)  Not essential services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated or permitted pursuant to this section and shall not be regulated or permitted as essential services, public utilities, or private utilities. 
(17)  Licensed or franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall certify that all licenses or franchises required by law for the construction and/or operation in the city have been obtained and shall file a copy of all required licenses or franchises with the zoning administrator. 
(18)  Signs. No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower except for usual regulatory signs required by the State of Michigan or the FCC such as "No Trespassing", "Danger", or a sign indicating who should contacted in case of an emergency. 
(19)  Buildings and support equipment. Buildings and support equipment associated with antennas or towers shall comply with the requirements of section 52-319(f). 
(20)  Provision for removal. The application for siting of any antenna or tower shall require the applicant to deposit with the city clerk security of a performance guarantee (in a time duration and with a financial institution deemed acceptable to the city) in the form of cash, a certified check, or irrevocable bank letter of credit, which will ensure full compliance with this Ordinance and any conditions of approval. The security shall cover removal of the facility when it has been abandoned, is no longer in use, or is in violation as provided in section 52-319(g). The security shall be in the amount indicated in the following schedule: 
Total Construction Cost Security $0.00-$2,500 $500 $2,501-$7,500 $1,000 $7,501-$15,000 $2,000 $15,001-$25,000 $5,000 $25,001-$50,000 $15,000 $50,001 and greater $25,000  
Total construction cost includes all costs for construction, including engineering and design costs, governmental review, permitting fees, labor, and parts. The security shall be kept in full force and effect and irrevocable and non-cancelable (except by the written consent of both the city and the then-owner of the antenna, tower or related facility) during the entire time while the antenna or tower exists or is in place. The applicant and owner shall further agree as a condition of the security that the applicant and owner are responsible for the payment of any costs and attorney fees incurred by the city in securing removal. 
(21)  Tower spacing. Minimum spacing between tower locations shall be two miles. The planning commission may waive this standard where the proposed location of the tower will serve to cluster two or more towers in close proximity to one another and, thereby, minimize the visual impacts upon panoramic views in the city. 
(d)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  General. The uses listed in this subsection are deemed to be permitted uses. They shall not require a special use permit, but they may require administrative approval or review as governed by the following provisions. 
a.  The city zoning administrator may administratively approve or review the uses listed in this subsection. 
b.  Each applicant for administrative approval or review shall apply to the zoning administrator, providing all information called for and/or regulated in section 52-319(c) and a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of the city board to reimburse the city for the costs of reviewing the application. 
c.  The zoning administrator shall review the application as required in this section, and determine if the proposed use complies with all requirements and regulations of this Ordinance. 
d.  If an administrative approval is denied, the applicant may take an appeal to the board of appeals. 
(2)  List of permitted uses. Locating antennas on existing or preexisting towers or structures consistent with the terms of subsection (d)(2)a. is permitted upon administrative review by the zoning administrator. Antennas or cable microcell networks consistent with subsections (d)(2)b. and (d)(2)c. below are permitted uses, upon approval by the zoning administrator after an administrative review: 
a.  Administratively reviewed tower colocation must not require tower reconstruction or tower height modification above the following thresholds: 
1.  Height increase greater than 20 feet or ten percent of the original tower height as approved at the time of construction or greater than the maximum tower height permitted in subsection (c)(4). 
2.  Width increase of the original tower as approved at the time of construction by more than necessary to permit the installation of the new equipment. 
3.  Increase in the related facilities or tower foot print greater than 2500 square feet. 
b.  Any antenna that is not attached to a tower may be approved by the zoning administrator as a secondary use to any commercial, industrial, or similar structure, provided: 
1.  The antenna does not extend above the highest point of the structure. 
2.  The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA regulations. 
3.  The antenna complies with all applicable building codes. 
4.  The antenna will not materially alter the appearance of the existing structure. 
5.  Any accessory equipment for the antenna shall be placed inside the structure to which the antenna is attached or in the rear yard with screening provided so that the equipment is not visible from adjacent properties and roads. 
c.  Installing a cable microcell network through use of multiple low powered transmitters/receivers attached to existing wireline systems, such as conventional cable or telephone wires, or similar technology that does not require the use of towers. 
(e)  Special uses. 
(1)  General. The uses listed in this subsection will require a special use permit issued pursuant to article V of this Ordinance. 
(2)  List of permitted special uses. Any of the following may be granted as a special use if it meets all applicable requirements set forth in this Ordinance: 
a.  Locating a tower, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower, in any industrial district (I) or industrial park district (IPD), or on any land that is designated in the master plan as public or semi-public. 
b.  Locating a tower, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower, elsewhere in the city, subject to the following: 
1.  Applicant shall provide information and supporting documents that demonstrate that no existing structure identified in subsection (c)(3) or location in a zoning district listed within subsection (e)(2)a. can reasonably meet the disclosed service, coverage and/or capacity needs of the applicant, including demonstration that not approving the proposed location would result in a significant gap in coverage and prohibit personal wireless services to individual in that location. Such demonstration requires identification of all structure and properties considered and a factual explanation of why they are not feasible in terms of availability, suitability, or otherwise. 
2.  Applicant shall demonstrate good faith by identifying and evaluating alternate sites, locations, designs, placements, or features for the proposed facility that would be more consistent with the purposes stated in section 52-319(a). 
3.  For each alternate site, location, design, placement, or feature identified by the applicant or otherwise, the applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed facility is more consistent with the ordinance purposes stated in section 52-319(a) and/or that such alternates are not feasible. 
4.  Wireless communication facilities and towers shall be of a design that camouflages or conceals the presence of antennas and towers into the surrounding environment and to minimize the visual impact so as to be compatible with the existing character of the proposed site, neighborhood, and general area, as found satisfactory by the city. Monopole construction is preferred. 
c.  Locating an antenna on existing or preexisting towers or structures in compliance with this Section when locating such antenna will increase the original tower height as approved at time of construction more than 20 feet or ten percent, increase the width of the original tower as approved at time of construction by more than necessary to permit the installation of the new antenna and equipment, increase the original tower facility or foot print as approved at time of construction to an area greater than 2500 square feet, or will violate the terms and conditions of any previous approval of the tower and tower facility. Colocation by multiple carriers on existing or preexisting towers will be strongly encouraged, provided such colocation is accomplished in a manner consistent with the following: 
1.  A tower that is modified or reconstructed shall be of the same tower type as the existing tower or reconstructed as a monopole. 
2.  Height. 
i.  An existing or preexisting tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller height, not to exceed 45 feet over the original tower's height, provided the ultimate height does not exceed the maximum height listed in subsection (c)(4)b. 
ii.  An existing or preexisting tower modified or rebuilt to a taller height shall not require an additional setback distance as set forth in subsection (c)(5). 
d.  Any antenna that is not located on a tower as a secondary use to any commercial, industrial, or institutional structure, provided: 
1.  The antenna does not extend more than 30 feet above the highest point of the structure. 
2.  The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA regulations. 
3.  The antenna complies with all applicable building codes. 
4.  The antenna will not materially alter the appearance of the existing structure. 
5.  Any accessory equipment for the antenna shall be placed inside the structure to which the antenna is attached or in the rear yard with screening provided so that the equipment is not visible from adjacent properties and roads. 
e.  Relocating a tower within 50 feet of its existing location to accommodate colocation, provided the following conditions are met: 
1.  Relocation does not further decrease a required setback as required in subsection (c)(5) or cause violation of the separation requirement in subsection (c)(7). 
2.  After a tower is rebuilt to accommodate colocation, any abandoned or unused tower must be removed from the site, in accordance with the stipulations of section 52-319(g). 
(f)  Buildings and other equipment storage. 
(1)  Antennas located on towers. 
a.  The related unmanned equipment structures shall not contain more than 300 square feet of gross floor area per user or be more than 12 feet in height. It shall be located within 50 feet of the associated tower. Multiple users will be strongly encouraged to share an equipment structure with a common wall. 
b.  The structure or cabinet shall be screened as required in subsection (c)(9). 
c.  The structure shall be surrounded by a security fence as required in subsection (c)(10). 
d.  The structure will comply with all applicable building codes. 
(2)  Antennas mounted on structures or rooftops. The equipment cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall comply with the following: 
a.  The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 300 square feet of gross floor area per user or be more than 12 feet in height. In addition, for buildings and structures that are less than 65 feet in height, the related unmanned equipment structure, if over 100 square feet of gross floor area or eight feet in height, shall be located on the ground and shall not be located on the roof of the structure. 
b.  If the equipment is located on the roof of a building, the area of the equipment structure and other equipment and structures shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the roof area. 
c.  If the equipment structures or cabinet is located on the ground, it will be surrounded by a security fence as required in subsection (c)(10). 
d.  Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all applicable building codes. 
(g)  Removal of antennas, towers, and associated facilities. 
(1)  A condition of every approval of a wireless communication facility shall be adequate provisions for removal of all or part of the facility as required in subsection (c)(20). Removal shall be called for upon the occurrence of one or more of the following events: 
a.  When the facility has not been used 180 days or more. For purposes of this section, the removal of antennas or other equipment necessary to operate the facility or the cessation of the operations (transmission and/or reception of communication signals) shall be considered as the beginning of a period of nonuse. Also, a change of use, from the original principal use, without reapplication and approval by the city will be considered as the beginning of a period of nonuse. 
b.  When a tower, antenna, or other facility is in violation of this Ordinance. 
(2)  The situations in which removal of a facility is required, as set forth above, may be applied and limited to portions of a facility. 
(3)  Upon the occurrence of one or more of the events requiring removal, as specified above, the property owner or persons who have used the facility shall immediately apply or secure the application for any required demolition or removal permits, and immediately proceed with and complete the demolition/removal, restoring the premises to the pre-existing conditions as documented on the approved site plan. 
(4)  If the required removal of a facility or a portion thereof has not been lawfully completed within 60 days following written notice by the city, the city may remove or secure removal of the facility or required portions thereof, with its actual cost and reasonable administrative charge to be drawn, collected and/or enforced from or under the security posted at the time application was made for establishing the facility. If reasonable actual costs for facility removal and site restoration exceed the posted security, then the owner of this facility will be liable for those excess costs. 
(h)  Nonconforming uses. 
(1)  Not expansion of nonconforming use. Towers that are constructed and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this section shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use of a structure. 
(2)  Pre-existing towers. Pre-existing towers shall be allowed to continue their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance shall be permitted on such pre-existing towers. New construction (other than routine maintenance), height modification, expanded use, or application for colocation on a pre-existing tower shall comply with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(3)  Replacing Damaged or Destroyed Nonconforming Towers or Antennas. Pre-existing or nonconforming antennas or towers that are damaged or destroyed are governed by reconstruction in Section 13.90 of this Ordinance. In the event of abandonment or termination of use, such towers will be removed. 
(i)  Review. 
(1)  Completeness of application. Upon receipt of an application for a special use permit and payment of application fees, the zoning administrator must determine if the application is administratively complete within 14 business days and notify the applicant in writing what additional information is necessary to make the application complete. Once an application is determined to be administratively complete, the zoning administrator shall notify the applicant, the planning commission, and the city commission. 
(2)  Scheduling public hearing. To enable timing required in section (i)(3) and notwithstanding provisions to the contrary, the city clerk shall schedule the public hearing required for applications needing a special use. This shall be done upon determination that the application is administratively complete. 
(3)  Decision. Once the application is complete, the zoning administrator for principal uses and the city board for special uses must approve or deny an application for new equipment (including an antenna) on an existing tower within 60 days and must approve or deny an application for a new tower within 90 days. 
(Ord. No. 2018-001 , 1-2-2018) 
Sec. 52-320. - Movable, pre-constructed storage buildings. 
    Storage buildings not to exceed ten feet by twelve feet in size and not having a permanent foundation such as the movable storage barns purchased from others are permitted in any residential district or any commercial district subject to the setbacks set forth in that district. 
(Ord. No. 2018-004 , 5-7-2018) 
Secs. 52-321-52-340. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SPECIAL USE REGULATIONS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of 9-5-2006 amended art. V in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former art. V derived from Code 1985, §§ 5.120-5.122. 

Sec. 52-341. - Purpose. 
    The intent of this article is to provide standards for special land uses, which are uses that, under usual circumstances, could be detrimental to other land uses permitted within the same zoning district, but may be permitted because of circumstances unique to the location of the particular use. This article provides standards for the planning commission to determine the appropriateness of a given special land use using factors such as: compatibility with adjacent zoning, location, design, size, intensity of use, impact on traffic operations, potential impact on groundwater, demand on public facilities and services, equipment used, and processes employed. Accordingly, special land uses should not be permitted without consideration of relevant restrictions or conditions being imposed which address their unique characteristics. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-342. - Standards. 
    A special land use must meet general standards which involve judgment and leave room for interpretation. In general, special land uses are of large scale and/or intensity with a potential impact that goes beyond the subject site and abutting uses. All special uses shall meet the following minimum standards: 
(1)  The proposed use must be consistent with the spirit and intent of this article. 
(2)  The proposed use must be compatible with adjacent uses of land, the natural environment and the capabilities of affected public services and facilities. 
(3)  The proposed use must be consistent with the public health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(4)  The proposed use shall be in conformance with the objectives and specific elements of the current adopted master plan of the city and any special studies adopted as amendments thereto. 
(5)  A special use must meet any additional standards which are as specified in the district regulations of the applicable zoning district providing for the subject special land use. Reasonable conditions may be required to ensure conformance with the standards specified in this article pursuant to the land development standards. 
(6)  Consideration of special land use applications must include, as a minimum, relevant issues, such as parking requirements, traffic considerations, relative size and design of the structure compared to design and size of other neighboring structures, and other related issues prior to considering approval. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-343. - Application procedure. 
(a)  Any person owning or having an interest in the subject property may file an application for special land use approval as provided for in this article. 
(b)  The following materials shall be submitted to the city at least 30 days prior to the meeting at which the planning commission first considers the special land use application: 
(1)  Payment of the required fee. 
(2)  Copies of completed application forms. 
(3)  Copies of a site plan meeting the requirements of article VII, Site Plan Review. 
(4)  Impact assessment if required by the planning commission; the analysis shall be carried out by qualified individuals and shall include, but need not be limited to, the impact on: natural features, stormwater management, surrounding land uses, public facilities/services, public utilities, and traffic. 
(c)  The planning commission shall have the discretion to require an applicant to submit an economic impact study or an environmental impact study if deemed necessary to protect the public interest if in its sole discretion it deems such studies in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-344. - Designated review authority and approval procedure. 
(a)  The planning commission shall have final review authority for all special land uses. 
(b)  Following submission of the required application materials the planning commission shall hold a public hearing. The zoning administrator shall notify the following persons of the application being considered, so the notice is sent not less than 15 days before the date that the application will be considered and the notices sent to: 
(1)  The applicant. 
(2)  The owner of the property, if different. 
(3)  If the special use involves less than 11 adjacent properties. The owners of all real property within 300 feet of the boundary for the property for which the approval has been requested, as shown by the latest assessment roll, regardless of whether the owner and property is located in the city or not. 
(4)  If the special use involves less than 11 adjacent properties. Occupants of any structures within 300 feet of the boundary for the property for which the approval has been requested, regardless of whether the owner and property is located in the city or not. 
(5)  The general public by publication in a newspaper which circulates in the city. 
(6)  The members of the planning commission. 
(c)  The notice shall include: 
(1)  The nature of the special use permit being requested. 
(2)  The property(ies) for which the request has been made. 
(3)  If the special use involves less than 11 adjacent properties, also a listing of all existing street addresses within the property(ies) which is(are) subject of the special use. (Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such addresses currently exist. If there are no street addresses another means of identification may be used.) 
(4)  The location where the application documents can be viewed and copied prior to the date the application will be considered. 
(5)  The date, time and location of when the hearing on application will take place. 
(6)  The address at which written comments should be directed prior to the consideration. 
(7)  For members of the commission only, a complete copy of the special use permit application and supporting documents in the record. 
(d)  The planning commission shall review the application in terms of the requirements of section 52-342 and any other applicable standards contained within this chapter, Standards for approval and shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-345. - Conditions of approval. 
(a)  As part of any special land use approval, the planning commission may impose any additional conditions or limitations as, in its judgment, may be necessary for protection of the public interest. Such conditions shall be related to and ensure that the review considerations of section 52-342 standards for approval and the applicable specific regulations imposed by this chapter. Special land use specific requirements must be met. 
(b)  The approval of a special land use, including conditions made as part of the approval, is attached to the property described as part of the application and not to the owner of such property. 
(c)  A record of conditions imposed shall be maintained. The conditions shall remain unchanged unless an amendment to the special land use approval is approved. 
(d)  A record of the decision of the planning commission, the reasons for the decision reached, and any conditions attached to such decision shall be kept and made a part of the minutes of the planning commission. 
(e)  The building official/zoning administrator shall make periodic investigations of developments authorized by special land use approval to ensure continued compliance with all requirements imposed by the planning commission and this article. Noncompliance with the requirements and conditions approved for the special land use shall constitute grounds for the planning commission to terminate the approval following a public hearing. Such hearing shall be held in accordance with the procedures used for the original hearing and as required by this article. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-346. - Validity of special land use approval. 
(a)  In cases where actual physical construction of a substantial nature of the structures authorized by a special land use approval has not commenced within one year of issuance, and a written application for extension of the approval has not been filed as provided below, the approval shall automatically become null and void and all rights thereunder shall terminate. 
(b)  Upon written application filed prior to the termination of the one-year period, the planning commission may authorize a single extension of the time limit for a further period of not more than one year. Such extension shall only be granted based on evidence from the applicant that the development has a reasonable likelihood of commencing construction within the one year extension. 
(c)  The granting of a special land use shall allow that particular use to be conforming on the subject property, as long as the standards of this article are maintained. 
(d)  Any use for which a special land use approval has been granted and which ceases to continuously operate for a six-month period shall be considered abandoned and the special land use approval shall become null and void. 
(e)  No application for a special land use approval which has been denied wholly or in part shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of the order of denial, except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of changed conditions relating to all of the reasons noted for the denial found to be valid by the planning commission. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-347. - Special land use amendments and expansions. 
(a)  Amendments. Any person or agency who has been granted a special land use approval shall notify the building official/zoning administrator of any proposed amendment to the approved site plan of the special land use. The building official/zoning administrator shall determine whether the proposed amendment constitutes a minor or major amendment based on the determination standards for all site plans in accordance with the requirements of article VII, Site Plan Review. A major amendment to a special land use approval shall comply with the application and review procedures contained in this article. 
(b)  Expansion or change in use. The expansion, change in activity, reuse, or redevelopment of any use requiring a special land use approval, with an increase of ten percent or greater, of the total square footage of use, shall require resubmittal in the manner described in this article. A separate special land use approval shall be required for each use requiring special land use review on a lot, or for any expansions of a special land use on property which has not previously received special land use approval. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-348. - Specific requirements. 
    Certain special land uses, because of their unique character and potential impacts on the welfare of adjacent properties and the city, require additional specific requirements. Such uses are listed below with specific standards and regulations that must be met in addition to the standards imposed by this chapter for approval. 
    The following are special land uses with specific site and/or use standards which are described on the following pages: 
(a)  Drive-through-window facilities for banks, restaurants or other permitted uses. 
(b)  Outdoor display, sales, or storage. 
(c)  Retail businesses and shopping centers exceeding 50,000 square feet. 
(d)  Drive-through-window facilities for banks, restaurants or other permitted uses. 
1.  Sufficient parking and stacking capacity in accordance with sections 52-305 through 52-309, Off-street parking and loading standards, for the drive-through portion of the operation shall be provided to ensure that traffic does not extend into the public right-of-way. 
2.  A bypass lane shall be provided around the stock (stacking) spaces. 
3.  In addition to parking space requirements, at least three parking spaces shall be provided in close proximity to the exit of the drive-through portion of the operation to allow for customers waiting for delivery of orders. 
4.  Only one ingress/egress driveway shall be permitted on any single street. If the use is located on a corner lot access to the drive-through facility shall be only from the street which carries the least amount of daily traffic at the time the application is approved, except that such access from any other street may be shared with an adjoining property. 
5.  The planning commission may require direct vehicular access connections with adjacent commercial developments where feasible. 
6.  Access driveways shall be located no less than 100 feet from the centerline of the intersection of any street or 75 feet from the centerline of any other driveway. 
7.  Overhead canopies shall be setback at least 20 feet from the right-of-way and constructed of materials consistent with the principal building. The proposed clearance of any canopy shall be noted on the site plan. The canopy shall be no higher than the principal building. 
8.  Outdoor speakers for the drive through facility shall be located in a way that minimizes sound transmission toward neighboring property and uses. 
(e)  Outdoor display, sales, or storage. 
1.  A special land use approval may be granted for outdoor display, sales, or storage on the same property as an approved mini-storage use, marina, or other principal use deemed compatible by the planning commission. 
2.  Stored vehicles or goods on a site without a building, shall meet the setback requirements of the zoning district. If a building is located on the site, no outdoor storage shall be permitted in any required yard of buildings for the district in which the commercial outdoor storage use is located. 
3.  If retail activity is associated with the use, an enclosed building of at least 500 square feet of gross floor area for office and sales use is required. 
4.  The storage of soil, sand, mulch, and similar loosely packaged materials shall be contained and covered to prevent it from blowing into adjacent properties. The outdoor storage of fertilizers, pesticides, and other hazardous materials is prohibited. 
5.  All stored materials including loosely packaged materials shall not be piled or stacked higher than the height of the obscuring screen. Vehicles, implements, and recreational vehicles may exceed the height of the screen provided that they are set back from the screen a distance equal to their height. 
6.  All outdoor storage areas shall be paved with a permanent, durable, and dustless surface and shall be graded and drained to dispose of all surface water. 
7.  All loading and truck maneuvering shall be accommodated on site or on a dedicated easement. 
8.  Fencing and lighting for security purposes may be required as determined by the planning commission. All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential areas in accordance with article X, Lighting Standards. 
9.  Where the outdoor storage provisions provided elsewhere in this chapter are more restrictive, they shall apply. 
(f)  Retail businesses and shopping centers exceeding 50,000 square feet. 
1.  Retail businesses and shopping centers exceeding 50,000 square feet shall only be located where they can be accessed by major traffic routes, as classified in the city master plan, or streets classified as "major streets" on the city's Act 51 map. 
2.  The design of buildings or shopping centers shall ensure that vehicular circulation patterns are appropriately designed and regulated to eliminate potential conflicts between traffic generated by the building or shopping center, and traffic on adjacent streets and thoroughfares. The planning commission, prior to making a recommendation on an application for such use, may require a traffic analysis which compares the projected trip generating capacity of the proposed development to existing and projected traffic volumes and the carrying capacity of adjacent streets. The traffic analysis shall be prepared by a firm or individual experienced in such studies. 
3.  Whenever any such use abuts a residential district, a building setback of at least 200 feet shall be provided. Areas of impervious surfaces (parking and driveways) shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet. 
4.  Maximum lot coverage of all buildings shall be 25 percent, maximum lot coverage of all buildings, parking, and paved areas shall be 70 percent of the net site. 
5.  Internal circulation shall be designed such that no intersection includes more than four aisles or drives. 
6.  Site entrances shall be restricted to three-way movements, with unrestricted inbound movements. 
7.  Internal drives defined by the ends of aisles shall have raised, curbed, landscaped islands at appropriate locations to define circulation paths and control movements through the parking lot. 
8.  Loading facilities which serve the principal building shall be screened from public view. 
9.  Outdoor storage of trucks, trailers, or pallets shall be prohibited. The outdoor display, sale or storage or merchandise shall require a separate special land use approval. 
10.  Any outlots shall have circulation and parking designed to complement the remainder of the site. 
11.  Any operations plan including uses, hours of operation, delivery times, truck routes, security provisions, maintenance procedures, and other operations as determined by the planning commission may be required as part of special land use review to assure compatibility with the surrounding neighborhoods. 
(g)  Billboards and off-premises signs. 
1.  Billboards and off-premises signs shall be permitted only in the IND industrial district. 
2.  Billboards shall not exceed 300 square feet in area. 
3.  Billboards shall not exceed 20 feet in height. 
4.  Billboards shall be spaced a minimum of 500 feet from any on-premises sign or building and 1,200 feet from any other billboard. 
5.  Billboards shall be set back at least 100 feet from any property line or any other public right-of-way. 
6.  Billboards shall be set back at least 500 feet from the property lines of any public park, playground, school, residential district, religious institution, or other areas of public assembly as determined by the planning commission. 
7.  Billboards shall not be permitted adjacent to or within 500 feet of an interchange or an intersection. The distance shall be measured from the point of beginning or ending of pavement widening at the exit from, or entrance to, the main traveled way. 
8.  Each face shall exhibit no more than two pictorials and/or two written messages about one use, product, service, goods, event, or facility located on other premises. No face of a sign shall be so designed as to give the impression of more than two signs. 
9.  Any off-premises sign not in use for advertising purposes shall have unused surfaces kept uniformly white in color overall. However, the owner of the sign shall be permitted to place a phone number on it to which inquiries for advertisement may be directed. 
10.  All billboards and off-premises signs shall obtain a sign permit to confirm compliance with article IX, Signs. 
11.  Billboards shall comply with all applicable requirements and conditions to P.A. 106 of 1972, as amended, the Highway Advertising Act of 1972. All signs prohibited by the Highway Advertising Act of 1972 are also prohibited by the city. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-349. - Farm animals, except chickens and ducks. 
    Animals usually associated with farms, except chickens and ducks as specified in section 52-350, are not allowed in residential districts. Other districts may allow animals by special exception use permit provided: 
(1)  The property is eligible for the keeping of animals under the generally accepted agricultural management practices as published by the State of Michigan and within the Right to Farm Act. 
(2)  The property is located in a rural area of the city. 
(3)  The property is at least two acres in size for small animals, such as turkeys or rabbits and four acres in size for large animals, such as goats, pigs or horses. 
(4)  Under no circumstances may a rooster qualify as an animal permitted within any district within the City of Clare. 
(5)  Such animals are to be used as pets and shall not be used to produce income. The by-products such as eggs or meat shall not be sold. 
(6)  A person who has been issued a permit shall submit it for examination upon demand by any police officer or code enforcement officer. 
(7)  All barns and similar structures to be used in conjunction with any large animals shall be located at least 80 feet from all property lines. The location of all other structures shall conform to the yard and setback requirements of this section. 
(8)  The area to be used as pasture shall be adequately fenced to prevent animals from leaving the property. 
(9)  The planning commission shall determine the maximum of each type of animal allowed on the property as part of the approval process. 
(10)  The applicant shall provide the planning commission with a site plan indicating: a) all existing buildings located on the property and within 300 feet of the property; b) the location of all proposed structures, either existing or to be constructed to be used in connection with the animals; and c) the location of all waste storage areas and a disposal plan for removal of all waste from the property. 
(11)  The applicant shall provide any additional information deemed necessary for the commission to approve or deny the request. 
(12)  Animals to be used for 4-H or similar activities shall be governed by this use permit. Permits for such activities shall be limited to not more than one year by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 2011-012, 9-19-2011; Ord. No. 2015-004 , 8-4-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-004, adopted Aug. 4, 2015, changed the title of § 52-349 from "Farm animals, except chickens" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 52-350. - [Raising chickens within the city.] 
    Chickens or ducks may be raised within the city by special permit as provided. 
(1)  Any person who keeps chickens or ducks in the City of Clare shall obtain a permit from the city prior to acquiring any chickens or ducks. No chickens or ducks shall be kept unless the owners of all residentially zoned adjacent properties (as defined below in subsection (5)j). Consent in writing to the permit and this consent is presented along with an application for a permit. The permit fee shall be as determined from time to time by the city commission by resolution. Permits expire and become invalid five years after the date of issuance. A person who wishes to continue keeping chickens or ducks shall have obtained a new permit on or before the expiration date of the previous permit. Application for a new permit shall be pursuant to the procedures and requirements that are applicable at the time the person applies for a new permit. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the issuance of a permit by the city, private restrictions on the use of property shall remain enforceable and take precedence over a permit. Private restrictions include but are not limited to deed restrictions, condominium master deed restrictions, neighborhood association by-laws, and covenant deeds. A permit issued to a person whose property is subject to private restrictions that prohibit the keeping of chickens or ducks is void. The interpretation and enforcement of the private restriction is the sole responsibility of the private parties involved. 
(3)  A person who keeps or houses chickens or ducks on his or her property shall comply with all of the following requirements: 
a.  Have been issued the permit required under subsection (2) above. 
b.  Keep no more than two chickens or ducks in total, i.e., two chickens or one chicken and one duck or two ducks. 
c.  The principal use of the person's property is for a single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling. 
d.  No person shall keep any rooster. 
e.  The chickens or ducks shall be provided with a covered enclosure and must be kept in the covered enclosure or a fenced enclosure at all times. Fenced enclosures are subject to all provisions of the City Code. 
f.  A person shall not keep chickens or ducks in any location on the property other than in the backyard. For purposes of this section, "backyard" means that portion of a lot enclosed by the property's rear lot line and the side lot lines to the points where the side lot lines intersect with an imaginary line established by the rear of the single-family or two-family structure and extending to the side lot lines. 
g.  No covered enclosure or fenced enclosure shall be located closer than ten feet to any property line of an adjacent property. 
h.  All enclosures for the keeping of chickens or ducks shall be so constructed or repaired as to prevent rats, mice, or other rodents from being harbored underneath, within, or within the walls of the enclosure. A covered enclosure or fenced enclosure shall not be located closer than 40 feet to any residential structure on an adjacent property provided, however, this requirement can be waived as follows: 
1.  If the principal use of applicant's property is for a single-family dwelling, to obtain such a waiver the applicant shall present at the time of applying for a permit the written statements of all adjacent landowners that there is no objection to the issuance of the permit. 
2.  If the principal use of the applicant's property is for a two-family dwelling, to obtain such a waiver the applicant shall present at the time of applying for a permit the written statements of all adjacent landowners and of the occupants of the other dwelling stating that there is no objection to the issuance of the permit. 
i.  For purposes of this section, adjacent property means all parcels of property that the applicant's property comes into contact with at one or more points, except for parcels that are legally adjacent to but are in fact separated from the applicant's property by a public or private street. 
j.  All enclosures for the keeping of chickens or ducks shall be so constructed or repaired as to prevent rats, mice, or other rodents from being harbored underneath, within, or within the walls of the enclosure. 
k.  All feed and other items associated with the keeping of chickens or ducks that are likely to attract or to become infested with or infected by rats, mice, or other rodents shall be protected so as to prevent rats, mice, or other rodents from gaining access to or coming into contact with them. 
l.  If the above requirements are not complied with, the city may revoke any permit granted under this section and/or initiate prosecution for a civil infraction violation. 
(4)  A person who has been issued a permit shall submit it for examination upon demand by any police officer or code enforcement officer. 
(5)  The area to be used as pasture shall be adequately fenced to prevent animals from leaving the property. 
(6)  The applicant shall provide the City of Clare Code Enforcement Division with a site plan indicating: a) all existing buildings located on the property and within 300 feet of the property; b) the location of all proposed structures, either existing or to be constructed to be used in connection with the animals; and c) the location of all waste storage areas and a disposal plan for removal of all waste from the property. 
(7)  The applicant shall provide any additional information deemed necessary for the code enforcement division to approve or deny the request. 
(8)  Animals to be used for 4-H or similar activities shall be governed by this use permit. Permits for such activities shall be limited to not more than one year by the code enforcement division. 
(Ord. No. 2011-012, 9-19-2011; Ord. No. 2012-002, 2-6-2012; Ord. No. 2014-009 , 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 52-351. - Special use regulations related to medical marijuana. 
    Medical marijuana land uses, because of their unique character and potential impacts on the welfare of adjacent properties and the city, require additional specific requirements. Such requirements are listed below and shall be the specific standards and regulations that must be met in addition to any standards imposed elsewhere for approval. 
(1)  All medical marijuana licensed activities shall comply at all times with the Medical Marijuana Act, Public Act 281 of 2016 and the General Rules of the Michigan Department of Community Health, as they may be amended from time to time. 
(2)  Cultivation shall be conducted so as not to create dust, glare, noise, odors, or light spillage beyond the parcel and shall not be visible from an adjoining public way. Special use permit applications shall address measures contemplated to control all dust, glare, noise, odors, or light spillage. In addition, cultivation shall be conducted so as not to create discharge to the city waste water treatment system that unduly burdens the city. The special use permit application shall address the amount and type of discharge that will be entering the city waste water treatment system and subject to review and approval by the city. 
(3)  A medical marijuana facility shall not be located within 1,000 feet of an R-1 or R-2 residential zoning district or within 1,000 feet of any church, state-licensed day care facility, public library, public park, preschool, elementary school, middle school, high school or public recreation facility. 
(4)  A medical marijuana facility shall obtain a zoning compliance certificate and if the applicant is not the owner of the parcel, such certificate shall include the property owners' consent to the use of the parcel as a medical marijuana cultivation facility. 
(5)  To the extent cultivation occurs outside an enclosed building, the special use permit application shall include and address all security matters, including security fencing, intrusion alarms to the satisfaction of the planning commission and city commission. 
(6)  No medical marijuana facility may be established, operated or maintained within 500 feet of any other medical marijuana facility, except as provided below. 
(7)  Distance limitations shall be measured in a straight line from the respective parcel or lot line of both the subject parcels and/or parcels zoned R-1 or R-2, or occupied by special uses specified in this subsection (b)(8). 
(8)  No person under 18 years will be admitted to the facility without his or her parent or legal guardian. 
(9)  Insofar as multiple state licensed facilities are permitted to be operated under the same roof or in the same facility, this section shall be deemed to permit and encourage any combination of multiple state licensed marijuana operations at one location, or on the same property, or in the same building. For the purposes of this section, multiple licensed facilities may operate on one zoning parcel. 
(10)  Uses permitted under Public Act 281 of 2016 being medical marijuana growers, secure transport, safety compliance facilities, provisioning centers, and processing centers, shall be subject to a separate license and permit from the city and (a) the fee for the permit shall be as set by the city commission from time to time, and (b) if at any time the business licensed under this Public Act has the state revoke, suspend or the business otherwise loses its license, it must immediately shut its doors and the city permit will be considered to be null and void, and (c) the permits run annually and expire on the anniversary date of the issuance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-002 , 5-15-2017) 
Secs. 52-352-52-370. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PLANNED RESIDENTIAL UNIT DEVELOPMENT[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Planned unit development, MCL 125.584b. 

Sec. 52-371. - Intent. 
(a)  The intent of this article is to provide an optional method for residential land development, which allows for flexibility in the application of the standards governing the type of residential structures permitted and their placement on the property. A planned residential unit development will provide for the development of residential land as an integral unit which incorporates within a single plan the location and arrangement of all buildings, drives, parking areas, utilities, landscaping and any other improvements or changes within the site. Deviation from the specific site development standards of this chapter may be allowed as long as the general purposes for the standards are achieved and the general provisions of the zoning regulations are observed. A planned residential unit development shall be designed to: 
(1)  Achieve compatibility with the surrounding area and to encourage innovation and variety in the design, layout and type of residential development; 
(2)  Achieve economy and efficiency in the use of land, natural resources and energy; 
(3)  Provide for efficiencies and economies in providing public services and utilities; and 
(4)  Encourage the development of more useful open space. 
(b)  The total area comprising a planned residential unit development is to be planned and developed as a unified and coordinated project. 
(Code 1985, § 5.47.00) 
Sec. 52-372. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Common open space means lands within the planned residential unit development, under the common ownership of all residents in the planned residential unit development, to be used for a park, recreation or environmental amenity. Such lands shall not include public or private streets, driveways or parking areas. Within the lands only facilities and structures for recreational purposes may be constructed, with the total impervious area of roofs and paving constituting not more than ten percent of the total open space. 
    Homeowners' association means an association of all owners of a project, organized for the purpose of administering, managing and maintaining the common open space, and common property and facilities. The association shall be described in all covenants, deeds or other recorded legal documents which affect the title to any land within the development. 
(Code 1985, § 5.47.01) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 52-373. - Development standards and modifications. 
    A planned residential unit development will be developed in accordance with the following standards, except that, upon recommendation of the city planning commission, the city commission may waive a part or all of these requirements where, because of parcel size or shape or other extenuating factors, such a restriction would be to the detriment of quality development, and through site design, any adverse affects to adjoining properties can be eliminated: 
(1)  Minimum size. The minimum size shall (PUD) be three acres. 
(2)  Permitted principal uses. Permitted principal uses shall be as follows: 
a.  Residential R-1 districts. 
1.  Single-family dwellings. 
2.  Attached single-family dwellings limited to a cluster of units not more than 150 feet in length. 
b.  Residential R-2 districts. 
1.  Single-family dwellings. 
2.  Attached single-family dwellings limited to a cluster of units not more than 150 feet in length. 
3.  Multiple-family dwellings. 
(3)  Allowable densities. 
a.  The maximum density permitted in a planned residential unit development shall be: 
1.  R-1, 5.0 dwelling units per acre. 
2.  R-2, 15.0 dwelling units per acre. 
b.  Where a planned residential unit development includes land in more than one zoning district, the dwelling units must be distributed throughout the project in accordance with the allowable density of the zoning district in which they are located. 
(4)  Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses shall include: 
a.  Common open space for passive or active recreation and golf course area specifically for the residents of the planned residential unit development. 
b.  Streams or ponds. 
c.  Parking lots. 
d.  Other uses which, as the result of the plan review process, are determined to be designed to serve the residents of the planned residential unit development. 
(5)  Common open space. At least 40 percent of total land area within a planned residential unit development shall be in common open space, and it shall be distributed more or less uniformly throughout the total site area. 
(6)  Unified control. All lands within a proposed planned residential unit development shall be under the control of a single applicant, with that applicant being an individual, partnership, corporation or group of individuals, partnerships or corporations. All buildings, structures, landscaping and other improvements in a planned residential unit development shall be under the unified control of the same applicant. 
(7)  Access and circulation. 
a.  Roadway access for planned residential unit developments will be reviewed in accordance with standards set forth in chapter 24. 
b.  Private roadway width shall be a minimum of 20 feet. Roadways will be paved in accordance with specifications approved by the city engineer. 
c.  Improved walkways will be provided within the planned residential unit development as dictated by internal circulation requirements, and walkways shall connect to external walks providing access to schools, parks and other pedestrian traffic generators. 
(8)  Parking standards. 
a.  Spaces required. Parking spaces shall be required as follows: 
1.  One-bedroom units, 11/2 spaces. 
2.  Two-bedroom units or more, two spaces. 
3.  Guest parking as dictated by the project design. 
b.  Design and layout in R-1 residential districts. 
1.  Parking in an R-1 residential district must be arranged so as to be compatible with the surrounding development in that residential district. Parking for residents and guests must be considered in the overall design. Private drives and garages are allowed. 
2.  Parking lots shall conform to the following: 
i.  Parking space dimensions shall be no less than ten feet in width or 20 feet in length. 
ii.  A single parking area shall contain no more than 20 parking spaces. 
iii.  Within a parking area, no more than ten spaces shall be permitted in a continuous row without being interrupted by landscaping. 
3.  Separate parking or storage areas may be provided to accommodate motor homes, campers, boats and similar vehicles and equipment. Such areas will be screened from both within and without the planned residential unit development. 
c.  Design and layout in R-2 residential districts. 
1.  Parking space dimensions shall be no less than ten feet in width or 20 feet in length. 
2.  Parking lots shall conform to the following: 
i.  No more than 40 parking spaces shall be accommodated in a single parking area. 
ii.  No more than ten parking spaces shall be permitted in a continuous row without being interrupted by landscaping. 
d.  Screening. Parking areas shall be screened from adjacent roads and buildings with hedges, fences, walls, dense plantings or berms. 
e.  Lighting. All areas shall be adequately lighted. Lighting shall be arranged so as to be directed away from any residential buildings. 
(9)  Site perimeter yard requirements. 
a.  Where a planned residential unit development abuts a R-1 district, all structures shall be at least 30 feet from any perimeter boundary line, except that such structures in excess of 40 feet in length shall be set back an additional foot for every five feet of building length parallel to such boundary line. 
b.  Where a planned residential unit development abuts a zoning district other than an R-1 or R-2 district, all structures shall be set back at least 25 feet from any perimeter boundary line. 
c.  Where a planned residential unit development abuts an R-1 district, no intensive recreational building or facility shall be located within 50 feet of any perimeter boundary line. 
d.  Except for single-family detached dwelling units, where a planned residential unit development abuts an R-1 district, no parking area shall be within 50 feet of any perimeter boundary line. 
(10)  Interior yard requirements. Yards in the interior of a planned residential unit development may be less than those required in the zoning district within which they are located. Development may occur without any provision for interior yards, but in no case shall buildings be closer than ten feet from each other (zero lot line development). 
(11)  Underground utilities. All utilities within a planned residential unit development shall be constructed underground. 
(12)  Lot sizes. Lot sizes may be reduced from the regulations of the specific zoning district. Provisions may be made for developments without lot area. 
(13)  Dwelling unit access. Dwelling units may front on and take access from private roadways which are part of the commonly held lands within the development. 
(Code 1985, § 5.47.02) 
Sec. 52-374. - Application procedure. 
(a)  Filing. Applications for a planned residential unit development are to be filed with the city manager. 
(b)  Applicant. An application for approval of a planned residential unit development shall be submitted by or on behalf of an applicant who has a demonstrable legal interest in all of the lands within the proposed development. 
(c)  Preapplication conference. An applicant shall meet with the city manager prior to the submission of a formal application. The purpose of the conference is to review procedures necessary for the submission of an application. Special problems concerning utilities, street access, site design and zoning will be identified to enable the developer to better plan for the project. Time requirements for plan approval will be reviewed. 
(d)  Preliminary plan application. Before submitting a final plan, an applicant shall submit a preliminary plan of the planned residential unit development in accordance with requirements set forth in subsection (f) of this section. The plan shall show the name, location and principal design elements so as to enable the city to make a determination as to whether the planned residential unit development is in conformance with the requirements of this chapter. The approval of a preliminary plan shall confer on the applicant the conditional right that the general terms and conditions under which the preliminary plat approval was granted will not be changed. 
(e)  Final plan application. Upon approval of a preliminary plan application, a developer shall prepare and submit a final plan application in accordance with the requirements set forth in subsection (g) of this section. A final plan submitted in accordance with an approved preliminary plan shall warrant approval by the city planning commission and the city commission. Upon approval of a final plan application by the city commission, the developer may obtain necessary building permits for the construction of the planned residential unit development. 
(f)  Preliminary plan application submission requirements. The preliminary plan application shall contain the following: 
(1)  Two copies of the following information: applicant's name, address, telephone number and proof of property interest, and the name, address and telephone number of the architect, engineer or designer preparing the application. 
(2)  Two copies of a written legal description of the total site area proposed for development. 
(3)  Five copies of a site plan and supporting maps and drawings containing the following information, at a scale of not more than one inch equals 100 feet, and sufficiently dimensioned so as to identify the size and location of the various elements of the plan: 
a.  Location map. 
b.  Site topography, existing and proposed, at an interval of no greater than two feet. 
c.  Location of all existing and proposed buildings and structures. 
d.  Public and private roadways within and adjacent to the site. 
e.  Walkways within and adjacent to the site. 
f.  Park areas, driveways, and loading and service areas. 
g.  Open areas and a description as to use thereof. 
h.  A written tabulation of statistical data concerning the site, including the number of dwelling units by type, the area of all parcels created, the area of all common open space and the number of parking spaces provided. 
i.  A general landscape plan of landscaping within the site. Specific details of plant size shall be shown for any landscaping provided to comply with any required screening within the project. 
j.  Location and screening of any outside trash containers. 
k.  Location and size of all existing utilities and drainage facilities. 
l.  General location and size of all proposed utilities and drainage facilities. 
m.  Dimensions of all parcels to be created as a part of the development. 
(4)  Two copies of building elevation drawings, showing the architectural style to be used in the development. 
(5)  A submittal fee in accordance with section 24-104. 
(g)  Final plan application submission requirements. The final plan application shall contain the following: 
(1)  Two copies of the following information: applicant's name, address, telephone number and proof of property interest, and the name, address and telephone number of the architect, engineer or designer preparing the application (two copies). 
(2)  Two copies of a written legal description of the total site area proposed for development. 
(3)  Two copies of a letter of transmittal setting forth the proposed development schedule, including the sequence of any phases of development. 
(4)  Five copies of a site plan, and supporting maps and drawings containing the following information, at a scale of not more than one inch equals 100 feet, and dimensioned so as to identify the size and location for the various elements of the plan: 
a.  A location map. 
b.  Site topography, existing and proposed, at an interval of no greater than two feet. 
c.  Location of all existing and proposed buildings and structures. 
d.  Public and private roadways within and adjacent to the site. 
e.  Walkways within and adjacent to the site. 
f.  Park areas, driveways, and loading and service areas. 
g.  Open areas and a description as to the use thereof. 
h.  A written tabulation of statistical data concerning the site, including the number of dwelling units by type, the area of all parcels created, the area of all common open space and the number of parking spaces provided. 
i.  A general landscape plan of landscaping within the site. Specific details of plant size shall be shown for any landscaping provided to comply with any required screening within the project. 
j.  Location and screening of any outside trash containers. 
k.  Dimensions of all parcels to be created as a part of the development. 
(5)  Two copies of the organizational structure of the homeowners' association to be formed for the operation and maintenance of all common open space and common property and facilities within the development. 
(6)  Two copies of all covenants pertaining to the development. 
(7)  Plans and specifications for all sanitary sewer, storm drainage, water and roadways within the project. Such plans and specifications shall be prepared by a professional engineer in accordance with the standards of the department of public health of the state, as they pertain to public utilities. 
(Code 1985, § 5.47.03) 
Sec. 52-375. - Planning commission review and approval of preliminary plan. 
    Public hearing and notice. The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed planned residential unit development. Notice of such public hearing shall be given as set forth in section 52-344. 
(Code 1985, § 5.47.04; Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-376. - City commission review and approval of preliminary plan. 
    Public hearing and notice. The city commission shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed planned residential unit development. Notice of such public hearing shall be given as set forth in section 52-344. 
(Code 1985, § 5.47.05; Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-377. - Review and approval of final plan. 
(a)  Submission. A developer may submit to the city manager for final approval all or part of the plan for which preliminary approval has been received. Any final plan for a part of the larger development shall be such that its proportional share of the common space shall be included in and contiguous to the area to be developed, and such partial development shall be capable of standing on its own with respect to necessary improvements, circulation, facilities and open space. 
(b)  Planning commission action. After a study of the proposed final plan for a planned residential unit development or part thereof, the planning commission shall, within 30 days of the receipt of such plan, recommend to the city commission approval, approval with modification or disapproval of the project. The planning commission shall prepare a report explaining its action. The planning commission shall recommend approval of a final plan unless it is determined that the final plan is not in accordance with the approved preliminary plan or that the final plan, when a part of a total proposed plan, does not represent a proportion of all critical elements of the plan. 
(c)  City commission action. Within 30 days of the receipt of a recommendation from the city planning commission and after the execution of the agreement by the developer, as required in subsection (d) of this section, the city commission shall approve, approve with modification or disapprove the final plan. A final plan shall be approved unless it is determined that it is not in conformance with the approved preliminary plan or that such final plan, when a part of the total proposed plan, does not represent a proportional part of all the critical elements of the plan. The planning commission shall set forth, in writing, the basis for its decision and any conditions relating to an affirmative decision. 
(d)  Agreement required. 
(1)  Prior to final plan approval by the city commission, the developer shall have executed, and submitted in duplicate to the city manager, an agreement with the city, setting forth: 
a.  The specific location and use of all common lands and common facilities within the development; 
b.  The organizational structure of the homeowners' association and provisions for implementation of transfer of control to such association from the developer; 
c.  The methods for levying taxes, and operation and maintenance fee; 
d.  Provisions enabling the city to enter in and maintain such common lands and facilities when the developer or homeowners' association has failed to do so, along with procedures for assessing such costs back to the development; 
e.  Provisions whereby the building inspector shall not issue a certificate of occupancy until all the required improvements as set forth in the site plan have been completed, or a financial guarantee sufficient to cover the cost of any improvements not completed, has been provided to the city as prescribed in accordance with the provisions of section 52-379; 
f.  Provisions to allow the city to enter and complete such improvements if the developer has failed to do so within the stated period of time. 
(2)  The agreement shall be approved as to form and content by the city attorney. 
(Code 1985, § 5.47.06) 
Sec. 52-378. - Approval period. 
(a)  Preliminary plan. The length of approval of a preliminary plan for a planned residential unit development shall be 18 months from the date of the city commission's action. An extension may be applied for in writing by the applicant prior to the expiration date, and extensions may be granted by the city commission twice, each for a period of one year. 
(b)  Final plan. The length of approval of a final plan for a planned residential unit development shall be two years from the date of the city commission's action. An extension may be applied for in writing by the applicant prior to the expiration date, and extensions may be granted by the city commission twice, each for a period of one year. Where a planned residential unit development is being developed in phases, the initiation of each new development phase shall automatically extend the approval for two years from the date of issuance of a building permit. 
(Code 1985, § 5.47.07) 
Sec. 52-379. - Performance guarantee. 
(a)  Condition for issuance of temporary certificate of occupancy. If, when a certificate of occupancy is requested, all required site improvements have not been completed, the building inspector may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy upon receipt from the developer by the city clerk of a financial guarantee in the form of a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit or surety bond in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of outstanding improvements. 
(b)  Covered improvements. The amount of the performance guarantee shall be limited to cover the estimated cost of improvements necessary to comply with the provisions of this chapter and any conditions attached to the planned residential unit development approval, and such improvements shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, screening and drainage. 
(c)  Exemption. This section shall not be applicable to improvements for which a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit or surety bond has been deposited pursuant to Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(d)  Completion time. All required improvements covered by the performance guarantee shall be completed within 240 days of the issuance of the temporary certificate of occupancy. If all required improvements are not completed within the time period provided, the city, by resolution of the city commission, may proceed to have such work completed and reimburse itself for the cost thereof from the security furnished by the proprietor. 
(e)  Release. Upon the written request of the developer for a release of all or a portion of the financial security provided for the completion of the improvements, and upon certification by the city building inspector that the proportion of the financial security requested to be released is equal to or less than the proportion of the improvements installed at the date of such request, the city manager may authorize the release of such financial security to the developer or to such other source as shall be directed by the developer. Any written request from the developer seeking a release of a portion of the financial security shall be accompanied by a written certification from the developer's engineer or architect certifying what part of the improvements have, in fact, been completed. 
(Code 1985, § 5.47.08) 
State Law reference- Deposit of performance guarantee, MCL 125.584e. 
Sec. 52-380. - Plan amendments. 
    Minor changes in the location, siting or character of buildings and structures may be authorized by the city manager, if required by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time the final development program was approved. No change authorized under this section may increase by more than ten percent, or decrease by more than 20 percent, the size of any building or structure, nor change the location of any building or structure by more than ten feet in any direction, provided, notwithstanding anything in this subsection to the contrary, the city manager may not permit changes beyond the minimum or maximum requirements set forth in this article. All other changes in the planned residential unit development, including changes in the site plan and the development schedule, must be made under the procedures that are applicable to the initial approval of a planned residential unit development. 
(Code 1985, § 5.47.09) 
Sec. 52-381. - Subdivision requirements. 
    Any planned residential unit development which will result in the creation of parcels of land under separate ownership, as defined in Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.), the Land Division Act; or Public Act No. 59 of 1978 (MCL 559.101, et seq.), the Condominium Act, shall comply with the provisions of such Acts. 
(Code 1985, § 5.47.10; Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Secs. 52-382-52-410. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SITE PLAN REVIEW[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of 9-5-2006 amended art. VII in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former art. VII derived from Code 1985, ch. 56, §§ 1-10. 

Sec. 52-411. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is the intent of this article to require site plan review approval by the planning commission prior to issuance of a building permit for certain buildings, structures, and uses that can be expected to have an impact on natural resources, traffic patterns, adjacent parcels, and the character of future development, and for all special land uses, to ensure that all such buildings, structures, and uses are in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  It is further the intent of this article to require the eventual upgrade of existing sites that do not conform with current standards of this article and ensure that the arrangement, location, design, and materials within a site are consistent with the character of the city and the goals and design guidelines in the city master plan. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-412. - Uses requiring site plan review. 
Uses Requiring Site Plan Review Use or Activity Requires Site Plan Review Sketch Plan Review (Adm. Approval) Exempt a. New construction of any nonresidential or multiple-family development * b. All special land uses in accordance with article V Special Land Uses * c. Site condominium developments * d. Planned unit developments (PUDs) in accordance with article VI Planned Unit Development Standards * e. Erection of a tower, antenna, or other communication facility; essential public service buildings and storage yards * f. Colocation of a communication antenna upon an existing tower * g. Adult and child residential care facilities including day-care centers, foster care homes, family day-care homes and group homes h. Home occupations * i. Temporary uses, buildings, structures, and seasonal events * j. An increase in floor area of uses subject to site plan review up to 1,000 square feet or 5 percent of existing floor area, whichever is less * k. Change in use to one permitted in zoning district and requires no significant changes to building facade, footprint, parking, landscaping, lighting, signs, bike paths or sidewalks * l. Improvements to outdoor recreational uses and parks * m. Expansion, replacing or alteration of landscaping areas consistent with this article * n. Improvements or installation of walls, fences, or lighting * o. Alterations to off-street parking layout or installation of pavement or curbing improvements provided total number of spaces shall remain constant, and the construction plans and lot construction are approved by the appropriate city staff * p. Construction or relocation of a waste receptacle or enclosure * q. Changes to facade, architectural features or wall signs (elevation plan showing changes and construction materials is required) * r. Approved changes to utility systems * s. Grading, excavation, filling, soil removal, creation of swimming pool, creation of ponds or tree clearing over 100 square feet * t. Grading, excavation, filling, soil removal, creation of ponds, installation of a swimming pool or clearing of trees within an area of less than 100 square feet * u. Modifications to nonconforming uses, buildings or sites, including a change to a more conforming situation; modifications to nonconforming single-family dwelling units shall be in accordance with provisions governing nonconforming uses, structures, and lots * v. Modifications to upgrade a building to improve barrier free design, comply with Americans with Disabilities Act or other federal, state or county regulations * w. Construction or erection of permitted accessory buildings and structures accessory to a single- or two-family dwelling unit * x. Construction, reconstruction, erection and/or expansion of single-family or two-family dwelling on parcel zoned solely for residential purposes * y. Development regulated by the Land Division Act of 1997 (P.A. 112) and the city subdivision control ordinance * z. Erection of essential public service local distribution lines * aa. Construction, erection or relocation of permitted accessory buildings and structures less than 100 square feet in area accessory to a multiple-family, commercial, office, essential service, municipal, or industrial use * bb. Keeping of pets as an accessory use without additional structures, except kennels * cc. Construction of accessory building or structure for the keeping of pets * dd. Accessory outdoor display of general retail items as determined by the building official/city manager * ee. Internal construction or change in the floor plan for a conforming use that does not increase gross floor area, provided the construction cost over a 12 month period does not exceed 50 percent of the building SEV or affect parking requirements on a site * ff. Construction or erection of signs, antennas, cooling/heating or other mechanical equipment, telephone booth, newspaper boxes, or similar structures which conform to other city standards and where site plan review is not specifically required under other sections of this article * gg. Any proposed building or use which does not qualify for sketch plan or exempt from any site plan review *  
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-413. - Planned unit developments, site condominiums, and condominium subdivisions. 
    Site plans for planned unit developments, site condominiums and condominium subdivisions shall be subject to the provisions of article VI, Planned Unit Development Standards. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-414. - Optional preliminary site plan review process. 
    The site plan approval process includes a review, at the option of the applicant, of a preliminary site plan by the planning commission. This option is recommended for site plans affecting over five acres, plans affecting locations designated in the city master plan as having significant natural features, sites containing floodplain or within the flood hazard zones, sites containing or potentially containing MDEQ-designated/regulated wetlands or sites regulated by MDEQ or other environmental grounds, special land uses and complex commercial developments. The review of a preliminary site plan allows the planning commission and city staff to review and comment on the project's compliance with the requirements of this article prior to the preparation of all the required site plan review materials. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-415. - Site plan submittal requirements. 
    The site plan shall include all the following information, unless the building official/city manager determines that some of the required information is not reasonably necessary: 
(a)  Application, form and fees. A completed application form, supplied by the city clerk, building official/zoning administrator, and an application fee; a separate escrow deposit may be required for administrative charges to review the site plan submittal; 
(b)  Proof of ownership. Current proof of ownership of the land to be utilized or evidence of a contractual ability to acquire such land, such as an option or purchase agreement. 
(c)  Project schedule. A narrative indicating the period of time within which the project will be completed. 
(d)  Copies. Fifteen copies of the site plan. 
(e)  Sheet size. Sheet size of submitted drawings shall be at least 24 inches by 36 inches, with graphics at an engineer's scale of one inch equals 20 feet. 
(f)  Cover sheet. Cover sheet providing: 
1.  Applicant's name. 
2.  Name of the development. 
3.  Preparer's name and professional seal of architect, engineer, surveyor, or landscape architect indicating license in the state. 
4.  Date of preparation and revision dates. 
5.  North arrow. 
6.  Property lines and dimensions. 
7.  Complete and current legal description and size of property in acres. 
8.  Small location sketch of sufficient size and scale to determine the site's location within the city. 
9.  Note on each plan sheet stating "Not to Be Used as Construction Drawings". 
(g)  Site plan. Plan sheet(s) indicating: 
1.  Zoning and current land use of applicant's property and all abutting properties and of properties across any public or private street from the site. 
2.  Lot lines and all structures on the property and within 100 feet of the site's property lines. 
3.  Location of any vehicle access points on both sides of the street within 100 feet of the site along streets where vehicle access to the site is proposed. 
4.  Existing buildings and any public or private easements, noting those which will remain and which are to be removed. 
5.  Layout and typical dimensions of proposed lots, footprints and dimensions of proposed buildings and structures; uses with the acreage allotted to each use; for residential developments, the number, type, and density of proposed housing units; if a multiphase development is proposed, identification of the areas included in each phase. 
6.  Elevations showing height, materials and colors for all proposed structures, including any residential units, shall be provided and considered part of the approved site plan; the building elevations must show all rooftop mechanical units along with the proposed method of screening. 
7.  Building footprints, setbacks, typical floor plans and a sketch of any ground mounted equipment to scale along with required screening. 
8.  Existing and proposed locations of utility services (with sizes), including storm drainage, retention or detention ponds, fire hydrants, and any public or private easements; notes shall be provided clearly indicating which existing services will remain and which will be removed. 
9.  Locations of all natural, historical, and architectural features; natural features shall include all woodlands, trees, wetlands, lakes, rivers, drainage ways, topography, etc. 
10.  Location(s) of any MDEQ-regulated wetland, including submission of a wetland delineation by a qualified wetland consultant, and indication of the status of application for an MDEQ wetland permit or copy of permit received including description of any wetland mitigation required; and location of other non-regulated wetland areas over two contiguous acres. 
11.  Location and method of screening for all waste receptacles including dumpsters and compactors, meeting the requirements of section 52-316, Waste receptacles and enclosures. 
12.  Location and dimensions of parking lots and spaces, and loading/unloading areas (including vehicle pathway to access loading area), and calculations to meet the requirements of sections 52-305 through 52-309, Off-Street Parking and Loading-Unloading Standards. 
13.  Details of exterior lighting meeting the requirements of article X, Lighting Standards including locations, height, method of shielding; and a photometric grid overlaid on the proposed site plan indicating the overall light intensity throughout the site (in footcandles). 
14.  Size, type, and location of proposed identification signs including: 
a.  Location, type, height and method of lighting for identification signs. 
b.  Location and type of any directional or regulatory/traffic control signs, with details for any sign not conforming to the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
15.  Details of site circulation and access design, including: 
a.  [Dimensions.] Dimensions of existing and proposed right-of-way lines, including those abutting the site, and names of abutting public streets. 
b.  [Pavement.] Indication of pavement widths and pavement type including internal service and access drives. 
c.  [Street dimensions.] Street horizontal and vertical dimensions, including curve radii. 
d.  [Access points.] Locations and dimensions of access points, including deceleration or passing lanes, distance from adjacent driveways or intersection streets, including those across a street. 
e.  [Sidewalks, bicycle paths.] Location of existing sidewalks and location and dimensions for proposed sidewalks and bicycle paths. 
f.  [Access easements.] Written verification of access easements or agreements, if applicable. 
h.  Landscape plan. A landscape plan in accordance with article VIII, Landscape Standards and Tree Replacement indicating proposed plant locations with common plant name, number, and size in caliper at installation. Berms, retaining walls or fences shall be shown with elevations from the surrounding average grade. 
i.  Grading plan. A site grading plan for all developments where grading will occur, with existing and proposed topography at a minimum of two-foot contour levels and with topography extending a minimum of 50 feet beyond the site in all directions and a general description of grades within 100 feet, and further where required to indicate stormwater runoff into an approved drain or detention/retention pond. 
j.  Stormwater management plan. A general description and location of stormwater management system shall be shown on the grading plan, including pre- and post-site development runoff calculations used for determination of stormwater management, and location and design (slope) of any retention/detention ponds. Stormwater outfall structures or basins constructed in a MDEQ-regulated wetland may require an MDEQ wetland permit; and, if constructed below the ordinary high water mark of an inland lake or stream, will require a permit under the Inland Lakes and Streams Act, PA 346 of 1972, as amended. Status of all such MDEQ permit applications or copies of permits with attached conditions shall be provided as applicable. 
k.  Additional items. Any additional graphics or written materials requested by the planning commission or city commission to assist the city in determining the compliance with the site plan standards, such as aerial photography, photographs, traffic impacts using trip generation rates recognized by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) for an average day and peak hour of the affected roadways, and impact on significant natural features and drainage. 
l.  Flood hazard zones. The following information shall be submitted as a part of an application for permission to commence any type of development within a flood hazard area zone: 
1.  The elevation of the ground floor and any basement floors of all structures. 
2.  A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
3.  Proof of development permission from appropriate city, state, and federal agencies as required, including a floodplain permit, approval, or letter of authority from the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality under authority of Act 245 of the Public Acts of 1929, as amended by Act 167 of the Public Acts of 1968, the Flood Plain Regulatory Authority. 
4.  Base flood elevation data where the proposed development is subject to Act 288 of the Public Acts of 1967, the Subdivision Control Act, or greater than five acres in size. 
5.  Additional information which may be reasonably necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this article 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-416. - Standards for site plan approval. 
    Based upon the following standards, the planning commission may recommend approval, approval with conditions or denial of the site plan: 
(a)  General. All elements of the site plan shall be designed to take into account the site's topography, existing historical and architectural features, the size and type of plot, the character of adjoining property and the traffic operations of adjacent streets. The site shall be developed so as not to impede the normal and orderly development or improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted in this article. 
(b)  Building design. The building design shall relate to the surrounding environment in regard to texture, scale, mass, proportion, and color. High standards of construction and quality materials will be incorporated into the new development in accordance with the requirements of section 52-314, Nonresidential development requirements. 
(c)  Preservation of significant natural features. Judicious effort shall be used to preserve the integrity of the land, existing topography, and natural features, in particular woodlands, MDEQ-designated/regulated wetlands, and, to a lesser extent, wetlands which are not regulated by the MDEQ. 
(d)  Landscaping. The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar as practical, by removing only those areas of vegetation or making those alterations to the topography which are reasonably necessary to develop the site in accordance with the requirements of this article. Landscaping shall be preserved and/or provided to ensure that proposed uses will be adequately buffered from one another and from surrounding public and private property. Landscaping, landscape buffers, and greenbelts shall be provided and designed in accordance with the provisions of article VIII, Landscape Standards and Tree Replacement. 
(e)  Streets. All streets shall be developed in accordance with the city subdivision control ordinance and construction standards, unless developed as a private road in accordance with the requirements of section 52-317, Private road standards. 
(f)  Access, driveways and circulation. Safe, convenient, uncongested, and well defined vehicular and pedestrian circulation within and to the site shall be provided and shall meet the following criteria: 
1.  Drives, streets, parking and other elements shall be designed to discourage through traffic, while promoting safe and efficient traffic operations within the site and at its access points. 
2.  All driveways shall meet the design and construction standards of the city. 
3.  Access to the site shall be designed to minimize conflicts with traffic on adjacent streets, particularly left turns into and from the site. 
4.  For uses having frontage and/or access on a major traffic route, as defined in the city master plan, the number, design, and location of access driveways and other provisions for vehicular circulation shall comply with the provisions of article XI, Access Management and Driveway Standards. 
(g)  Emergency vehicle access. All buildings or groups of buildings shall be arranged so as to permit necessary emergency vehicle access as required by the city fire and police department. 
(h)  Sidewalks, pedestrian and bicycle circulation. 
1.  The arrangement of public or common ways for vehicular and pedestrian circulation shall be connected to existing or planned streets and sidewalks/pedestrian or bicycle pathways in the area. 
2.  A pedestrian circulation system shall be separated from vehicular circulation system. 
3.  In order to ensure public safety, special pedestrian measures, such as crosswalks, crossing signals and other such facilities may be required in the vicinity of primary and secondary schools, playgrounds, local shopping area, fast food/service restaurants and other high traffic areas of pedestrians or bicycles. 
(i)  Barrier-free access. The site has been designed to provide barrier-free parking and pedestrian circulation. 
(j)  Parking. The number and dimensions of off-street parking spaces shall be sufficient to meet the minimum required by sections 52-305 through 52-309, Parking and Loading-Unloading Standards. However, where warranted by overlapping or shared parking arrangements, the planning commission or city council may reduce the required number of parking spaces if deemed in the best interest of the public. 
(k)  Loading and storage. All loading and unloading areas and outside storage areas shall be screened as determined by the planning commission in accordance with article VIII, Landscape Standards and Tree Replacement. 
1.  Soil erosion control. The site shall have adequate lateral support so as to ensure that there will be no erosion of soil or other materials. The final determination as to adequacy of, or need for, lateral support shall be made by the city engineer. 
2.  Utilities. Public water and sewer facilities shall be available or shall be provided for by the developer as part of the site development, where such systems are available. 
3.  Stormwater management. Appropriate measures shall be taken to ensure that removal of surface waters will not adversely affect neighboring properties or the public storm drainage system. Provisions shall be made to accommodate stormwater which complements the natural drainage patterns and wetlands, prevent erosion and the formation of dust. Sharing of stormwater facilities with adjacent properties shall be encouraged. The use of detention/retention ponds may be required. Surface water on all paved areas shall be collected at intervals so that it will not obstruct the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or create standing water. 
4.  Lighting. Exterior lighting, in accordance with article X, Lighting Standards, shall be arranged so that it is deflected away from adjacent properties and so that it does not impede the vision of traffic along adjacent streets. Flashing or intermittent lights shall not be permitted. 
5.  Noise. The site has been designed, buildings so arranged, and activities/equipment programmed to minimize the emission of noise, particularly for sites adjacent to residential districts. 
6.  Mechanical equipment and utilities. Mechanical equipment and utilities, roof, building and ground mounted, shall be screened in accordance with the requirements of section 52-313, Mechanical equipment and utilities. 
7.  Waste receptacles. Waste receptacles shall be provided as required in section 52-316, Waste receptacles and enclosures. 
8.  Signs. The standards of article IX, Signs must be met. 
9.  Hazardous materials or waste. For businesses utilizing, storing or handling hazardous material such as automobile service and automobile repair stations, automobile body repair stations, dry cleaning plants, metal plating industries, and other industrial uses, documentation of compliance with state and federal requirements shall be provided. 
10.  Other agency reviews. The applicant has provided documentation of compliance with other appropriate agency review standards, including, but not limited to, the MDEQ, MDOT, Clare County Drain Commission, Clare County Health Department, and other federal and state agencies, as applicable. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-417. - Site plans with multiple phases. 
    The planning commission shall review site plans with multiple phases as a site plan meeting the submission requirements of article VII, Site Plan Submittal Requirements. Any future phases identified on a site plan must be reviewed by the planning commission in the form of a separate site plan submission. The planning commission may require that the conceptual layout for future phases and outlots be shown on site plans to ensure proper development of the overall site. When a future phase of development is identified on a site plan, however, the planning commission is not bound by any aspect of that portion of the plan until a site plan meeting the requirements of this article have been provided. In addition, any phase of a site plan where construction has not commenced within one year from the date of approval must return to the planning commission for a new site plan approval. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-418. - Conditions of site plan approval. 
(a)  As part of an approval to any site plan, the planning commission may impose any additional conditions or limitations as in its judgment may be necessary to ensure that public services and facilities can accommodate the proposed site plan and its activities, to protect significant natural features and the environment, and to ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses. Such conditions shall be considered necessary by the planning commission to ensure compliance with the review standards of section 52-415, Standards for site plan approval, and necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(b)  Approval of a site plan, including conditions made as part of the approval, is attached to the property described as part of the application and not to the owner of such property or holder of the site plan. 
(c)  A record of conditions imposed shall be recorded on the site plan and maintained. The conditions shall remain unchanged unless an amendment to the site plan is approved in accordance with section 52-421, Deviations from approved site plan. 
(d)  A record of the decision of the planning commission, the reason for the decision reached and any conditions attached to such decision shall be kept and made a part of the minutes of the planning commission. 
(e)  The building official/city manager may require that the applicant review and resubmit a site plan in compliance with the conditions imposed by the planning commission. Should resubmittal be required, all modifications shall be highlighted on the plan in such a manner that the modifications are easily identified. The building office/city manager shall have authority to approve the site plan. 
(f)  The building official/city manager may make periodic investigations of developments for which site plans have been approved. Noncompliance with the requirements and conditions of the approved site plan shall constitute grounds for the planning commission to terminate such approval following a public hearing. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-419. - Validity of approved site plan. 
(a)  Approval of the site plan, including any phase of a multiphased site plan, is valid for a period of one year. If actual physical construction of a substantial nature of the improvements included in the approved site plan has not commenced and proceeded meaningfully toward completion during that period, the approval of the site plan shall be null and void. 
(b)  Upon written application filed prior to the termination of the one-year review period, the planning commission may authorize a single extension of the time limit for approval of a site plan for a further period of not more than one year. Such extension shall only be granted based on evidence from the applicant that the development has a likelihood of commencing construction within the extension period, the length of which shall be determined by the planning commission but which shall not exceed one year. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-420. - Appeals of site plan. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning commission in granting or denial of final site plan approval shall have the right to appeal the decision to the zoning board of appeals (ZBA). The appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within 21 business days of the decision of the planning commission. The appeal shall state the aggrieved parties' grounds for appeal. 
(b)  The filing of an appeal of a decision of the planning commission concerning a site plan shall act to stay any building permit issued for improvements on the property which is the subject of the appeal. 
(c)  On hearing such appeal, the ZBA shall review the record before the planning commission and shall determine whether or not there was support on the record for the original decision. The appellant shall not have the right to present new evidence, but shall be bound by the record before the planning commission. The ZBA shall approve the site plan if the requirements of this article and other applicable city ordinances are met, and prepare written findings on its decision on the appeal. 
(d)  An appeal of a ZBA decision concerning a site plan shall be to the Circuit Court of Clare County. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-421. - Deviations from approved site plan. 
    Amendments to the approved site plan may occur only under the following circumstances: 
(a)  An applicant or property owner who has been granted site plan approval shall notify the building official/city manager of any proposed amendment to such approved site plan. 
(b)  Minor changes may be approved by the city building official/city manager. The building official/city manager must provide, in writing to the planning commission, documentation that the proposed revision does not alter the basic design, compliance with the standards of this article, nor any specified conditions of the plan as agreed upon by the planning commission. In considering such a determination, the building official/city manager shall consider the following to be a minor change: 
1.  Change in size of structures, for residential buildings by up to five percent, provided that the overall density of units does not increase. 
2.  Change in square footage of nonresidential buildings by up to five percent or 1,000 square feet, whichever is smaller. 
3.  Alterations to horizontal and/or vertical elevations by up to five percent. 
4.  Movement of a building or buildings by no more than ten feet. 
5.  Increase in designated "areas not to be disturbed." 
6.  Replacement of plantings approved in the site plan landscape plan by similar types and sizes of landscaping which provides a similar screening effect on a one-to-one or greater basis, with approval of the building official/city manager. 
7.  Improvements to site access or circulation, such as inclusion of deceleration lanes, boulevards, curbing, pedestrian/bicycle paths, etc. 
8.  Changes of building materials to another of higher quality, as determined by the building official/city manager. 
9.  Changes in floor plans which do not alter the character of the use. 
10.  Slight modification of sign placement or reduction of size. 
11.  Relocation of sidewalks and/or refuse storage stations. 
12.  Internal rearrangement of parking lot which does not affect the number of parking spaces or alter access locations or design. 
13.  Changes required or requested by the city for safety reasons. 
(c)  Should the building official/city manager determine that the requested modification to the approved site plan is not minor, the planning commission shall be notified in writing that the site plan has been suspended, and, if construction has initiated, a stop work order shall be issued for the section of the project deemed not to be in compliance. Thereafter, the applicant may revise the site plan and submit to the building official/city manager for resubmission to the planning commission. All modifications must be highlighted in such a manner that the modifications to the approved plan are easily identified. 
(d)  Any deviation from the approved site plan, except as authorized in section 52-421, Deviations from approved site plan, shall be considered a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-422. - Projects eligible for sketch plan review and administrative approval. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this section is to permit submittal of a sketch plan in certain specific instances where a complete site plan is not considered essential to ensure compliance with the intent and standards of this chapter. The intent is to also provide for an administrative review by city staff of planning commission approved site plans for compliance with conditions as imposed by the planning commission. 
(b)  Eligibility. A sketch plan, rather than a complete site plan package, may be submitted for uses or activities identified in section 52-412, Uses requiring site plan review. 
(c)  Procedure. 
(1)  Sketch plan. The process for administrative approval of a sketch plan shall involve submittal of the sketch plan and required application form, and fee to the building official/city manager. The building official/city manager shall review the sketch plan in accordance with the same standards used by the planning commission for a full site plan. The building official/city manager shall make a report of administrative reviews to the planning commission. 
a.  The minimum contents of a sketch plan submitted for administrative review include: 
1.  General information including: 
a)  Completed application form and fee. 
b)  Title block with sheet number/title; name, address and telephone number of the applicant and firm or individual who prepared the plans; and date(s) of submission and any revisions (month, day, year). 
c)  Scale and north-point. 
d)  Location map drawn to a separate scale with north-point, showing surrounding land, water features, zoning and streets within a quarter mile. 
e)  Legal and common description of property including net acreage. 
f)  Identification and seal of registered or licensed architect, engineer, land surveyor, or landscape architect who prepared drawings. 
g)  Zoning classification of petitioner's parcel and all abutting parcels. 
h)  A note on each plan sheet stating "Not to Be Used as Construction Drawings." 
2.  Buildings and structures. 
a)  Existing and proposed buildings and parking lots with dimensions and setbacks. 
b)  Floor plan indicating existing and proposed uses. 
c)  Building elevations including materials and colors for all sides with proposed changes. 
3.  Parking and access. 
a)  Existing and proposed parking calculations. 
b)  Existing and proposed driveways. 
4.  Site data. 
a)  Existing and proposed landscaping illustrated on the plan and described in a plant list. 
b)  Proposed changes to grading and other natural features. 
c)  Existing and proposed lighting and screening. 
d)  Proposed changes to utilities. 
e)  Any other items requested by the building official/city manager to assist in the administrative review. 
b.  Planning commission approved site plan. If the administrative review consists of a review of an approved site plan with conditions by the planning commission, the complete site plan must be submitted with all revisions highlighted in such a manner that all modifications are easily identified. 
c.  Additional information. The building official/city manager retains the option to require additional information or a complete site plan for review by the planning commission, particularly for sites which do not comply with previously approved site plans, sites with parking deficiencies, sites abutting residential districts or sites experiencing problems with drainage, traffic, noise, aesthetics or other general health and safety issues. If a full site plan is required, the building official/city manager shall inform the applicant to submit a set of plans in accordance with this article within 14 days of receipt of the application. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-423. - As-built drawing. 
    As-built drawings shall be provided as required by the city engineer, city building department or city commission as determined from time to time. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-424. - Property maintenance after approval. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property for which site plan approval has been granted to maintain the property in accordance with the approved site design on a continuing basis until the property is razed, or until new zoning regulations supersede the regulations upon which site plan approval was based, or until a new site design is approved. This maintenance requirement includes healthy landscaping, walls, fences, pavement, pavement markings, signs, building exterior, litter and debris control, drainage facilities and all other elements of a site. 
(b)  Any property owner who fails to so maintain an approved site plan shall be deemed in violation of the provisions of this article and shall be subject to the same penalties appropriate for a violation. 
(c)  With respect to condominium projects, the master deed shall contain provisions describing the responsibilities of the condominium association, condominium owners, and public entities, with regard to maintenance of the property in accordance with the approved site plan on a continuing basis. The master deed shall further establish the means of permanent financing for required maintenance and improvement activities which are the responsibility of the condominium association. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Secs. 52-25-52-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TREES AND LANDSCAPING 

Sec. 52-430. - Purpose. 
(a)  The intent of this article is to promote the public health, safety and welfare by establishing minimum standards for the design, installation and maintenance of landscape improvements. Landscaping is viewed as a critical element contributing to the aesthetics, development quality, stability of property values, and the overall character of the city. The standards of this article are intended to help achieve a number of functional and environmental objectives such as: 
(1)  Promoting the implementation of the city master plan and sub-area studies. 
(2)  Defining and articulating outdoor spaces and architectural elements. 
(3)  Obscuring, integrating and complementing various site elements. 
(4)  Assisting in directing safe and efficient movement of vehicular and pedestrian circulation. 
(5)  Screening headlights to reduce glare and incidental pollution. 
(6)  Reducing the physical impact between adjacent land uses. 
(7)  Providing landscape treatments that are consistent with adjacent sites and parcels within the surrounding area. 
(8)  Providing incentives to preserve quality existing plant material. 
(9)  Providing reasonable standards to bring developed sites, which existed prior to the adoption of these standards, into compliance with the requirements contained herein. 
(b)  The standards contained in this article are considered the minimum necessary to achieve the objectives identified above. In several instances these standards are intentionally flexible to encourage flexibility and creative design. Additional landscaping beyond the minimum specified is encouraged to further improve the function, appearance and value of the property. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-431. - Landscape plan specifications. 
(a)  A separate detailed landscape plan shall be submitted as part of the site plan review process. 
(b)  The landscape plan shall demonstrate that all requirements of this article are met and shall: 
(1)  Illustrate location, spacing, species, and size of proposed plant material. 
(2)  Separately identify compliance with the minimum numeric requirements for greenbelts, buffer zones, parking lot trees, detention ponds, and interior landscaping; required trees or materials cannot be double counted. 
(3)  If applicable, identify compliance with the numeric requirements for tree replacement and preservation. 
(4)  Provide, as determined by the planning commission, typical cross sections to illustrate views from adjacent land uses and the slope, height and width of proposed berms or landscape elements. 
(5)  Identify trees and other landscape elements to be preserved. 
(6)  Delineate the location of tree protection fence and limits of grading at the perimeter of areas that are to be preserved. 
(7)  Provide significant construction details to resolve specific conditions such as limits of grading adjacent to areas with trees and vegetative cover to be preserved, tree wells to preserve existing trees or culverts to maintain natural drainage patterns. 
(8)  Provide details to ensure proper installation and establishment of proposed plant material. 
(9)  Identify grass areas and other methods of ground cover. 
(10)  Identify a landscape maintenance program including a statement that all diseased, damaged or dead materials shall be replaced in accordance with standards of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-432. - Replacement of removed trees. 
    A tree survey shall be submitted with any site plan for new development. The survey shall identify the location, species, and size of existing trees on the proposed site. Existing trees that are greater than eight caliper inches that are planned to be removed shall be replaced on the site in accordance with the following standards: 
(a)  Removed trees between eight and 18 caliper inches shall be replaced at a rate of 50 percent of the total diameter breast height (DBH). 
(b)  Removed trees greater than 18 caliper inches shall be replaced at a rate of 75 percent of the total dbh. 
(c)  Removed trees greater than 30 caliper inches shall be replaced at a rate of 100 percent of the total dbh. 
(d)  Trees that are dead or diseased, with no visible growth, as determined by the building official/zoning administrator, are exempt from replacement requirements. 
(e)  A summary table of existing trees shall be provided, indicating those trees that will be removed. Said summary table shall include the common name of each tree, its botanical name, the size of the tree, its condition, and any replacement calculations regarding any replacement necessary under this chapter. 
* Diameter at breast height (dbh) is the diameter measured at a height of four and one-half feet above the natural grade. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-433. - Design standards. 
(a)  Greenbelts. A greenbelt shall be planted or preserved along public rights-of-way and designated frontage roads. The greenbelt is intended to provide a transition between the roadway and an existing or proposed land use. Greenbelts shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  The width of the greenbelt shall be 35 feet in residential districts and equivalent to the minimum required parking lot setback in nonresidential districts. 
(2)  Greenbelts shall include only living materials and planting beds, except for approved sidewalks, bike paths, signs, driveways, and essential services. 
(3)  Where sidewalks are located within the greenbelt, plant materials shall be provided on each side of the pathway to provide visual and physical separation between the vehicular and pedestrian circulation. 
(4)  The greenbelt shall contain two canopy trees per 40 linear feet and six shrubs per 30 linear feet, or fraction thereof, of street frontage including any openings for driveways, pathways, or easements. The planning commission may approve the substitution of evergreen trees for up to 50 percent of the required canopy trees when appropriate in consideration of the land use and existing character of adjacent uses. 
(5)  Ornamental trees may be used to diversity (diversify) greenbelt planting requirements, provided two ornamental trees shall be provided for each one required canopy tree. 
(6)  Greenbelt plantings shall be arranged to simulate a natural setting such as massing or staggered rows, except where the planning commission finds a more formal arrangement would be consistent with the established character of the area. 
(7)  Greenbelts shall be designed to ensure adequate sight visibility for motorists, adequate clearance for pedestrians and vehicles, clearance from overhead utility lines, adequate separation from underground utilities and accessibility to fire hydrants. Where such conditions prohibit full compliance, the planning commission may adjust the location of the required materials so long as the design intent is met. 
(b)  Buffer zones. 
(1)  A buffer shall be provided between the subject site and all adjacent properties, developed or undeveloped, in accordance with the following table. 
(2)  The planning commission shall use the table as the minimum requirements necessary and determine whether landscaping, a wall, a berm, or combination of these elements are needed to attain the intended screening. 
(3)  The use of canopy trees and associated understory are encouraged while walls and berms are discouraged. 
Buffer Zones Zoning or Use of Adjacent Site Zoning or proposed use of 
subject site Single- 
family Multiple-Family Manufactured 
housing Office Medical or Municipal Use Central Business District Commercial Industrial Single-family None B A B A A A A Multiple-family B None A B A A A A Manufactured Housing A A None A A A A A Office B B A None B B B B Commercial A A A B B B None A Industrial A A A B A A A None Outdoor Storage Areas in Any district A A A B B A A B Public Utility Buildings And Structures In any District A A A A A A A B Parking Lots A A A B B B B B  
Buffer Zone A 30-foot minimum width, along the property line with two canopy trees and four shrubs, or one canopy tree, one evergreen and four shrubs per 27 linear feet, rounded upward, and including a wall, berm or combination of these elements as determined by the planning commission. Buffer Zone B Ten-foot minimum width, along the property line with one canopy tree and four shrubs, or one evergreen tree and four shrubs per 27 linear feet, rounded upward. Along U.S. 127 or U.S. 27 right-of-way A six-foot high berm shall be provided and meet the planting requirements of buffer A.  
(c)  Parking lot landscaping. Parking lot landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Landscaping shall be dispersed evenly throughout the parking lot in order to break up large expanses of pavement and assist with vehicular and pedestrian flow. 
(2)  At least one canopy tree shall be provided per ten parking spaces provided. 
(3)  All of the required parking lot trees shall be placed within the parking lot envelope as described by the area including the parking lot surface and extending outward ten feet from the edge of the parking lot. 
(4)  A minimum of one-third of the trees shall be placed within the parking lot envelope. 
(5)  Parking lot islands shall be curbed and be at least 100 square feet in area. Islands within parking lots having less than 100 spaces may be a minimum of ten feet in width, parking areas with more than 100 spaces shall have islands at least 20 feet in width. The depth of the island shall be two feet shorter than an adjacent parking space. 
(6)  Only trees, shrubs, grass or other living ground cover shall be used within parking lot islands. Natural colored bark mulch shall be permitted to enhance living materials as necessary. 
(7)  The design and layout of the parking lots shall provide appropriate pedestrian circulation and connections to perimeter pedestrian connections. 
(d)  Detention/retention pond landscaping. Ponds shall be located outside required setbacks and designed to provide a natural appearance. Detention and retention ponds shall be provided in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Side slopes shall be such that the perimeter of the pond shall not need to be fenced. 
(2)  One canopy or evergreen tree and ten shrubs are required per 50 feet of pond perimeter, as measured along the top of the bank elevation. The required landscaping shall be planted in a random pattern, not limited to the top of the pond bank. 
(3)  Where a natural landscape is found not to be particular or desirable the planning commission may require some type of decorative fencing, or fencing for safety purposes. 
(e)  Interior site landscaping. Site landscaping shall be located near building entrances, along building foundations, along pedestrian walkways, near service areas or as landscaped plazas. 
(f)  Residential and site condominium developments. Landscaping for single-family and multiple-family residential developments shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Street trees shall be provided at a rate of one tree per 40 linear feet of frontage, or thereof, along all interior roads. The planning commission may determine that existing trees preserved within ten feet of the road edge may fulfill the street tree requirement for that portion of the road. Trees should generally be planted between the sidewalk and road curb, in consideration of intersection sight distance. 
(2)  The landscape plan shall also include details of the cul-de-sac islands, project entrances, accessory buildings and common open space areas. 
(g)  Right-of-way landscaping. Public rights-of-way located adjacent to required landscaped areas shall be considered part of the required landscaped areas. Such areas shall be planted with grass or other suitable living plant material and maintained by the owner or occupant of the property. Trees and shrubs may be planted within the right-of-way with permission from the appropriate authority with jurisdiction over the street. 
(h)  Accessory site components. In addition to required screens or walls, site elements such as waste receptacles, air conditioner units, utility boxes and other similar components shall be appropriately screened with plant material. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 2008-01, 3-3-2008) 
Sec. 52-434. - Specifications for landscape improvements and plant materials. 
(a)  Wall standards. While walls are not necessarily encouraged, certain situations may be appropriate for a provision of a wall. When provided, walls shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Walls shall be located on the lot line or within the required setback when it is desired to have plant material on both sides of the wall. 
(2)  Walls shall be continuous except for openings for pedestrian connections as approved by the planning commission. 
(3)  Walls shall be constructed of the primary building material of the principal structure as determined by the planning commission. 
(4)  The height of any wall shall be as determined by the planning commission based on the intended screening. 
(b)  Berm standards. While berms are not necessarily encouraged, they may be appropriate in certain situations. Instances where wider open spaces are available between uses, the planning commission may allow the substitution of a berm with additional landscaping in place of the wall requirement. Berms shall be constructed with horizontal and vertical undulations so as to represent a natural appearance with a crest area at least four feet in width. Berms shall be planted with trees, shrubs or lawn to ensure that it remains stable. The exterior face of the berm shall be constructed as a earthen slope. The interior face of the berm may be constructed as an earthen slope or retained by means of a wall, terrace or other similar method. The maximum slope of the berm shall not exceed one foot of vertical rise to three feet of horizontal distance. 
(c)  Plant material. All plant materials shall be hardy to the city, be free of disease and insects and conform to the American Standard for Nursery Stock of the American Nurserymen. 
(d)  Minimum sizes and spacing. The minimum plant sizes and spacing shall be provided in accordance with the following: Wherever screening is required, screening shall consist of closely spaced evergreen plantings which can be reasonably expected to form a complete visual barrier. Deciduous plant material may be used for variety to supplement evergreen plantings. 
Minimum Sizes and Spacing Type of Plant Material Minimum Plant Sizes Spacing Requirements Deciduous canopy trees 21/2" caliper 25' on-center Ornamental trees 2" caliper 6' height (clump form) 15' on-center Evergreen trees 6' height 15' on-center Narrow evergreen trees 4' height 12' on-center Deciduous shrubs 2' height 4'-6' on-center Upright evergreen shrubs 2' height 3'-4' on-center Spreading evergreen shrubs 18"-24" spread 6' on-center  
(e)  Mixing of species. The overall landscape plan shall not contain more than 33 percent of any one plant species. The use of native species and mixture of trees from the same species association is strongly encouraged. 
(f)  Trees not permitted. The following trees are not permitted as they split easily, their wood is brittle, their roots clog drains and sewers, and they are unusually susceptible to disease or insects. The planning commission may however allow trees from this list when associated with an appropriate ecosystem. Trees not permitted are as follows: Box elder, elms, tree of heaven, willows, soft maples (silver), poplars, horse chestnut (nut bearing), ash ginkgo (female), cottonwood, mulberry, black locust, honey locust (with thorns). Elms which have been demonstrated to be disease-resistant may be used. 
(g)  Planting beds. Bark used as mulch shall be maintained at minimum of two inches deep. Planting beds shall be edged with plastic, metal, brick or stone in residential districts and metal edging in all other zoning districts. 
(h)  Topsoil. Topsoil shall consist of a four-inch base for lawn areas and an eight- to 12-inch base within planting beds. 
(i)  Proximity to utilities. Plant material shall not be located in a manner that will interfere with or cause damage to underground utility lines, public roads or other public facilities. 
(j)  Lawn grasses. Lawn grasses shall be planted in species normally grown as permanent lawns in Clare County. Grasses may be plugged, sprigged, seeded or sodded except that rolled sod, erosion-reducing net or suitable mulch shall be used in swales or other areas susceptible to erosion and shall be staked where necessary for stabilization. When complete sodding or seeding is not used, nursegrass seed shall be sown and mulched for immediate protection until permanent coverage is achieved. Grass sod and seed shall be free of weeds and noxious pests or disease. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-435. - Minimum standards for installation, irrigation and maintenance. 
(a)  Timing of planting. All required plant material shall be planted prior to issuing a final certificate of occupancy. In the event that the project is completed during a time of year when planning [planting] is impractical, a financial guarantee in the amount of the remaining improvements shall be provided in a form of payment acceptable to the city. 
(b)  Completion of improvements. Tree stakes, guy wires and tree wrap shall be removed after completion of the initial growing season. 
(c)  Irrigation. All landscaped areas shall be provided with an underground irrigation system. 
(d)  Maintenance. Landscaped areas and plant materials required by this chapter shall be kept free from refuse and debris. Plant materials, including lawn, shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance in accordance with the approved site plan. If any plant material dies or becomes diseased, it shall be replaced within 30 days' written notice from the city or within an extended time period as specified in said notice. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-436. - Standards for compliance for existing sites. 
    In any case where the building and/or parking area is being increased by at least 25 percent over the originally approved site plan or is being changed to a more intense use as determined by the planning commission, the site shall be brought into full compliance with the landscape standards herein. In instances where the increase in building and/or parking area is less than 25 percent over the original site plan, the extent of new landscaping shall be equal to four percent of compliance for every one percent of increase in building or parking footprint. For example, a building or parking area increase of ten percent requires 40 percent compliance with the landscape standards. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
ARTICLE IX. - SIGNS 

Sec. 52-437. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate signs and to minimize outdoor advertising within the city so as to protect public safety, health and welfare; minimize abundance and size of signs to reduce visual clutter, motorist distraction, and loss of sight distance; promote public convenience; preserve property values; support and complement land use objectives as set forth in the city master plan and this chapter; and enhance the aesthetic appearance and quality of life within the city. The standards contained herein are intended to be content neutral. 
    These objectives are accomplished by establishing the minimum amount of regulations necessary concerning the size, placement, construction, illumination, and other aspects of signs in the city so as to: 
(a)  Recognize that the proliferation of signs is unduly distracting to motorists and nonmotorized travelers, reduces the effectiveness of signs directing and warning the public, causes confusion, reduces desired uniform traffic flow, and creates potential for accidents. 
(b)  Prevent signs that are potentially dangerous to the public due to structural deficiencies or disrepair. 
(c)  Reduce visual pollution and physical obstructions caused by a proliferation of signs which would diminish the city's image, property values and quality of life. 
(d)  Recognize that the principal intent of commercial signs, to meet the purpose of these standards and serve the public interest, should be for identification of an establishment on the premises, and not for advertising special events, brand names, or off-premises activities; alternative channels of advertising communication and media are available for advertising which do not create visual blight and compromise traffic safety. 
(e)  Enable the public to locate goods, services and facilities without excessive difficulty and confusion by restricting the number and placement of signs. 
(f)  Prevent placement of signs which will conceal or obscure signs of adjacent uses. 
(g)  Protect the public right to receive messages, especially noncommercial messages such as religious, political, economic, social, philosophical and other types of information protected by the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. 
(h)  The regulations and standards of this article are considered the minimum necessary to achieve a substantial government interest for public safety, aesthetics, protection of property values, and are intended to be content neutral. 
(i)  Prevent off-premises signs from conflicting with other allowed land uses. 
(j)  Maintain and improve the image of the city by encouraging signs of consistent size which are compatible with and complementary to related buildings and uses, and harmonious with their surroundings. 
(k)  Prohibit portable commercial signs in recognition of their significant negative impact on traffic safety and aesthetics. 
(l)  Preserve and enhance the image of the city's commercial areas. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-438. - Sign definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Accessory sign. A sign which pertains to the use of the premises on which it is located. 
    Animated sign. A sign which uses lights, moving parts, or other means to depict action, create an image of a living creature or person, or create a special effect or scene. 
    Awning or canopy sign. A nonrigid fabric marquee or awning-type structure which is attached to the building by supporting framework, which includes a business identification message, symbol and/or logo. See "Wall sign." 
    Banner. A fabric, plastic or other sign made of nonrigid material without enclosing structural framework. 
    Billboard. A sign separate from a premises erected for the purpose of advertising a product, event, person, or subject not related to the premises on which the sign is located. Permitted off-premises directional signs shall not be considered billboards for the purpose of this article. 
    Business center. A grouping of two or more business establishments on one or more parcels of property which may share parking and access and are linked architecturally or otherwise present the appearance of a unified grouping of businesses. A business center shall be considered one use for the purposes of determining the maximum number of ground signs. An automobile or vehicle dealership shall be considered a business center regardless of the number or type of models or makes available, however, used vehicle sales shall be considered a separate use in determining the maximum number of signs, provided that the used vehicle sales section of the lot includes at least 25 percent of the available sales area. 
    Changeable message sign. A sign on which the message is changed mechanically, electronically or manually, including time/temperature signs; also called menu board, reader board or bulletin board. 
    Community special event sign. Signs and banners, including decorations and displays celebrating a traditionally-accepted patriotic or religious holiday, or special municipal, school or other nonprofit activities. 
    Construction sign. A temporary sign identifying the name(s) of project owners, contractors, developers, realtors representing developers, architects, designers, engineers, landscape architects, and financiers of a project being constructed or improved; and not including any advertising of any product or announcement of availability of leasing space. 
    Directional sign. A sign which assist motorists in determining or confirming a correct route such as enter, exit and parking signs. Business identification or logo on such a sign is considered and calculated as part of the allowable square footage for a ground sign. 
    Festoon. A string of ribbons, tinsel, small flags, pinwheels or lights, typically strung overhead in loops. 
    Flashing sign. A sign which contains an intermittent or sequential flashing light source. 
    Freestanding sign. A sign which is erected upon or supported by the ground, including "pole or pylon signs" and "ground signs." 
    Gasoline price sign. A sign which is used to advertise the price of gasoline. In the event that the brand identification sign is attached to or is a part of the sign advertising price, that portion of the sign used for advertising price shall be considered the gasoline price sign. 
    Ground or monument sign. A three-dimensional, self-supporting, base-mounted freestanding identification sign, consisting of two or more sides extending up from the base, and upon which a message, business, group of businesses or center name is affixed. 
    Illegal sign. A sign which does not meet the requirements of this article and does not have legal nonconforming status. 
    Incidental sign. A small sign, emblem, or decal informing the public of goods, facilities, or services available on the premises. Examples of incidental signs include credit card signs, signs indicating the hours of business, no smoking signs, [signs] used to designate bathrooms, and signs providing information on credit cards and business affiliations. 
    Integral sign. A memorial sign or commemorative tablet which contains names of buildings, dates of erection, and monumental citations. 
    Luminous tube. See "Neon (sign)" and "Outline tubing sign." 
    Mansard. A sloped roof or roof-like facade. Signs mounted on the face of a mansard roof shall be considered wall signs. 
    Marquee. A permanent roof-like structure or canopy, supported by and extending from the face of the building. A marquee sign is a sign attached to or supported by a marquee structure. 
    Menu board, reader board or bulletin board. See "Changeable message sign". 
    Moving sign. A sign in which the sign itself or any portion of the sign moves or revolves. A "rotating sign" is a type of moving sign. Such motion does not refer to the method of changing the message on the sign. 
    Mural. A design or representation which is painted or drawn on the exterior surface of a structure and which does not advertise a business, product, service, or activity. 
    Nameplate. A nonelectric on-premises identification sign giving only the name, address, and/or occupation of an occupant or group of occupants. 
    Neon sign. See "Outline tubing sign." 
    Nonconforming sign. A sign that does not comply with the size, placement, construction or other standards or regulations of this article, but were lawfully established prior to its adoption. Signs for which the zoning board of appeals has granted a variance are exempt and shall not be defined as nonconforming. 
    Obsolete sign. A sign that advertises a product that is no longer made or that advertises a business that has closed. 
    Off-premises sign. A sign which identifies a use or advertises products and services not available on the site or parcel on which the sign is located; a sign which directs travelers or provides a message unrelated to the site on which the sign is located, e.g. billboards. 
    On-premises sign. A sign providing the address and name of owner of a parcel of land; a sign advertising a business, service or product sold or produced on the same site or parcel. 
    Outline tubing sign. A sign consisting of glass tubing, filled with a gas such as neon, which glows when electric current is sent through it. See "Neon (sign)" and "Luminous tube". 
    Parapet. The extension of a false front or wall above a roof line. Signs mounted on the face of a parapet shall be considered wall signs. 
    Permanent sign. A sign designed to be installed permanently in the ground a minimum of 42 inches deep by use of a steel post, wood post or other appropriate materials. 
    Political sign. A temporary sign used in connection with local, state or national elections or referendums. 
    Portable sign. A sign designed to be moved from place to place, whether or not it is permanently attached to the ground or structure. This includes hot-air and gas-filled balloons, banners, pennants, streamers, festoons, ribbons, tinsel, pinwheels, nongovernment flags, and searchlights; but excludes political signs, real estate signs, construction signs, permanent changeable message signs, and regulatory/government signs. 
    Poster panel sign. A type of temporary sign that is used to draw attention to matters that are temporary in nature, such as price changes or sales. "A"-frame or sandwich signs are types of poster panel signs. 
    Projecting sign. A sign, other than a wall sign, that is affixed to any building or wall and whose leading edge extends more than 12 inches beyond such building or wall. 
    Public sign. A sign erected in the public interest by or upon orders from a city, state, or federal public official. Examples of public signs include: legal notices, safety signs, traffic signs, memorial plaques, signs of historical interest and similar signs. 
    Pylon or pole sign. A sign supported on the ground by a pole, braces or monument, and not attached to any building or other structure. 
    Real estate development sign. A sign that is designed to promote the sale or rental of lots, homes, or building space in a real estate development (such as a subdivision or shopping center) which is under construction on the parcel on which the sign is located. 
    Real estate open house sign. Temporary signs which advertise and direct the public to an open house for a building which is available for sale or lease, with the event held on a specific day. 
    Real estate sign. An on-premises temporary sign advertising the property or structure's availability for sale or lease. 
    Regulatory sign. A sign installed by a public agency to direct traffic flow, regulate traffic operations and provide information in conformance with the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
    Residential entranceway sign. A sign which marks the entrance to a subdivision, apartment complex, condominium development, or other residential development. 
    Roof line. The top edge of a roof or building parapet, whichever is higher, excluding cupolas, pylons, chimneys, or similar minor projections. 
    Roof sign. Any sign that extends above the roof line or is erected over the surface of the roof. 
    Rotating sign. See "Moving sign." 
    Sign. Any device, structure, fixture, figure, symbol, banner, pennant, flag, balloon, logo, or placard consisting of written copy, symbols, logos and/or graphics, designed for the purpose of bringing attention to, identifying or advertising an establishment, project, goods, services, or other message to the general public. Unless otherwise indicated, the definition of "sign" includes interior and exterior signs which are visible from any public street, sidewalk, alley, park, or public property, but not signs which are primarily visible to and directed at persons within the premises upon which the sign is located. 
    Temporary sign. A sign not constructed or tended for longterm use. Examples of temporary signs include signs which announce a coming attraction, a new building under construction, a community or civic project, or other special events that occur for a limited period of time. 
    Time and temperature sign. Signs which display the current time and/or temperature. 
    Vehicle sign. Signs painted or mounted on the side of a vehicle, including signs on the face of a truck trailer. 
    Wall sign. A sign attached parallel to and extending not more than 12 inches from the wall of a building. Painted signs, signs which consist of individual letters, cabinet signs, and signs mounted on the face of a mansard roof shall be considered wall signs. Permanent signs which are not affixed directly to a window or are positioned next to a window so that they are visible from the outside shall also be considered wall signs. 
    Window sign. A sign located in or on a window which is intended to be viewed from the outside. Permanent window signs which are not affixed directly to a window or are positioned next to a window so that they are visible form the outside shall be considered wall signs. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-439. - Exempt signs. 
    The following signs are specifically exempt from the provisions of this article provided they are not located in the public right-of-way or in conflict with the regulations found elsewhere in this chapter: 
(a)  Address numbers with a numeral height no greater than six inches for residences and 18 inches for businesses. 
(b)  Banners advertising a public entertainment or event, provided that they receive a permit from the city commission, are only used in a location designated by the city commission, and are erected no more than 14 days before the event they advertise and are removed within one business day following the event. 
(c)  Barber poles, time and temperature signs which do not contain business messages, provided that the maximum square footage of the electronic time/temperature sign does not exceed 32 square feet. 
(d)  Construction signs provided that there shall be only one such sign per construction project; with a maximum height of six feet; not exceeding 32 square feet in area; set back a minimum 15 feet from any property line or public street right-of-way; and that such signs shall be erected during the construction period only and shall be removed within 14 days of the date a final approval for occupancy is issued. 
(e)  Corporate flags, provided the maximum height of the flagpole is 25 feet measured from the average surrounding grade, the maximum size of the corporate flag is 35 square feet, there shall be no more than one corporate flag per lot; corporate flags and banners shall be prohibited on buildings, light poles, and freestanding signs. 
(f)  Flags or insignia of any nation, state, city, community organization, educational institution, noncommercial enterprise, college or university provided that any American flag displayed shall be done so in compliance with Public Law 94-344 and shall never be used for advertising purposes in any manner whatsoever. 
(g)  Garage and estate sale signs announcing the sale of household goods, provided that there is only one sign per premises; that the sign is placed on-premises only, entirely on private property; that it is set back a minimum of 15 feet from any property line or public street right-of-way; that it does not exceed six square feet in area; and it is erected no more than ten business days before and is removed within one business day after the announced sale. 
(h)  Gas station pump signs on gas station pump islands or their structural supports identifying "self-serve" and "full-serve" operations, provided that there is no business identification or advertising copy on such signs, that there are no more than two such signs per pump island and that such signs do not exceed four square feet in area. 
(i)  "Help wanted" signs soliciting employees for the place of business where posted, provided that the maximum area for all such signs shall be a maximum of six square feet. 
(j)  Historical plaques and sign plaques or signs describing state or national designation as a historic site or structure and/or containing narrative, not exceeding 12 square feet in area. 
(k)  Incidental signs not exceeding a total of two square feet, a total of two signs per business indicating acceptance of credit cards or describing business affiliations and are attached to a permitted sign, exterior wall, building entrance or window. 
(l)  Integral signs including memorial signs, names of buildings, dates of erection, monumental citations, commemorative tablets when carved into stone, concrete or similar materials or made of bronze, aluminum or other noncombustible materials and made an integral part of the structure and not exceeding 25 square feet in area. 
(m)  Open-front restaurant signs provided that such signs are affiliated with a permitted open-front restaurant, are mounted on the wall of the building, are removed when/if the business is closed for the season, and do not exceed six square feet in area. 
(n)  Parking lot signs indicating restrictions on parking, when placed within a permitted parking lot, are a maximum of six feet in height, and do not exceed three square feet in area. 
(o)  Permanent signs on vending machines, gas pumps, and ice containers indicating the contents, provided that the sign on each device does not exceed the area of the front of the machine, a limit of one sign per vending machine, gas pump or ice container. 
(p)  Political signs, provided that the property contains an occupied structure; such signs are not placed within the public street right-of-way line; such signs are spaced at least ten feet apart; such signs do not exceed four square feet in area; and that such signs are removed within one business day following the election for which they are erected. 
(q)  Public signs including warning signs, such as no trespassing, warning of electrical currents or animals, provided that such signs do not exceed two square feet in area. 
(r)  Real estate model signs directing the public to a model home or unit, provided that such signs are temporary, set back a minimum of 15 feet from any property line or public right-of-way and are placed on-premise(s) only; a maximum of one model sign per parcel and/or residential unit which does not exceed six square feet in area. 
(s)  Real estate open house signs provided the following conditions are met: 
1.  There shall be only two such signs placed off-premises and one on-premises. 
2.  The size of each sign shall be a maximum of four square feet in size and three feet in height above grade. 
3.  Signs shall not be affixed to other signs, utility poles, fire hydrants or trees. 
4.  Signs may be located in the public right-of-way but shall be placed at least ten feet from the curb or 15 feet from the pavement edge where there is no curb. 
5.  The person or firm placing the signs shall obtain the written permission from the owner or occupant of all properties on which such signs are placed. 
6.  The signs shall be allowed for a maximum of eight hours per day. 
7.  The signs shall be removed within one hour following closing of the open house. 
(t)  Real estate signs provided that there shall be only one real estate sign per parcel for each public street frontage, such signs are set back a minimum of 15 feet from any property line or public right-of-way, that the maximum height of any such sign shall be six feet, and such signs shall not exceed six square feet in area within any residential districts; 12 feet in area for all other districts. 
(u)  Residential nameplates and home occupations signs identifying the occupants of the building or for professional purposes shall be limited to one per dwelling and not to exceed two square feet in area; the sign shall not be illuminated and must be attached to an exterior building wall. 
(v)  Roadside stand signs provided that such signs are set back a minimum of 15 feet from any property line or public right-of-way, have a maximum height of six feet, that there are a maximum of three such signs on any parcel, that no such sign exceeds 32 square feet in area. 
(w)  Traffic control signs including regulatory and directional traffic control and street signs erected by a public agency in compliance with Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-440. - Prohibited signs. 
    The following signs shall be prohibited in any district: 
(a)  Signs which obstruct free access or egress from any building, including those that obstruct any fire escape, required exitway, window, or door opening or that prevent free access to the roof by firefighters. 
(b)  Signs having moving members or parts, excluding barber poles, electronic poles and electronic time/temperature signs which do not contain business messages. 
(c)  Signs using high intensity or flashing lights, festoons, spinners or other animated devices. 
(d)  Exterior string lights used in connection with a commercial enterprise, other than holiday decorations which are strung no more than 60 days before the holiday and removed within ten days following the holiday for which they were erected. 
(e)  Signs which in any way simulate or could be confused with the lighting of emergency vehicles or traffic signals; there shall be no flashing, oscillating or intermittent, or red, yellow, or green illumination on any sign located in the same line of vision as a traffic control system, nor interference with vision clearance along any highway, street, or road or at any intersection of two or more streets. 
(f)  Signs which obstruct or impair the vision of motorists or non-motorized travelers at any intersection, driveway, within a parking lot or loading area. 
(g)  Nonregulatory signs placed in any public right-of-way; attached to a utility pole; or affixed to a tree, street furniture, or waste receptacles. 
(h)  Off-premises signs erected for the purpose of advertising a product, event, person, or subject, unless otherwise provided for in this article or covered under the State Highway Act. 
(i)  Roof signs unless specifically permitted elsewhere in this article. 
(j)  Portable signs, as defined, not provided for in this article. 
(k)  Signs affixed to a parked vehicle or truck trailer which is being used principally for advertising purposes, rather than for transportation purposes. 
(l)  Pylon or pole signs not provided for in this article. 
(m)  Any sign or sign structure which: 
1.  Is structurally unsafe. 
2.  Constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, or abandonment. 
3.  Is capable of causing electric shock to person who come in contact with it. 
4.  Is not kept in good repair, such that it has broken parts, missing letters, or non-operational lights. 
(n)  Any sign which makes use of the words "stop", "look", or "danger", or any other words, phrases, symbols, or characters, in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-441. - General standards for permitted signs. 
    Signs which are permitted as accessory uses serving a commercial or informational purpose may be permitted subject to the requirements of this article; provided, that no such sign shall be erected or altered until approved by the building official/city manager and until a sign permit has been issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(a)  Sign setbacks. 
1.  All signs, unless otherwise provided for, shall be set back a minimum of three feet from any public or private street right-of-way line or access drive in all districts. This distance shall be measured from the nearest edge of the sign, measured at a vertical line perpendicular to the ground to the right-of-way. 
2.  Side yard setbacks for signs shall be the same as that required for the main structure or building, provided that all nonresidential signs shall be set back at least 100 feet from any residential district. 
(b)  Location. Sign location to assure adequate sight distance. In order to ensure adequate sight distance for motorists, bicyclists and pedestrians, a minimum clear vision area shall be maintained between a height of 24 inches and six feet within a triangular area measured 25 feet back from intersection of public right-of-way lines. Furthermore, signs shall not be permitted where they obstruct motorist vision of regulatory signs, traffic-control devices or street signs. Within the discretion of the traffic control board or committee of the City of Clare, greater restrictions than are contained within this section may be imposed in order to protect minimum clear vision area or adequate line of sight. Such sight and condition respective requirements shall be within the sole discretion of the committee or board having authority over traffic control. 
(c)  Design and construction. Signs, as permitted in the various zoning districts, shall be designed to be compatible with the character of building materials and landscaping to promote an overall unified and aesthetic effect in accordance wit the standards set forth herein. Signs shall not be constructed from materials that are remnants or manufactured for a different purpose. 
(d)  Illumination. 
1.  Signs shall be illuminated only by steady, stationary, shielded light sources directed solely at the sign or internal to it. 
2.  Use of glaring undiffused lights or bulbs shall be prohibited. 
3.  Lights shall be shielded so as not to project onto adjoining properties or thoroughfares. 
4.  Underground wiring shall be required for all illuminated signs not attached to a building. 
(e)  Maintenance and construction. 
1.  Every sign shall be constructed and maintained in a manner consistent with the building code provisions and maintained in good structural condition at all times. All signs shall be kept neatly painted, stained, sealed or preserved including all metal, wood or other materials used for parts and supports. 
2.  All signs erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered or moved shall be constructed in such a manner and of such materials so that they shall be able to withstand wind pressure of at least 20 pounds per square foot or 75 m.p.h. 
3.  All signs, including any cables, guy wires, or supports shall have a minimum clearance of four feet from any electric fixture, street light, or other public utility pole or standard. 
(f)  Measurement. Measurement of allowable sign area: 
1.  The allowable area for signs shall be measured by calculating the square footage of the sign face and any frame of other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate it from the background against which it is placed as measured by enclosing the most protruding points or edges of a sign within a parallelogram or rectangle. 
2.  When a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in calculating the area of the sign except that where two such faces are placed back to back, only the larger face shall be considered, provided that both faces are part of the same structure, contain the same message and are separated by no more than two feet. 
3.  For purposes of calculating sign area allowed as a wall sign, the wall sign square footage shall be determined by measuring a parallelogram (box) which includes the portion of the canopy which contains a message, symbol and/or logo. 
4.  When a sign consists solely of lettering or other sign elements printed, painted or mounted on a wall of a building without any distinguishing border, panel or background, the calculation for sign area shall be measured by enclosing the most protruding edges of the sign elements within a parallelogram or rectangle. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 2009-005, 1-18-2010) 
Sec. 52-442. - Specific sign standards. 
    The number, display area, and height of signs within the various zoning districts is provided in the table within this section and its accompanying footnotes. Additional standards for specific types of signs are given below: 
(a)  Directional signs. No more than one directional sign shall be permitted for each approved driveway, with a maximum sign area of four square feet per sign, and a maximum height of four feet. Any directional sign which includes a business name, symbol or logo shall be calculated as part of the allowable sign square footage, as specified in the sign dimensional standards and regulations table. 
(b)  Billboards or off-premises advertising signs. Billboards shall additionally comply with the provisions specified in article V. 
(c)  Projecting and canopy signs. Projecting signs and canopy signs may be used as an alternative to wall signs listed in the sign dimensional standards and regulations table, provided that they meet the following standards: 
(1)  Any sign area on a canopy shall be included in calculations of maximum wall sign square footage. 
(2)  Projecting or canopy signs in the C-1 district shall be set back at least two feet from any street curb line, shall not extend more than six feet over the public right-of-way, and shall leave a minimum clearance of eight feet above the ground. 
(3)  Projecting or canopy signs, other than those in the C-1 district, shall have a minimum ground clearance of ten feet, shall be set back at least six feet from any adjacent public right-of-way, nor project over an alley or private access lane. A projecting sign shall not extend for more than two feet from the building to which it is attached. 
(4)  No wall, canopy or projecting sign shall extend above the roof or parapet of the structure to which it is attached by more than one foot. 
(5)  Wood posts or supporting arms shall not be used in conjunction with any projecting sign. 
(6)  Projecting signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. 
(7)  Canopy signs shall not be internally illuminated. 
(d)  Institutional signs. Permanent signs of a religious institution, school, museum, library, community recreation facility or other nonprofit organization or institution, including the use of a changeable message sign, are permitted subject to the following standards: 
(1)  A minimum setback from the street right-of-way or property line of 15 feet. 
(2)  Area not to exceed 45 square feet. 
(3)  A maximum of six feet in height. 
(e)  Entranceway signs. One permanent sign per vehicular entrance identifying developments such as subdivision, apartment complexes, condominium communities, senior housing complexes, manufactured housing communities, office and industrial parks and similar uses, provided that the sign is set back a minimum of 15 feet from any property line or public right-of-way; has a maximum height of six feet; and does not exceed 24 square feet in area, is permitted. 
(f)  Signs for temporary uses/seasonal events. Temporary buildings, structures, uses, and special events, shall be permitted to have on- and off-premises signs provided the property contains an occupied structure, and complies with the following: 
(1)  A maximum [of] two on-premises signs with a combined maximum of 100 square feet. 
(2)  A maximum [of] 15 off-premises signs advertising the event, each no greater than four square feet in area, per side, and spaced at least 100 feet apart; such signs shall not be placed within the public street right-of-way line; all off-premises signs shall be erected no earlier than one week prior to the event; and removed within one business day following the event for which they are erected; a map shall be provided to the building and zoning administrator illustrating locations for proposed signs. 
(3)  A nonrefundable fee shall be required for all such signs to ensure all signs are removed within one business day following the termination of the temporary use or seasonal event. 
(g)  Temporary grand opening signs. One on-premises temporary grand opening sign, a maximum of 32 square feet in surface display area per side, a maximum ten feet in height and set back a minimum ten feet from any public street right-of-way may be permitted for a period not to exceed 14 days for those businesses which meet at least one of the following conditions: 
(1)  The business is new at the particular location. 
(2)  The business is under new ownership. 
(3)  The business has undergone a major expansion which has received site plan approval by the planning commission. 
(4)  The business has reopened after being closed for at least one year. 
Note that conditions for a permitted temporary grand opening sign shall not include an additional or change in product line, new services, new management or other situations not expressly provided for above. 
(h)  Portable A-frame signs. Portable A-frame or sandwich board signs are permitted in the C-1, C-2, and I districts at the public entrances to businesses subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Signs. No sign shall be constructed, erected or displayed within any public right-of-way, upon any public land, ground or building, or upon any public utilities apparatus or structure within the city without the specific permission and approval of the city planning commission. The administrative process and procedures for such approval shall be in accordance with the site plan application process outlined in article VII. 
(2)  Off-premises signs. Off-premises signs are prohibited unless approved by the city planning commission and/or except as outlined under subsection 52-142(4). 
(3)  Sandwich boards. Sandwich boards shall: 
a.  Be constructed of durable, weather-resistant material. 
b.  Be professionally lettered and painted, and appropriately maintained. 
c.  Be freestanding. 
d.  Only be displayed during the operating hours of the respective business or commercial activity. 
e.  Not exceed five feet in height or three feet in width. 
f.  Be displayed within one block of the respective business location. 
g.  Not be an impediment or obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
h.  Not be erected within 20 feet of another sandwich board. 
i.  No objection from the business the sign is put in front of. 
(i)  Limited on wall signs. One wall sign shall be allowed per business, in addition to any other allowed ground signs. Businesses located on a corner lot shall be allowed up to two wall signs, one for each front facade. The maximum wall sign area shall not exceed ten percent of the front facade of the building (any facade which faces a public street), per use or business establishment. 
(j)  Limited on ground signs. Only one ground sign is permitted per use, including uses which occupy more than one parcel and business centers, with additional signs permitted according to the following table, however, no site shall have more than two ground signs, regardless of the number of street frontages or the amount of frontage. 
Frontage along two or more rights-of-way = One sign up to the maximum sign face square footage shall be allowed along two frontages 300 feet of frontage along one right-of-way = One ground sign along that frontage Over 300 feet of frontage along one right-of-way = Two ground signs  
(k)  Changeable message signs. Theaters shall be permitted one changeable message sign, not to exceed 100 square feet, designed for periodic message change to indicate events. 
(l)  Additional restrictions. No ground sign is allowed on property fronting U.S. 127. If site restrictions dictate, the planning commission will review a request for an eight foot height allowance. For shopping centers and strip malls, only the name of the center is allowed on the ground sign. See table below. 
SIGN DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS District Wall Sign Canopy/Projecting Sign Ground Sign Number Maximum Size Number Maximum Size Number Maximum Size Maximum Height Residential - 1 *A *A *A Residential - 2 *A *A *A Commercial - 1 1 10% of front facade 1 32 square feet 1 *B 60 square feet 6 feet Commercial - 2 1 10% of front facade 1 32 square feet 1 *B 60 square feet 6 feet Industrial Park 1 10% of front facade 1 45 square feet 1 *B 60 square feet 6 feet Industrial - 1 1 10% of front facade 1 45 square feet 1 *B 60 square feet 6 feet  
  
SIGN DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS District High Rise Sign Pylon Signs Number Maximum Height Number Maximum Size Maximum Height Residential - 1 *A *A Residential - 2 *A *A Commercial - 1 1 > 30 feet. Engineer drawings and administrative review required. 1 see (m) 
below 120 square feet 8 feet Commercial - 2 1 > 30 feet. Engineer drawings and administrative review required. 1 see (m) 
below 120 square feet 8 feet Industrial Park *A *A Industrial - 1 1 > 30 feet. Engineer drawings and administrative [review required.] 1 see (m) 
below 120 square feet 8 feet *A - non-exempt signs are prohibited *B - Per street frontage  
(m)  Pylon signs. Pylon signs are permitted within the pylon sign overlay zone as defined by the planning commission and zoning map. There should be no more than one pylon sign for each 300 feet of frontage along a single right-of-way. Where there are frontages along two or more rights-of-way, there shall be one pylon sign per 500 feet of frontage. The road frontages may be combined to meet the 500 feet requirement. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 2008-01, 3-3-2008; Ord. No. 2012-002, 2-6-2012) 
Sec. 52-443. - Nonconforming signs. 
    Nonconforming signs are those signs that do not comply with the size, placement, construction or other standards or regulations of this chapter, but were lawfully established prior to its adoption. Signs for which the board of appeals has granted a variance are exempt and shall not be defined as nonconforming. It is the intent of this article to encourage eventual elimination of nonconforming signs in a timely manner. This objective is considered as much a subject of public health, safety and welfare as the prohibition of new signs in violation of this article. Therefore, the purpose of this article is to remove illegal nonconforming signs while avoiding any unreasonable invasion of established private property rights. A nonconforming sign may be continued and shall be maintained in good condition as described elsewhere in this article, however, the following alterations are regulated: 
(a)  A nonconforming sign shall not be structurally altered or repaired so as to prolong its useful life or so as to change its shape, size, type or design unless such change shall make the sign conforming. 
(b)  A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another non-conforming sign. 
(c)  A nonconforming sign shall not be reestablished after abandonment as defined in section 52-444, Dangerous, unsafe, abandoned, and illegally erected signs. 
(d)  A nonconforming sign must not be re-established after damage or destruction if the estimated expense of reconstruction exceeds 50 percent of the appraised replacement cost as determined by the building official/city manager or if 50 percent or more of the face of the sign is damaged or destroyed. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-444. - Dangerous, unsafe, abandoned, and illegally erected signs. 
(a)  Dangerous signs. Any sign constituting an immediate hazard to health or safety shall be deemed a nuisance and may be immediately removed by the city and the cost thereof charged against the owner of the property on which it was installed. 
(b)  Unsafe signs. Any sign that becomes insecure, in danger of falling, or otherwise unsafe but not considered an immediate danger by the building official/city manager to the health or safety of the public shall be removed or repaired according to the process outlined in subsection (e) below. 
(c)  Abandoned signs. Any sign that advertises a business that has been discontinued for at least 90 days or that advertises a product or service that is no longer offered shall be deemed abandoned. Permanent signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended by a change in ownership or management shall not be deemed abandoned unless the structure remains vacant for at least six months. An abandoned sign shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises. If the owner or lessee fails to remove the sign, the building official/city manager shall initiate the process noted in subsection (e) below. 
(d)  Illegally erected signs. The building official/city manager shall order the removal of any sign erected illegally in violation of this article, according to the process outlined in subsection (e) below. 
(e)  Process for enforcing violations of this section. For violations of subsections (b) through (d), the building official/city manager shall send notice, by certified mail addressed to the owner of the property on which the sign is located. The notice shall describe the violation and allow seven days for removal. Should the sign not be removed or repaired within the time specified, the building official/city manager shall have the authority to remove the sign, and the property owner shall be liable for the cost thereof. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-445. - Administration and appeals of sign ordinance standards. 
(a)  Generally. The regulations of this article shall be administered and enforced by building official/city manager. 
(b)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, use or maintain any sign in the city, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the standards and regulations of this article. Any such violation, including the failure to remove a sign when directed under the authority of this article, shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-446. - Application. 
    Applications for sign permits shall be made upon a form provided by the department for this purpose. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, phone, and if available, fax and e-mail, of the person applying for the permit. 
(2)  Name, address, phone, and if available, fax and e-mail, of the person owning the parcel upon which the sign is proposed to be placed. 
(3)  Location of the building, structure, and parcel on which the sign is to be attached or erected. 
(4)  Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings, structures, property lines, and existing or proposed rights-of-way. 
(5)  Two copies of the plans and specifications. The method of construction and/or attachment to a building, or in the ground, shall be explained in the plans and specifications. 
(6)  Name, address, phone, and if available, fax and e-mail of the person erecting the sign. 
(7)  The zoning district in which the sign is to be placed. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-447. - Permit fees. 
    Permit fees for signs shall be established by the city commission by resolution from time to time. The permit fees must relate to the cost of issuing the permit and may vary based on the size, type and height of the sign. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-448. - False information. 
    A person providing false information under this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Secs. 52-449-52-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - LIGHTING STANDARDS 

Sec. 52-501. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public by recognizing that buildings and sites need to be illuminated for safety, security and visibility for pedestrians and motorists. To do so, this article provides standards for various forms of lighting that will: minimize light pollution; maintain safe night-time drive performance on public roadways; preserve the restful quality of nighttime by eliminating intrusive artificial light and lighting that unnecessarily contributes to "sky glow"; reduce light pollution and light trespass from light sources onto adjacent properties; conservation of electrical energy; and curtail the degradation of the night-time visual environment. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-502. - Applicability. 
    The standards in this article shall apply to any light source that is visible from any property line, or beyond, for the site from which the light is emanating. The building official/city manager may review any building or site to determine compliance with the requirements under this article. Whenever a person is required to obtain a building permit, electrical permit for outdoor lighting or signage, a special land use approval, subdivision approval or site plan approval from the city, the applicant shall submit sufficient information to enable the building official/city manager and/or planning commission to determine whether the proposed lighting will comply with this article. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-503. - Lighting definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Canopy structure. Any overhead protective structure which is constructed in such a manner as to allow pedestrians/vehicles to pass under. 
    Flood or spot light. Any light fixture or lamp that incorporates a reflector or refractor to concentrate the light output into a directed beam in a particular direction. 
    Glare. Direct light emitted by a lamp, luminous tube lighting or other light source. 
    Lamp. The component of the luminaire that produces the actual light including luminous tube lighting. 
    Light fixture. The assembly that holds a lamp and may include an assembly housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a lamp holder, a ballast, a reflector or mirror, and a refractor or lens. A light fixture also includes the assembly for luminous tube and fluorescent lighting. 
    Light pollution. Artificial light which causes a detrimental effect on the environment, enjoyment of the night sky or causes undesirable glare or unnecessary illumination of adjacent properties. 
    Light trespass. The shining of light produced by a luminaire beyond the boundaries of the property on which it is located. 
    Luminaire. The complete lighting system including the lamp and light fixture. 
    Luminous tube lighting. Gas-filled tubing which, when subjected to high voltage, becomes luminescent in a color characteristic of the particular gas used, e.g. neon, argon, etc. 
    Outdoor light fixtures. Outdoor artificial illuminating devices, outdoor fixtures, lamps and other similar devices, permanently installed or portable, used for flood lighting, general illumination or advertisement. 
    Shielded fixture. Outdoor light fixtures, shielded or constructed so that light rays emitted by the fixture are projected below the horizontal plane passing through the lowest point on the fixture from which light is emitted, e.g. "shoebox-type" fixtures. A luminaire mounted in a recessed fashion under a canopy or other structure such that the surrounding structure effectively shields the light in the same manner is also considered fully shielded for the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-504. - Submittal requirements. 
    The following information must be included for all site plan submissions and where site plan approval is not required, some or all of the items may be required by the building official/city manager prior to lighting installation. 
(a)  Location of all freestanding, building-mounted and canopy light fixtures on the site plan and building elevations. 
(b)  Photometric grid overlaid on the proposed site plan indicating the overall light intensity throughout the site (in footcandles). 
(c)  Specifications and details for the type of fixture being proposed including the total lumen output, type of lamp and method of shielding. 
(d)  Use of the fixture proposed. 
(e)  Any other information deemed necessary by the building official/city manager to determine compliance with provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-505. - Lighting standards. 
    Unless exempted under section 52-506, Exemptions, all lighting must comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Freestanding pole lighting and canopy lighting. 
1.  Exterior lighting shall be fully shielded and directed downward to prevent off-site glare. The intensity of light within a site shall not exceed ten footcandles within any site or one footcandle at any property line, except where it abuts a residential district or use whereby a maximum of 0.5 footcandles is permitted. 
2.  The only exception is with gas station canopy and automobile dealership lighting, where a maximum of 20 footcandles is permitted within the site but the above standards shall apply to intensity at the property line. 
3.  Metal halide fixtures shall be used in an effort to maintain a unified lighting standard throughout the city and prevent "sky glow." 
4.  The planning commission may approve decorative light fixtures as an alternative to shielded fixtures when it can be proven that there will be no off-site glare and the proposed fixtures are necessary to preserve the intended character of the site. 
5.  The maximum height of parking lot light fixtures shall be 20 feet, except that the planning commission may permit a maximum height of 30 feet or when the poles are no closer than 150 feet to a residential district or use. 
6.  Except where used for security purposes, all outdoor lighting fixtures, existing or hereafter installed and maintained upon private property within commercial, industrial and office zoning districts shall be turned off between 11:00 p.m. and sunrise, except when used for commercial and industrial uses, such as in sales, assembly and repair areas, where such use continues after 11:00 p.m. but only for so long as such use continues. 
(b)  Building-mounted lighting. 
1.  Building-mounted lighting shall be fully shielded and directed downward to prevent off-site glare. The intensity of light shall not exceed ten footcandles within any site or one footcandle at any property line, except where it abuts a residential district or use whereby a maximum of 0.5 footcandles is permitted at the property line. 
2.  Metal halide fixtures shall be used in an effort to maintain a unified lighting standard throughout the City and prevent "sky glow." 
3.  The planning commission may approve decorative light fixtures as an alternative to shielded fixtures when it can be proven that there will be no off-site glare and the proposed fixtures will improve the appearance of the site. 
4.  Luminous tube and exposed bulb fluorescent lighting is prohibited as an architectural detail on all buildings, e.g. along the roof line and eaves, around windows, etc. The planning commission may approve internally illuminated architectural bands when it can be shown that the treatment will enhance the appearance of the building or is necessary for security purposes. 
(c)  Window lighting. 
1.  Any light fixtures visible through a window must be shielded to prevent glare at the property line. 
2.  Luminous tube and exposed bulb fluorescent lighting (visible from the property line) is prohibited unless it is part of a sign that meets the requirements of article IX, Signs, of this chapter. 
(d)  Other lighting. 
1.  The internal illumination of building-mounted canopies is prohibited. 
2.  Indirect illumination of signs, canopies and buildings is permitted provided a maximum 125 watt bulb is utilized and there is no glare. 
3.  The use of laser light source, search lights or any similar high-intensity light for outdoor advertisement or entertainment is prohibited. 
4.  Lighting shall not be of a flashing, moving or intermittent type. 
5.  Luminous tube and exposed bulb fluorescent lighting is permitted as part of a sign meeting the requirements of article IX, Signs, of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-506. - Exemptions. 
    The following are exempt from the lighting requirements of this article, except that the building official/city manager may take steps to eliminate the impact of the above exempted items when deemed necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(a)  Sports fields. 
(b)  Swimming pools. 
(c)  Holiday decorations. 
(d)  Window displays without glare. 
(e)  Shielded pedestrian walkway lighting. 
(f)  Soffit lighting. 
(g)  Residential lighting with no off-site glare. 
(h)  Street lights. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-507. - Lamp or fixture substitution. 
    Should any light fixture regulated under this article, or the type of light source therein, be changed after the permit has been issued, a change request must be submitted to the building official/city manager for his approval, together with adequate information to assure compliance with this chapter, which must be received prior to substitution. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Secs. 52-508-52-514. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - ACCESS MANAGEMENT AND DRIVEWAY STANDARDS 

Sec. 52-515. - Statement of purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide access standards which will facilitate through traffic operations, ensure public safety along roadways, and protect the public investment in the street system; while providing property owners with reasonable, though not always direct, access. The standards are specifically designed for streets whose primary function is the movement of through traffic, as opposed to local street whose primary function is access to adjacent properties. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 52-516. - Application of standards. 
(a)  The development of access and roadways or driveways within the City of Clare shall be consistent with Public Act 135 of 2010 and the Michigan Department of Transportation Complete Streets Policy. 
(b)  The access standards contained herein shall be required in addition to, and where permissible shall supersede, the requirements of the Clare County Road Commission (CCRC) and the Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT). 
(c)  The standards contained in this article shall apply to all uses, except permitted single-family and two-family dwelling units. 
(d)  For expansion and/or redevelopment of existing sites where the planning commission determines that compliance with all the standards of this article is unreasonable, the standards shall be applied to the maximum extent possible. In such situations, suitable alternatives which substantially achieve the purpose of this article may be accepted by the planning commission, provided that the applicant demonstrates all of the following apply: 
(1)  Size of the parcel is insufficient to meet the dimensional standards. 
(2)  The spacing of existing, adjacent driveways or environmental constraints prohibit adherence to the access standards at a reasonable cost. 
(3)  The use will generate less than 500 total vehicle trips per day or less than 75 total vehicle trips in the peak hour of travel on the adjacent street, based on the most recent rates developed by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE). 
(4)  There are no other reasonable means of access. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 2014-008 , 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 52-517. - Walkable-bikeable complete streets. 
(a)  "Complete streets" is defined as a design principle to promote a safe network of access for pedestrians, bicyclists, motorists, and transit riders of all ages and abilities. 
(b)  It is the policy of the city to encourage complete streets, and in furtherance of that policy: 
(1)  There shall be a nonmotorized network plan approved by the public service department, in consultation with the transportation division. 
(2)  The nonmotorized network plan shall include, at a minimum, accommodations for accessibility, sidewalks, curb ramps and cuts, trails and pathways, signage, and bike lanes, and shall incorporate principles of complete streets and maximize walkable and bikeable streets within the city. 
(3)  To the extent financially feasible, future construction or re-construction of city rights-of-way or any parts thereof shall be in conformity with the nonmotorized network plan. 
(4)  It shall be a goal of the city to fund adequately the implementation of the nonmotorized network plan, which shall include targeting at least five percent of State Act 51 funds received by the city annually in furtherance of the plan's implementation. 
(5)  The nonmotorized network plan shall be updated, at a minimum, every five years from the date of its initial adoption by the public service department. 
( Ord. No. 2014-008 , 10-6-2014 ) 
Sec. 52-518. - Number of driveways. 
(a)  Access to a parcel shall consist of either a single two-way driveway or a pair of one-way driveways wherein one driveway is designed and appropriately signed to accommodate ingress movements and the other egress movements. 
(b)  Where parcel frontage is insufficient to provide a driveway meeting the minimum driveway width and radii, a shared driveway or other means of access may be required. 
(c)  Where parcels of at least two acres in area, have frontage along two streets, access should be provided only along the street with the lower average daily traffic volume, unless the planning commission determines this would negatively affect traffic operations or surrounding land uses. 
(d)  Where the property has continuous frontage of over 300 feet and the applicant can demonstrate, using the Institute of Transportation Engineers Manual Trip General (Trip Generation Manual) or another accepted reference, that a second access is warranted, the planning commission may allow an additional access point. Where possible, this access should be spaced accordingly to the standards contained herein, located on a side street, shared with an adjacent property, and/or be constructed to restrict one or both left turn movements. 
(e)  Where the property has continuous frontage of over 600 feet, a maximum of three driveways may be allowed, with at least one such driveway being constructed and signed for right-turns-in, right-turns-out only. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 2014-008 , 10-6-2014) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2014-008 , adopted Oct. 6, 2014, amended and renumbered former §§ 52-517-52-523 as §§ 52-518-52-524. 
Sec. 52-519. - Shares access-Joint driveways, frontage road, parking lot connections and rear service drives. 
(a)  Shared use of access between two or more property owners should be encouraged through use of driveways constructed along property lines, connecting parking lots and construction on-site of frontage roads and rear service drives; particularly within one-quarter mile of major intersections, for sites having frontage on two or more streets, where frontage dimensions are less than 300 feet, at locations with sight distance problems, and/or along roadway segments experiencing congestion or accidents. In such cases, shared access of some type may be the only access design allowed. 
(b)  In cases where a site is adjacent to an existing frontage road, parking lot of a compatible use, or rear service drive, a connection to the adjacent facility may be required by the planning commission. 
(c)  In cases where a site is adjacent to undeveloped property, the site should be designed to accommodate a future frontage road, parking lot connection or rear service drive. 
(d)  The applicant shall provide the city with letters of agreement or access easements from all affected property owners. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 2014-008 , 10-6-2014) 
Editor's note- See editor's note to § 52-518. 
Sec. 52-520. - Adequate sight distance. 
(a)  Requirements for minimum intersection or corner site [sight] distance for driveways, shall be in accordance with the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) guidelines defined in chapter 9 of A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, 1994. 
(b)  The planning commission may adjust driveway location where there is inadequate sight distance. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 2014-008 , 10-6-2014) 
Editor's note- See editor's note to § 52-518. 
Sec. 52-521. - Driveway spacing from intersections and U.S. 127 ramps. 
(a)  Driveway spacing from intersections shall be measured from the centerline of the driveway to the extended edge of the intersecting street's right-of-way line. 
(b)  In order to preserve intersection operations and safety, the minimum distance between a driveway and an intersecting street right-of-way shall be based on the following: 
(1)  For locations in the vicinity of intersections experiencing congestion (peak hour operations below level of service "C" for one or more movements) and/or a significant number of traffic accidents (five or more annually), the planning commission may require that access be constructed along the property line furthest from the intersection. 
(2)  For locations within 200 feet of any signalized or four-way stop intersection, driveways shall be spaced a minimum of 150 feet from the intersection. Where this spacing cannot be provided, driveways designed for "right-turn in, right-turn out only" movements may be allowed, with a minimum spacing of 75 feet from the intersecting street right-of-way. 
(3)  For locations not addressed by subsection (2), above, not including single-family parcels, driveways shall be spaced 100 feet from the intersection. 
(4)  Driveways shall be spaced a minimum of three hundred (300) feet from the centerline of the U.S. 127 on and off ramps. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 2014-008 , 10-6-2014) 
Editor's note- See editor's note to § 52-518. 
Sec. 52-522. - Driveway spacing from other driveways. 
(a)  Driveway spacing from other driveways shall be measured from the centerline of each driveway at the point where it crosses the street right-of-way line. 
(b)  Minimum driveway spacing from other driveways along the same side of the street shall be determined based on posted speed limits along the parcel for each particular frontage, as follows: 
Driveway Spacing From Other Driveways Posted Speed (mph) Minimum Driveway Spacing 25 mph 100 feet 30 mph 125 feet 35 mph 150 feet 40 mph 185 feet 45 mph 230 feet 50 mph 275 feet 55 mph 350 feet  
(c)  Driveways shall be directly aligned with those across the street or, where offset, the minimum driveway spacing from driveways across the street shall be a minimum of 150 feet, as determined by the planning commission, excluding when one or both driveways are designed and signed for right-turn-in, right-turn-out only. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 2014-008 , 10-6-2014) 
Editor's note- See editor's note to § 52-518. 
Sec. 52-523. - Driveway design, channelized driveways, deceleration lanes and tapes, bypass lanes. 
(a)  Standards. Driveways shall be designed to the standards of the Clare County Road Commission, except where stricter standards are including herein or by the city driveway construction standards. 
(b)  Driveway width and radii. The typical driveway design shall include one ingress and one egress lane, with a combined maximum throat width of 30 feet, measured from face to face of curb. 
(1)  Wherever the planning commission determines that traffic volumes or conditions may cause significant delays for traffic exiting left, two exit lanes may be required. 
(2)  For one-way paired driveway systems, each driveway shall be 16 feet wide, measured perpendicularly. 
(3)  In areas with pedestrian traffic, the exit and enter lanes may be separated by a median with a maximum width of 25 feet. 
(4)  Driveways shall be designed with 25-foot radii; 30-foot radii where daily semi truck traffic is expected. 
(c)  Driveway storage. Driveway storage shall be determined by the planning commission based on traffic volumes and conditions. A minimum of 40 feet of driveway storage shall be provided for less-intense developments and a minimum of 120 feet of driveway storage shall be required for larger developments. Driveway storage shall be measured from the right-of-way line. 
(d)  Directional driveways, divided driveways, and deceleration tapers and/or bypass lanes. Directional driveways, divided driveways, and deceleration tapers and/or bypass lanes may be required by the planning commission where they are necessary to reduce congestion and accident potential for vehicles accessing the proposed use or site. Right-turn tapers shall be a minimum of 75 feet in length and at least 11 feet wide. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 2014-008 , 10-6-2014) 
Editor's note- See editor's note to § 52-518. 
Sec. 52-524. - Design of frontage road, rear service drives and parking lot connections. 
    Frontage roads, rear service drives and drives connecting two or more parking lots shall be constructed in accordance with the following requirements: 
(a)  Pavement width shall be a maximum of 30 feet, measured face of curb to face of curb; intersection approaches may be widened to 39 feet for a left-turn lane. 
(b)  Frontage road access to public streets shall be spaced according to the standards of section 52-521, driveway spacing from intersections and U.S. 127 ramps and section 52-522, driveway spacing from other driveways. 
(c)  Frontage roads shall have a minimum setback of 30 feet between the outer edge of pavement and the right-of-way line, with a minimum 60 feet of uninterrupted queuing (stacking) space at the intersections. 
(d)  Parking along or which backs into a frontage road shall be prohibited. 
(e)  For properties which are currently developed or adjacent to developed uses, and the standards of subsections (a) through (d) above, are determined by the planning commission to be too restrictive, frontage roads can be defined through parking lots by a raised curb and/or painted islands, as shown, provided that at least every third island at the end of the parking row is a raised curbed island. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 2014-008 , 10-6-2014) 
Editor's note- See editor's note to § 52-518. 
Sec. 52-525. - Conflict. 
    In the event of a conflict between the standards set forth in sections 52-515 through 52-524 and any MDOT standards or Complete Streets Standards as established by law, the provisions which provide the greater compliance with the Walkable-Bikeable Complete Streets shall prevail. 
( Ord. No. 2014-008 , 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 52-526. - Maintenance of private drives, driveways, service drives and parking lot connections. 
    To the extent roads that serve the public but are private driveways or access under this chapter exist or are created, said driveways shall be maintained in a state reasonably safe for travel. Under this section, the director of public works of the city may issue a notice to the appropriate businesses or property owners that shall require immediate repairs to the driveway, frontage road, or access drive in accordance with this section. In the event that repairs are not undertaken within 30 days of the date of the notice, the director of the department of public works may issue a notice of intent to close the access drive and proceed to close the drive to vehicular access by the public. The director of public works' action under this section shall be appealable to the city commission by filing a written request for hearing before the city commission within 15 days of the notice to either repair or the notice of closure of the access way. The findings of the city commission as to the safety and condition of the road or driveway at issue shall be final and binding and is not appealable to any court. 
( Ord. No. 2014-010 , 11-17-2014) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2014-010 , adopted Nov. 17, 2014, enacted new provisions designated as § 52-524. Inasmuch as §§ 52-524 and 52-525 already exist, said ordinance has been added as § 52-526 at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 52-527-52-529. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - CONDITIONAL ZONING 

Sec. 52-530. - Conditional zoning. 
(a)  Intent. It is recognized that there are certain instances where it would be in the best interests of the city, as well as advantageous to property owners seeking a change in zoning boundaries, if certain conditions could be proposed by property owners as part of a request for a rezoning. It is the intent of this section to provide a process consistent with the provisions of section 405 of the Public Act 110 of 2006 by which an owner seeking a zoning may voluntarily propose conditions regarding the use and/or development of land as part of the rezoning request. 
(b)  Application and offer of conditions. 
(1)  An owner of land may voluntarily offer in writing conditions relating to the use and/or development of land for which a rezoning is requested. This offer may be made either at the time the application for rezoning is filed or may be made at a later time during the rezoning process. 
(2)  The required application and process for considering a rezoning request with conditions shall be the same as that for considering rezoning requests made without any offer of conditions, except as modified by the requirements of this section. 
(3)  The owner's offer of conditions may not purport to authorize uses or developments not permitted in the requested new zoning district. 
(4)  Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that would require a special land use permit under the terms of this chapter may only be commenced if a special land use permit for such use or development is ultimately granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that would require a variance under the terms of this chapter may only be commenced if a variance for such use or development is ultimately granted by the zoning board of appeals in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(6)  Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that would require site plan approval under the terms of this chapter may only be commenced if site plan approval for such use or development is ultimately granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(7)  The offer of conditions may be amended during the process of rezoning consideration provided that any amended or additional conditions are entered voluntarily by the owner. An owner may withdraw all or part of its offer of conditions any time prior to final rezoning action of the city commission provided that, if such withdrawal occurs subsequent to the planning commission's public hearing on the original rezoning request, then the rezoning application shall be referred to the planning commission for a new public hearing with appropriate notice and a new recommendation. 
(c)  Planning commission review. The planning commission, after public hearing and consideration of the factors for rezoning set forth in section 52-32, may recommend approval, approval with recommended changes or denial of the rezoning; provided, however, that any recommended changes to the offer of conditions are acceptable to and thereafter offered by the owner. 
(d)  City commission review. After receipt of the planning commission's recommendation, the city commission shall deliberate upon the requested rezoning and may approve or deny the conditional rezoning request. The city commission's deliberations shall include, but not be limited to, a consideration of the factors for rezoning set forth in section 52-32. Should the city commission consider amendments to the proposed conditional rezoning advisable and if such contemplated amendments to the offer of conditions are acceptable to and thereafter offered by the owner, then the city commission shall, in accordance with section 405 of the Public Act 110 of 2006, refer such amendments to the planning commission for a report thereon within a time specified by the city commission and proceed thereafter in accordance with said statute to deny or approve the conditional rezoning with or without amendments. 
(e)  Approval. 
(1)  If after review and recommendation of the planning commission the city commission finds the rezoning request and offer of conditions acceptable, the offered conditions shall be incorporated into a formal written statement of conditions acceptable to the owner and conforming in form to the provisions of this section. The statement of conditions shall be incorporated by attachment or otherwise as an inseparable part of the ordinance adopted by the city commission to accomplish the requested rezoning. 
(2)  The statement of conditions shall: 
a.  Be in a form recordable with the register of deeds of the county in which the subject land is located or, in the alternative, be accompanied by a recordable affidavit or memorandum prepared and signed by the owner giving notice of the statement of conditions in a manner acceptable to the city commission. 
b.  Contain a legal description of the land to which it pertains. 
c.  Contain a statement acknowledging that the statement of conditions runs with the land and is binding upon successor owners of the land. 
d.  Incorporate by attachment or reference any diagram, plans or other documents submitted or approved by the owner that are necessary to illustrate the implementation of the statement of conditions. If any such documents are incorporated by reference, the reference shall specify where the document may be examined. 
e.  Contain a statement acknowledging that the statement of conditions or an affidavit or memorandum giving notice thereof may be recorded by the city with the register of deeds of the county in which the land referenced in the statement of conditions is located. 
f.  Contain the notarized signatures of all of the owners of the subject land preceded by a statement attesting to the fact that they voluntarily offer and consent to the provisions contained within the statement of conditions. 
(3)  Upon the rezoning taking effect, the zoning map shall be amended to reflect the new zoning classification along with a designation that the land was rezoned with a statement of conditions. The city clerk shall maintain a listing of all lands rezoned with a statement of conditions. 
(4)  The approved statement of conditions or an affidavit or memorandum giving notice thereof shall be filed by the city with the register of deeds of the county in which the land is located. The city commission shall have authority to waive this requirement if it determines that, given the nature of the conditions and/or the time frame within which the conditions are to be satisfied, the recording of such a document would be of no material benefit to the city or to any subsequent owner of the land. 
(5)  Upon the rezoning taking effect, the use of the land so rezoned shall conform thereafter to all of the requirements regulating use and development within the new zoning district as modified by any more restrictive provisions contained in the statement of conditions. 
(f)  Compliance with conditions. 
(1)  Any person who establishes a development or commences a use upon land that has been rezoned with conditions shall continuously operate and maintain the development or use in compliance with all of the conditions set forth in the statement of conditions. Any failure to comply with a condition contained within the statement of conditions shall constitute a violation of this zoning ordinance and be punishable accordingly. Additionally, any such violation shall be deemed a nuisance per se and subject to judicial abatement as provided by law. 
(2)  No permit or approval shall be granted under this chapter for any use or development that is contrary to an applicable statement of conditions. 
(g)  Time period for establishing development or use. Unless another time period is specified in the ordinance rezoning the subject land, the approved development and/or use of the land pursuant to building and other required permits must be commenced upon the land within 18 months after the rezoning took effect and thereafter proceed diligently to completion. This time limitation may upon written request be extended for a one-year period by the city commission if: (1) it is demonstrated to the city commission's reasonable satisfaction that there is a strong likelihood that the development and/or use will commence within the period of extension and proceed diligently thereafter to completion, and (2) the city commission finds that there has not been a change in circumstances that would render the current zoning with statement of conditions incompatible with other zones and uses in the surrounding area or otherwise inconsistent with sound zoning policy. 
(h)  Reversion of zoning. If approved development and/or use of the rezoned land does not occur within the time frame specified under subsection (g) above, then the land shall revert to its former zoning classification as set forth in MCL 125.584g. The reversion process shall be initiated by the city commission requesting that the planning commission proceed with consideration of rezoning of the land to its former zoning classification. The procedure for considering and making this reversionary rezoning shall thereafter be the same as applies to all other rezoning requests. 
(i)  Subsequent rezoning of land. When land that is rezoned with a statement of conditions is thereafter rezoned to a different zoning classification or to the same zoning classification but with a different or no statement of conditions, whether as a result of a reversion of zoning pursuant to subsection (h) above or otherwise, the statement of conditions imposed under the former zoning classification shall cease to be in effect. Upon the owner's written request, the city clerk shall record with the register of deeds of the county in which the land is located a notice that the statement of conditions is no longer in effect. 
(j)  Amendment of conditions. 
(1)  During the time period for commencement of an approved development or use specified pursuant to subsection (g) above or during any extension thereof granted by the city commission, the city shall not add to or alter the conditions in the statement of conditions. 
(2)  The statement of conditions may be amended thereafter in the same manner as was prescribed for the original rezoning and statement of conditions. 
(k)  City right to rezone. Nothing in the statement of conditions nor in the provisions of this section shall be deemed to prohibit the city from rezoning all or any portion of land that is subject to a statement of conditions to another zoning classification. Any rezoning shall be conducted in compliance with the ordinance and Public Act 110 of 2006. 
(l)  Failure to offer conditions. The city shall not require an owner to offer conditions as a requirement for rezoning. The lack of an offer of conditions shall not affect an owner's rights under this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-5-2006) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1985 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1985 Code, as supplemented, which are included herein. Sections of the 1985 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1985 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1.2 1-11 1.5 1-1 1.6 1-3 1.7 28-1 1.8-1.10 1-2 1.12 1-13 1.13 2-161 1.14 1-10 1.31-1.33 2-61-2-63 1.34(1, 2) 2-64 1.41, 1.42 2-121, 2-122 1.45, 1.46 26-1 1.51(1)- 
1.51(9) 26-31-26-39 1.51(11) 26-40 1.76 2-123 1.101-1.104 16-31-16-34 1.131-1.135 38-1-38-5 1.136-1.151 38-7-38-22 1.166 18-1 2.1, 2.2 36-32, 36-33 2.3 36-31 2.4-2.9 36-34-36-39 2.21-2.24 46-31-46-34 2.25-2.37 46-36-46-48 2.38-2.43 46-72-46-77 2.101-2.109 46-271-46-279 2.131-2.142 46-311-46-322 2.172-2.186 42-31-42-45 2.500-2.506 46-111-46-117 2.512-2.515 46-118-46-121 2.516-2.519 46-123-46-126 2.530, 2.531 46-127, 46-128 2.532 46-128 2.540-2.546 46-129-46-135 2.550-2.557 46-161-46-168 2.560-2.576 46-191-46-207 2.580-2.582 46-221-46-223 2.590-2.593 46-241-46-244 3.1 30-1 3.2-3.7 30-71-30-76 3.10-3.17 30-31-30-38 3.21-3.30 14-31-14-40 3.61 50-1 3.65 50-2 3.70 50-3 3.84 52-311 3.90(1), 
3.90(2) 4-31, 4-32 3.90(3) 4-33-4-36 3.90(4) 4-37 3.91-3.95 4-38-4-42 3.96, 3.97 4-45, 4-46 3.98, 3.99 4-43, 4-44 4.1-4.9 40-31-40-39 4.18 40-40 4.20, 4.21 40-41, 40-42 4.23, 4.24 40-43, 40-44 4.26 40-45 4.31 40-46 4.37-4.39 40-47-40-49 4.51-4.57 40-81-40-87 4.65, 4.66 40-88, 40-89 5.1 52-1 5.2, 5.3 52-101, 52-102 5.7 52-2 5.11-5.28 52-103-52-120 5.31-5.33 52-141-52-143 5.40 24-31 5.41 24-32 
52-161 5.42 24-33 52-162 5.43 24-34 52-163 5.44 24-35 5.45 24-36 
52-164 5.46 24-37 5.46.1 24-38 5.47.00- 
5.47.10 52-371-52-381 5.51, 5.52 52-181, 52-182 5.54-5.58 52-183-52-187 5.61-5.63 52-211-52-213 5.65-5.68 52-214-52-217 5.71-5.74 52-241-52-244 5.75 52-245 
52-271 5.76, 5.77 52-272, 52-273 5.79 52-274 5.80 52-121 5.85, 5.86 52-71, 52-72 5.91 52-31 5.93 52-33 5.94 52-32 5.101-5.110 52-301-52-310 5.120-5.122 52-341-52-343 5.151(3) 52-312 5.251 24-71 5.255-5.264 24-91-24-100 5.271-5.291 24-121-24-141 5.296-5.300 24-161-24-165 5.305-5.307 24-101-24-103 5.308 24-72 5.309 24-166 5.310 24-104 5.311-5.314 24-201-24-204 ch. 6, § 1- 
ch. 6, § 5 16-61-16-65 ch. 7, § 1- 
ch. 7, § 4 16-101-16-104 7.1-7.11 12-32-12-42 7.12-7.17 12-44-12-49 7.18 12-31 7.19-7.22 12-50-12-53 7.23, 7.24 12-54 7.31 12-43 7.61-7.67 32-31-32-37 7.81-7.84 32-71-32-74 7.86 32-75 7.91-7.99 12-91-12-99 7.101 12-100 7.111-7.115 32-101-32-105 7.131-7.136 34-31-34-36 7.141 34-72 7.142 34-71-34-78 7.151-7.156 48-31-48-36 7.158-7.160 48-37-48-39 7.161-7.165 48-39-48-43 7.171-7.174 6-31-6-34 7.181 6-61 7.184-7.186 6-62-6-64 7.211-7.214 6-91-6-94 ch. 8, § 2- 
ch. 8, § 9 26-71-26-78 8.2, 8.3 10-31, 10-32 8.4 10-1 8.5, 8.6 10-33, 10-34 8.21, 8.22 10-61, 10-62 8.24 10-63 8.25-8.28 44-31-44-34 9.1 20-31 9.2 20-37 9.7-9.11 20-32-20-36 9.31-9.33 20-71-20-73 9.41-9.44 20-101-20-104 9.51, 9.52 28-166 9.61-9.74 8-1-8-14 9.75-9.84 8-41-8-50 9.102(1) 28-61 9.102(2), 
9.102(3) 28-124, 28-125 9.102(4), 
9.102(5) 28-161, 28-162 9.102(6) 28-63 9.102(7) 28-123 9.102(8) 28-202 9.102(9) 28-126 9.102(11) 28-201 9.102(13) 28-91 9.102(14) 28-62 9.102(15) 28-128 9.102(16) 28-127 9.102(17) 28-163 9.102(18) 28-203 9.102(19) 28-208 9.102(20)- 
9.102(22) 28-204-28-206 9.102(23) 28-129 9.102(24) 28-207 9.102(25) 28-32 9.102(27) 28-93 9.102(28) 28-92 9.102(29) 28-130 9.102(30) 28-62 9.102(31), 
9.102(32) 28-164, 28-165 9.102(34) 28-34 9.103, 9.104 28-121, 28-122 9.105 28-64 9.117, 9.118 40-161 9.119 40-162 9.121-9.126 40-121-40-126 9.141 28-292, 28-293 9.142-9.146 28-294-28-298 9.147 28-291 9.162 28-209 9.168-9.177 6-121-6-130 9.181 28-33 9.183, 9.184 22-1, 22-2 9.200(3), 
9.200(4) 2-202, 2-203 9.200(intro. ¶) 2-201 10.1 44-1, 44-2 10.2 44-1, 44-2 10.5 44-1 10.42 44-4 10.76 44-4 10.410 44-3 ch. 28, § 1- 
ch. 28, § 18 42-81-42-98 ch. 56, § 1- 
ch. 56, § 10 52-411-52-420 ch. 83, § 1 2-181 ch. 83, §§ 2-4 2-182 ch. 83, §§ 5, 6 2-183 ch. 83, § 7, 
ch. 83, § 8 2-184, 2-185 ch. 100, § 1 10-122 ch. 100, § 2 10-121 ch. 100, § 3- 
ch. 100, § 5 10-123-10-125 ch. 103, § 1- 
ch. 103, § 4 20-131-20-134 ch. 104 20-161-20-166 ch. 117, art. I, § 1- 
ch. 117, art. I, § 9 28-361-28-369 ch. 117, art. II, § 1 28-321 ch. 117, art. II, § 3 28-323 ch. 117, art. II, § 4 28-325 ch. 117, art. II, § 5 28-324 ch. 117, art, II, § 2 28-322 ch. 118, § 1- 
ch. 118, § 4 28-261-28-264  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1985 Code, as supplemented, which are included herein. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 2002-012 11- 4-2002 52-312 2003-016  4-21-2003 28-361-28-369 2004-04  9-20-2004 1-7 adopting ord., 
p. xi Ord. of  9- 5-2006 52-2 52-32       Added 52-34 52-52 52-71-52-72       Added 52-73-52-76 52-181-52-186 52-211-52-217 52-243 52-244 52-305 52-306       Dltd 52-310       Added 52-313-52-317 52-341-42-343       Added 52-344-52-348 52-375 52-376 52-381 52-411-52-420       Added 52-421-52-423       Added 52-430-52-448       Added 52-501-52-507       Added 52-515-52-523       Added 52-530 2007-01  2-20-2007       Added 30-71(9), (10) 2007-02  3- 6-2007 52-107       Added 52-144       Added 52-165 2008-01  3- 3-2008       Added 20-200-20-216       Added 22-3, 22-4       Added 28-167 30-71 30-75 46-278       Added 52-118       Added 52-275-52-279 52-308 52-433 52-442 2008-002  8- 5-2008 1-9, 11       Added 16-66 2009-001  5- 4-2009 1 52-279(9)b.       Added 52-279(9)f. 2009-002  9-21-2009 1-11 16-66 2009-003 10- 5-2009 1-22       Added 40-50 2009-004 11- 2-2009 52-277(4)h. 52-277(5)d. 52-279(4), (6) 2009-005  1-18-2010 52-441 2009-006  1- 4-2010       Added 8-15 30-73 2010-001  4-19-2010       Added 44-5 2010-002  7-10-2010 52-279 2010-003  9- 7-2010 1       Added 10-35 2010-004  9- 7-2010 1       Added 10-36 2010-006  9-20-2010 46-71 46-162(f) 2010-010 12- 1-2010       Added 10-37 2011-001  1-17-2011 32-31 2011-002  2- 7-2011 22-31 2011-003  2- 7-2011 10-61 2011-004  3- 7-2011 52-2       Added 52-3, 52-145, 52-166, 52-318 52-211 52-271 2011-005  3-21-2011 38-10 2011-006  4- 4-2011 20-200-20-216 2011-007  7-18-2011       Added 41-1-41-11, 41-20 2011-010  9- 6-2011       Added 22-5 2011-012  9-19-2011       Added 52-349, 52-350 2012-001  1- 3-2012 1-8       Added 2-221-2-228 2012-002  2- 6-2012       Added 51-1-51-11 52-2       Rpld 52-51-52-53 52-121 52-350 52-442 2012-003  6-18-2012 52-274 2012-004  6-18-2012 52-186 52-302 2012-006 11- 5-2012       Added 22-50 52-181 52-211 2012-007 11- 5-2012       Added 8-51 2012-008 11- 5-2012 34-34       Added 34-37 2013-001  7-15-2013 52-143 52-163 52-183 52-213       Added 10-64 2013-003 12-16-2013 20-101 2014-001  3-17-2014 8-1 8-5 8-10       Added 8-16 2014-002  6- 2-2014       Added 20-500-20-513 2014-003  8- 4-2014 52-279(6) 52-305(a) 2014-006  9-15-2014       Added 32-38 2014-007  9-15-2014 22-50(b) 2014-008 10- 6-2014 52-2 52-279(4) 52-314(a) 52-316 52-516       Added 52-517       Rnbd 52-517-52-523       as 52-518-52-524 52-518-52-524       Added 52-525 2014-009 10- 6-2014 52-350 2014-010 11-17-2014 52-211       Added 52-219, 52-220, 52-526 2015-003  4-20-2015 46-32 46-124 2015-004  8- 4-2015 52-349 2015-005  9- 8-2015       Rpld 10-121-10-125       Added 10-121-10-124 2016-001  6- 6-2016 52-317 40-47 2016-002 12- 5-2016 52-2       Rpld 52-3 52-145 52-166       Rpld 52-211 52-271 2017-001  5-15-2017       Added 52-211 52-220 2017-002  5-15-2017 52-241 52-271       Added 52-351 2017-003  9-18-2017 30-74 28-167 2017-005 11- 6-2017 36-34 2017-006 11- 6-2017       Added 27-1, 27-2, 27-31-27-40, 27-61-27-65, 27-91-27-108 2017-007 12- 4-2017 40-162 2017-009 12- 4-2017 27-1, 27-2, 27-31-27-40, 27-61-27-65, 27-91-27-108 2018-001  1- 2-2018 52-2       Added 52-319 2018-002  3- 5-2018       Added 46-49 2018-003  4- 7-2018 52-271 2018-004  5- 7-2018 34-1, 52-75       Added 52-320       Rpld 48-31-48-43 2018-005  9- 4-2018 52-181 2018-006 10- 1-2018 16-103 2018-008 11- 5-2018       Added 52-122  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
MCL Section  
this Code 7.142 34-73 8.3 et seq. 1-2 8.3u 1-6 8.4 1-4 8.4b 1-3 14.301 et seq. Ch. 32 15.181 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 15.231 et seq. Char. § 16.3 
Ch. 2, Art. II- 
Ch. 2, Art. IV 27-32 42-84 42-97 15-261 52-52(g) 15.261 et seq. Char. § 4.14 Char. § 6.3 Char. § 9.8 Ch. 2, Art. II Ch. 2, Art. IV 15.321 et seq. Char. § 5.8 Ch. 2, Art. III 15.341 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III Char. § 5.8 15.401 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 28.251 et seq. Ch. 26 28.601 et seq. Ch. 26 26-1 29.1 et seq. Ch. 22 29.41 et seq. Ch. 22 29.417 et seq. Ch. 36 35.441 et seq. Ch. 32 32-37 32-74 37.2102 Ch. 2, Art. III 46.401 et seq. Char. Ch. 14 54.211 24-34 68.31 et seq. Char. Ch. 11 Ch. 38 81.1 et seq. Char. § 2.1 82.1 Char. § 1.3 91.1 Char. § 2.7 117.1 et seq. Char. Chs. 1-17 Char. § 1.3 
Char. § 2.1 Ch. 2 117.3(a) Char. Ch. 3 Char. § 3.2 Char. § 9.6 117.3(b) Char. § 4.11 117.3(c) Char. § 4.3- 
Char. § 4.5 117.3(d) Char. Ch. 3 117.3(g) Char. § 8.4 117.3(h) Char. Ch. 9 117.3(i) Char. § 9.2 117.3(j) Char. Ch. 2 117.3(k) Char. Ch. 2 Char. Ch. 7 Char. § 7.6 10-61 10-91 22-31 44-1 117.4 et seq. 40-50 117.4a Char. Ch. 10 117.4a et seq. Char. § 2.3 117.4i(g) Char. § 4.18 Char. § 7.12 117.4i(k) 1-13 117.4j(3) Char. § 2.8 117.4l 1-13 117.5b 1-1 117.5(d) Char. § 5.5 117.5h 28-202 117.5(i) Char. § 13.5 117.6 et seq. Char. § 1.3 117.18 Char. § 1.3 Char. § 2.7 117.56 Char. § 7.2 123.51 et seq. Ch. 30 123.161 et seq. Char. § 12.3 123.361 et seq. Ch. 36 123.811 et seq. Ch. 26 124.1 et seq. Char. § 2.4 124.281 et seq. Ch. 46 124.531 et seq. Char. § 2.4 125.31 et seq. Char. § 7.11 Ch. 52 125.71 et seq. Ch. 16 125.538 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. V 125.581 et seq. Char. § 7.11 Ch. 52 52-1 52-32 52-71 125.583a 52-121 125.583b 52-141 125.584b Ch. 52, Art. VI 125.584e 52-379 125.584g 52-530(g) 125.585 et seq. Ch. 52, Art. II, 
Div. 3 125.601 et seq. Ch. 16 125.651 et seq. Ch. 16 16-31 16-33 125.654 16-32 125.901 et seq. Ch. 16 125.1401 et seq. Ch. 16 Ch. 16, Art. III 16-62 125.1415a 16-61 125.1501 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. II 10-31, 10-32 52-307 125.1508b 10-31 125.1601 et seq. Ch. 16 125.1651 et seq. Ch. 16 Ch. 16, Art. IV 16-101-16-104 125.2307 Char. § 7.10 125.3101 et seq.       51-9 52-32(a) 52-71 52-73 125.3801 et seq.       51-1 51-9 128.1 et seq. Ch. 14 129.11 et seq. Char. § 8.7 133.9 Char. § 10.2 Char. Ch. 11 Ch. 38 141.101 et seq. 46-278 141.261 et seq. Char. Ch. 11 Ch. 38 141.421 et seq. Char. Ch. 8 
Ch. 2, Art. V 141.1001 et seq. Char. Ch. 8 141.1201 Char. Ch. 8 141.2101 et seq. Char. Ch. 8 
Ch. 2, Art. V 168.1 et seq. Char. Ch. 4 Char. § 4.5 Ch. 18 168.24a Char. § 4.17 168.25 Char. § 4.10 168.323 Char. § 4.15 168.491 et seq. Char. § 4.3 168.544c Char. § 4.12 168.568 et seq. Char. § 4.15 168.631 et seq. Char. § 4.7 168.635a Char. § 4.8 168.642a(4) Char. § 4.4 168.644f Char. § 4.11 168.644(G)(2) Char. § 4.1 168.646a Char. § 4.11 168.654 et seq. Char. § 4.2 18-1 168.720 Char. § 4.9 168.861 et seq. Char. § 4.17 168.951 et seq. Char. § 4.18 201.37 Char. § 5.2 Char. § 5.4 211.1 et seq. Char. § 8.4 Char. § 9.2 211.7 et seq. Char. § 9.3 211.10 et seq. Char. § 9.4 211.30 2-122 211.30(3) Char. § 9.9 211.30a Char. § 9.4 Char. § 9.7 2-122 211.31 Char. § 9.9 211.39 Char. § 9.11 211.43b Char. § 8.7 
Ch. 2, Art. V 211.44 et seq. Char. § 9.12 211.55 et seq. Char. § 9.17 211.741 et seq. Char. Ch. 11 Ch. 38 38-4 211.746 Char. § 11.9 211.761 et seq. Char. Ch. 11 Ch. 38 247.61 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. IV 247.171 et seq. Ch. 40 247.291 et seq. Ch. 40 247.321 et seq. Ch. 40 247.651 et seq. 42-93 252.201 et seq. Ch. 34 257.1 et seq. 20-35 20-71 20-131 Ch. 44 44-1 44-64 257.25b 44-5 257.605, 
257.606 Ch. 44 257.606(1)(a) Ch. 44, Art. II 257.610 Ch. 44 257.672 et seq. Ch. 44, Art. II 257.707 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. III 257.941 et seq. Ch. 44, Art. III 257.951 44-2 257.951 et seq. 44-2 259.1 et seq. Ch. 4 259.431 et seq. Ch. 4 287.261 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. II 287.290 Ch. 8 289.1101 et seq. 27-2 289.1101-289.8111 52-2 324.101 et seq. Ch. 20 20-501 324.4301 et seq. Ch. 36 Ch. 46 324.8901 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. V 36-39 324.10101 et seq. 20-501 324.11101 et seq. Ch. 36 324.11501 et seq. Ch. 36 324.11503 36-31 324.11505 36-31 324.14501 et seq. Ch. 36 324.19101 et seq. Ch. 36 324.20101 et seq. 20-501 324.20135(1)(b) 2-225 324.21301 et seq. 20-501 324.36501 et seq. Ch. 8 324.40101 et seq. Ch. 8 324.42701 et seq. 8-1 324.80101 et seq. 20-131 Ch. 50 50-1 324.80110 et seq. Ch. 50 324.81101 44-5 324.81101 et seq. 44-5 333.26421 et seq. 27-1 27-2 52-3 333.26421-333.26430 52-2 333.26423 52-2 333.26424 27-2 52-2 333.27101 et seq. 27-1 27-2 333.27901 et seq. 27-1 27-2 333.2850 Ch. 14 333.7101 et seq. 27-1 28-125 333.7106 27-2 52-2 333.7201 et seq. 28-261 333.26201 et seq.       Ch. 36 380.1 et seq. 28-321 400.271 et seq. Ch. 32 408.651 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. IV 408.681 et seq. Ch. 30 436.1101 et seq. 52-2 436.1915 28-209 440.2328 Ch. 12, Art. III 445.111 et seq. Ch. 32 445.371 et seq. Ch. 32 Ch. 32, Art. IV 445.401 34-72 445.401 et seq. Ch. 34 445.403 34-71 445.404- 
445.407 34-74-34-77 445.471 et seq. Ch. 34 445.472 34-78 446.26 et seq. Ch. 12, Art. III 446.51 Ch. 12, Art. III 446.201 et seq. Ch. 34 456.521 et seq. Ch. 14 484.2101 et seq. Ch. 42 484.2102 42-83 484.2251 42-84 484.3101 et seq. Ch. 42 42-81 42-83 484.3103 42-83 484.3104(2) 42-96 484.3104(3) 42-87 484.3105(1) 42-84 484.3105(3), 
484.3105(4) 42-84 484.3106(1) 42-84 484.3106(1), (2) 42-85 484.3106(2) 42-84 484.3106(5), 
484.3106(6) 42-84, 42-85 484.3106(7), 
484.3106(8) 42-88 484.3108 42-90-42-92 484.3110(4), 
484.3110(5) 42-93, 42-94 484.3113(1) 42-91 484.3113(4), 
484.3113(5) 42-91, 42-92 484.3113(6) 42-95 484.3115 42-85 484.3115(2) 42-98 484.3115(3), 
484.3115(4) 42-85 484.3115(5) 42-89 559.101 et seq. 52-381 560.101 et seq. Ch. 24 24-31, 24-32 24-71, 24-72 24-94 24-101 24-136 52-379 52-381 560.108, 
560.109 24-32 560.263 Ch. 24, Art. IV 24-201 600.101 et seq. 20-166 600.3801 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. II 600.8396 26-71 600.8705 26-74 600.8705-600.8709       26-74 600.8707 26-74 600.8709 26-74 600.9921 Char. Ch. 15 691.1401 et seq. Char. § 16.1 691.1402 Ch. 40 691.1408 Ch. 2, Art. III 712A.1 28-261 712A.1 et seq. 28-298 722.641 et seq. Ch. 28, Art. VIII, 
Div. 4 722.642 28-322 722.644 28-321 722.751 Ch. 28, Art. VIII, 
Div. 3 722.754 Ch. 28, Art. VIII, 
Div. 3 750.1 et seq. Ch. 28 750.49 et seq. Ch. 8 750.50 8-6 750.81 et seq. 28-61 750.141 Ch. 6, Art. III 750.167(1)(c) 28-63 750.167(1)(e) 28-124 750.167(1)(i), (j) 28-208 750.167(1)(l) 28-127 750.170 28-129, 28-130 28-363 750.200 et seq. Ch. 22 750.213 et seq. 28-365 750.227d 30-74 750.234 et seq. 28-161 750.240 28-33, 28-34 750.240 et seq. Ch. 22 750.243a et seq. 28-162 750.303 28-206 750.335a 28-201 750.377a et seq. 28-91 28-367 750.411a 28-34 750.448 28-204 750.448 et seq. 28-203 750.463 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. IV 750.464a Ch. 6, Art. III 750.473 28-321 28-323 750.479 28-32 750.493d 28-166 750.540e 28-64 750.546 et seq. 28-93 28-361, 28-362 28-364 752.541 et seq. 28-121 767.39 28-1  
