CODE OF ORDINANCES VILLAGE OF CASS CITY, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Published in 2003 by Order of the Village Council 
____________ 
Adopted: February 24, 2003 
Effective: March 17, 2003 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
VILLAGE OF 
CASS CITY, MICHIGAN 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Leslie Karr 
President 
____________ 
Donald Ball 
Dawn Hollis 
Cathy Kropewnicki 
Dale McIntosh 
Matt Prieskorn 
Steve Wright 
Village Council 
____________ 
Francis D. Sheridan 
Village Manager 
____________ 
Clinton C. House 
Village Attorney 
____________ 
Joyce A. Bemus 
Village Clerk-Treasurer 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Village of Cass City, Michigan. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the village council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of any ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODECD1:1CODE APPENDIXCDA:1CODE COMPARATIVE TABLECCT:1STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLESLT:1CODE INDEXCDi:1 
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Bill Carroll, Senior Code Attorney, and Robert MacNaughton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Cass City, Michigan. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial 
purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Cass City, Michigan. 
(c)  Copyrighted material.
Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Cass City, Michigan. 2002. 
VILLAGE OF CASS CITY 
ORDINANCE NO. 153
CODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE VILLAGE OF CASS CITY, MICHIGAN; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
THE VILLAGE OF CASS CITY, MICHIGAN, ORDAINS: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, Village of Cass City, Michigan," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 46, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before June 24, 2002, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and costs of prosecution or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. However, unless otherwise provided by law, a person convicted of a violation of this Code which substantially corresponds to a violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of imprisonment is 93 days shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and costs of prosecution or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 93 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the Village may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Village Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after June 24, 2002, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective March 17, 2003. 
On roll call - vote was: Yeas 5 Nays 0 
    This Ordinance is hereby declared to have been adopted by the Village of Cass City Council at a regular meeting thereof duly called and held on the 24th Day of February 2003. 
____________________________
Leslie Karr, Village President_____________________________________
Joyce A. Bemus, Village Clerk/Treasurer 
CERTIFICATION OF CLERK: 
    I HEREBY CERTIFY THAT THE FOREGOING IS A TRUE AND COMPLETE COPY OF AN ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY THE VILLAGE COUNCIL OF THE VILLAGE OF CASS CITY, COUNTY OF TUSCOLA, STATE OF MICHIGAN AT A REGULAR MEETING OF THE VILLAGE COUNCIL DULY CALLED AND HELD ON THE 24th DAY OF FEBRUARY, 2003. 
     Village Clerk  
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Municipal Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No.Date
AdoptedInclude/
OmitSupp. No.168  4-26-2010Include4169  8-30-2010Include42010.09.27-09 
(Motion)  9-27-2010Include4171 10-29-2012Include4173  4-29-2013Omit4176  4-27-2015Omit4175  2-23-2015Include42015.8.31-07 
(Motion)  8-31-2015Include4 
CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    This Code may be known and cited as the "Code of Ordinances, Village of Cass City, Michigan." 
State Law reference- Codification authority, MCL 66.3a. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this Code or any amendment thereto shall, for the purpose of this Code, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Code. The terms "this Code" and "Code" mean the Code of Ordinances, Village of Cass City, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done, as provided in this Code or in any order issued pursuant to this Code, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday it shall be excluded; and when the time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a legal holiday, from 12:00 midnight to 12:00 midnight, shall be excluded. 
    Council, village council. The terms "council" and "village council" mean the village council of the Village of Cass City, Michigan. 
    County. The terms "the county" and "this county" mean the County of Tuscola in the State of Michigan. 
    Gender. A term importing gender shall extend and be applied to both genders and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well. 
    MCL. The abbreviation "MCL" means the Michigan Compiled Laws, as amended. 
    Number. A term importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
    Officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency. Whenever any officer, employee, department, board, commission, or other agency is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the term "of the Village of Cass City, Michigan." Whenever, by the provisions of this Code, any officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency of the village is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty, reference to such officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency means and include such officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency or deputy or authorized subordinate. 
    Person. The term "person" and its derivatives and the term "whoever" include a natural person, partnership, association, legal entity or a corporate body or any body of persons corporate or incorporate. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms "person" and "whoever," as applied to any unincorporated entity, mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof. 
    Public act. The term "Public Act" means Public Acts of Michigan, as amended. 
    Shall, may. The term "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The term "may" is permissive. 
    State. The terms "the state" and "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Michigan. 
    Tense. Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context, all terms used in this Code indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of adoption of this Code but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any act, event, or requirement for which provision is made therein, either as a power, immunity, requirement or prohibition. 
    Village. The term "village" means the Village of Cass City, Michigan. 
State Law reference- Rules of construction, MCL 8.3 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Interpretation per state acts. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this Code, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the interpretation of this Code as those governing the interpretation of the Public Acts of Michigan. 
Sec. 1-4. - Captions. 
    Headings and captions used in this Code following the chapter, article, division and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section. 
Sec. 1-5. - References and notes. 
    Charter references, cross references, state law references and editor's notes are by way of explanation only and should not be deemed a part of the text of any section. 
Sec. 1-6. - Application to future legislation. 
    All of the provisions of this chapter, not incompatible with future legislation, shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this Code, unless otherwise specifically provided. 
Sec. 1-7. - Reference to other sections. 
    Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision. 
Sec. 1-8. - Reference to offices. 
    Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of the village, exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer or functions or change in the official title of the functionary. 
Sec. 1-9. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
Sec. 1-10. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this and the following chapters and sections, so far as they are the same as ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-11. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)	The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)	The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-12. - Code does not affect prior offenses or rights. 
(a)	Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)	The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the village in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-13. - Certain provisions saved from repeal. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)	Any offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of the Code; 
(2)	Any ordinance levying annual taxes;
(3)	Any ordinance appropriating money;
(4)	Any ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money;
(5)	Any ordinance establishing utility rates;
(6)	Any ordinance establishing franchises or granting special rights to certain persons;
(7)	Any ordinance authorizing public improvements;
(8)	Any ordinance authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property;
(9)	Any ordinance annexing or detaching territory;
(10)	Any ordinance granting or accepting easements, plats or dedication of land to public use; 
(11)	Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the village; 
(12)	Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades in the village;
(13)	Any ordinance prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any village officers or employees; 
(14)	Any ordinance prescribing traffic and parking restrictions pertaining to specific streets; 
(15)	Any ordinance pertaining to rezoning;
(16)	Any ordinance relating to sewage treatment or industrial waste control;
(17)	Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature;
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the village clerk's office. 
Sec. 1-14. - Amendment procedure. 
    Amendments to this Code shall be by ordinance. The title of each amendatory ordinance, adapted to the particular circumstances and purposes of the amendment, shall be substantially as follows: 
(1)	To amend any section:
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND SECTION ;#rule; (or SECTIONS ;#rule; AND ;#rule;) OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES, VILLAGE OF CASS CITY, MICHIGAN. 
(2)	To insert a new section or chapter:
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE CODE OF ORDINANCES, VILLAGE OF CASS CITY, MICHIGAN, BY ADDING A NEW SECTION (;#rule;, NEW SECTIONS or A NEW CHAPTER, as the case may be) WHICH NEW SECTION (SECTIONS or CHAPTER) SHALL BE DESIGNATED AS SECTION ;#rule; (SECTIONS ;#rule; AND ;#rule;) (or proper designation if a chapter is added) OF SAID CODE. 
(3)	To repeal a section or chapter:
AN ORDINANCE TO REPEAL SECTION ;#rule; (SECTIONS ;#rule; AND ;#rule;, CHAPTER ;#rule;, as the case may be) OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES, VILLAGE OF CASS CITY, MICHIGAN. 
Sec. 1-15. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	By contract or by village personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the village council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make such changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)	Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections;#rule; to ;#rule;" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-16. - Severability. 
(a)	It is the legislative intent of the village council in adopting this Code that all provisions and sections of this Code be liberally construed to protect and preserve the peace, health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the village. Should any provision or section of this Code be held unconstitutional or invalid, such holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of any of the remaining provisions or sections, it being the intent that this Code shall stand, notwithstanding the invalidity of any provision or section thereof. 
(b)	The provisions of this section shall apply to the amendment of any section of this Code whether or not the wording of this section is set forth in the amendatory ordinance. 
Sec. 1-17. - General penalty. 
(a)	Except as specifically provided otherwise by state law or village ordinance, all violations of this Code are misdemeanors. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person convicted of a violation of this Code that is a misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, and costs of prosecution or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. However, unless otherwise provided by law, a person convicted of a violation of this Code which substantially corresponds to a violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of imprisonment is 93 days shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, and costs of prosecution or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 93 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(b)	The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any section of this Code, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. 
(c)	The penalty shall be in addition to the abatement of the violating condition, any injunctive relief, and/or a revocation of any permit or license. 
(d)	This section shall not apply to the failure of officers and employees of the village to perform municipal duties required by this Code. 
State Law reference- Limitation on penalties, MCL 66.2. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Civil emergencies, ch. 8; community develpoment, ch. 10; elections, ch. 12; law enforcement, ch. 20; planning, ch. 28; special assessments, ch. 32; administration of parking violations bureau, § 38-92; utilities, ch. 40; administration and enforcement of zoning regulations, § 46-41 et seq.; zoning board of appeals, § 46-81 et seq.
State Law reference- Incorporation of villages, MCL 61.1 et seq.; open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq.; freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VILLAGE COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Village council, MCL 65.1 et seq.; standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.; open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq.; freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq.

Sec. 2-31. - Compensation of president and members. 
(a)	The president of the village shall be paid the sum of $40.00 for each council meeting attended, but not to exceed the sum of $600.00 in any one year. 
(b)	The members of the village council shall each be paid the sum of $30.00 for each council meeting attended, but not to exceed the sum of $450.00 in any one year. 
(Ord. No. 122, §§ 1, 2, 12-30-1985)
State Law reference- Compensation, MCL 64.21. 
Secs. 2-32-2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any village officers or employees saved from repeal, § 1-13(13).
State Law reference- Village officers, MCL 62.1 et seq.; standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-61-2-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VILLAGE MANAGER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to employ a village manager, MCL 65.8.

Sec. 2-81. - Establishment of office. 
    In accordance with the authority for the appointment of such village officers as the council shall deem necessary for the execution of the powers granted to the village contained in section 2 of chapter II and section 8 of chapter V of Public Act No. 3 of 1895 (MCL 62.2, 65.8), which is the Charter of the village, there is established the office of village manager. 
(Ord. No. 124, § 1, 9-29-1986)
Sec. 2-82. - Appointment. 
(a)	The village president shall, with the concurrence of four or more trustees, appoint a village manager for an indefinite term, and the village council may, by contract, enter into such other terms and conditions as the manager and council deem appropriate. The manager shall serve at the pleasure of the council and may be removed by the affirmative vote of four or more trustees, but only after a hearing before the council. 
(b)	The manager shall be selected solely on the basis of administrative and executive abilities with special reference to training and experience. 
(c)	The manager shall become a resident of the village or reside a distance of not more than 20 miles from the village boundaries within 90 days from the date of the appointment with extensions permitted upon approval of the council. The manager shall reside within such distance thereafter during the term of office. 
(Ord. No. 124, § 2, 9-29-1986)
Sec. 2-83. - Acting village manager. 
    The village council may appoint or designate an acting village manager during the period of a vacancy in the office of manager or during an absence approved by the council from duties in the village. 
(Ord. No. 124, § 3, 9-29-1986)
Sec. 2-84. - Duties. 
(a)	The village manager shall be chief administrative officer of the village and shall be responsible to the village council for the efficient administration of all affairs of the village and shall exercise management supervision over all departments and over all public property belonging to the village. 
(b)	The manager shall have the following functions and duties:
(1)	Act in behalf of and carry out the instructions of, and be the authorized representative of, the village council. 
(2)	Be responsible for the employment, suspension and discharge of administrative officers and department heads subject to council approval; and the employment, suspension and discharge of all other employees of the village. 
(3)	Be solely responsible to the village president and council for directing all the departments of the village under his jurisdiction, and the personnel therein, within the limits set by law. 
(4)	Attend all meetings of the village council with the right to take part in discussions but without the right to vote. 
(5)	Be a member ex-officio of all committees of the village council.
(6)	Recommend to the council for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient for improvement or betterment of the village. 
(7)	Prepare and administer the budget as provided for in the Uniform Budgeting and Accounting Act, Public Act No. 2 of 1968 (MCL 141.421 et seq.). 
(8)	Be the purchasing agent of the village.
(9)	Exercise and perform all administrative functions that are not imposed by Charter or ordinance upon some other official. 
(10)	Present to the council periodic reports covering the activities of the village administration for which he is responsible. 
(11)	Recommend to the council the salaries to be paid each appointive officer and employee of the village. 
(12)	Perform such other duties as may be required of him from time to time by the council, not inconsistent with the Charter of the village, or with the statute or ordinances. 
(13)	Investigate all complaints concerning the administration of the village, and shall have authority at all times to inspect the books, records and papers of any agent, employee or officer of the village. 
(Ord. No. 124, § 5, 9-29-1986)
Sec. 2-85. - Purchasing responsibilities. 
(a)	The village manager shall act as purchasing agent for all village offices and departments. The manager may delegate some or all of the duties as purchasing agent to another officer or employee, provided that such delegation shall not relieve the manager of the responsibility for the proper conduct of those duties. 
(b)	The village manager shall have the authority to purchase any product or service the cost of which does not exceed $5,000.00, provided that funds have been appropriated. The cost of the product or service shall not exceed the unencumbered balance of the appropriation for that account. Except as provided in this division, the village manager shall not purchase any product or service the cost of which exceeds the amount stated in this subsection without prior approval of the village council. The village manager may promulgate rules governing the purchase of products or services. 
(c)	The village manager shall have the authority to purchase any product or service regardless of its cost when such purchase is necessitated by an emergency condition. The term "emergency condition" means any event which would result in the disruption of a village service which is essential to the public health or safety. 
(Ord. No. 124, § 6, 9-29-1986)
Sec. 2-86. - Dealing with employees. 
    Neither the village council nor the village president shall attempt to influence the employment of any person by the village manager or in any way interfere in the management of departments under the jurisdiction of the manager. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the president and council and its members shall deal with departments under the jurisdiction of the village manager through the manager. 
(Ord. No. 124, § 7, 9-29-1986)
Secs. 2-87-2-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VILLAGE CLERK[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Clerk, MCL 64.5 et seq.

Sec. 2-111. - Establishment of office. 
    In accordance with the authority for the appointment of such village officers as the council shall deem necessary for the execution of the powers granted to the village contained in section 1 of chapter II of Public Act No. 3 of 1895 (MCL 62.1), which is the Charter of the village, there is established the office of the village clerk. The village clerk is an administrative officer of the village. 
(Ord. No. 145, § 1, 1-25-1999)
Sec. 2-112. - Appointment. 
(a)	The village manager shall be responsible for the employment, suspension, and discharge of the village clerk subject to village council approval. The village manager shall make such recommendations to the village president, who with the concurrence of four or more trustees, will effect such actions. The clerk shall serve at the pleasure of the village manager and may, upon recommendation of the village manager to the village president, be removed by the affirmative vote of four or more trustees, but only after a hearing before the council. The village clerk will report and be responsible to the village manager for the official functions and activities of the clerk's position and for the day-to-day operations of the department and office, except as otherwise provided by state law. 
(b)	The village clerk shall be selected on the basis of administrative and technical abilities with special reference to achieving and maintaining certification at the appropriate level for the village. 
(Ord. No. 145, § 2, 1-25-1999)
Sec. 2-113. - Duties. 
    The clerk shall possess all the powers vested in and shall be charged with all the duties imposed upon clerks by state law. In addition, the clerk shall perform all other such duties in the manner prescribed by the Charter of the village, the ordinances of the village, or by state law. The clerk shall perform such other duties as may be assigned or prescribed by state law, the village Charter, ordinances of the village or the council. The clerk shall: 
(1)	Be the clerk of the council and keep a permanent journal of its proceedings.
(2)	Keep a record of all ordinances, resolutions, and actions of the council.
(3)	Have power to administer all oaths required by state law, this Charter and ordinances of the village. 
(4)	Be custodian of the village seal, and affix it to all documents and instruments requiring the seal and shall attest the seal. 
(5)	Be custodian of all papers, documents and records pertaining to the village, the custody of which is not otherwise provided for in this Charter. 
(6)	Give the proper officials of the village ample notice of the expiration or termination of any official bonds, franchises, contracts or agreements. 
(7)	Issue and sign all licenses granted after the license fee has been paid to the treasurer and register such license. 
(8)	Certify by signature all ordinances and resolutions enacted or passed by the council.
(9)	Conduct elections in accordance with this Charter and state election law.
(10)	Be the general accountant of the village and maintain a system of accounts which conform to such uniform system as may be required by state law. 
(11)	Publish and post notices of the village as required by this Charter, state law, and ordinances of the village. 
(Ord. No. 145, § 3, 1-25-1999)
Secs. 2-114-2-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - VILLAGE TREASURER[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Treasurer, MCL 64.9 et seq.

Sec. 2-131. - Establishment of office. 
    In accordance with the authority for the appointment of such village officers as the council shall deem necessary for the execution of the powers granted to the village contained in section 1 of chapter II of Public Act No. 3 of 1895 (MCL 62.1), which is the Charter of the village, there is established the office of the village treasurer. The village treasurer is an administrative officer of the village. 
(Ord. No. 146, § 1, 1-25-1999)
Sec. 2-132. - Appointment. 
(a)	The village manager shall be responsible for the employment, suspension, and discharge of the village treasurer subject to village council approval. The village manager shall make such recommendations to the village president, who with the concurrence of four or more trustees, will effect such actions. The treasurer shall serve at the pleasure of the village manager and may, upon recommendation of the village manager to the village president, be removed by the affirmative vote of four or more trustees, but only after a hearing before the council. The village treasurer will report and be responsible to the village manager for the official functions and activities of the treasurer's position and for the day-to-day operations of the department and office, except as otherwise provided by state law. 
(b)	The village treasurer shall be selected on the basis of administrative and technical abilities with special reference to achieving and maintaining certification at the appropriate level for the village. 
(Ord. No. 146, § 2, 1-25-1999)
Sec. 2-133. - Duties. 
    The treasurer shall possess all the powers vested in and shall be charged with all the duties imposed upon treasurers by state law. In addition, the treasurer shall perform all other such duties in the manner prescribed by the Charter of the village, the ordinances of the village, or by state law. The treasurer shall perform such other duties as may be assigned or prescribed by state law, the village Charter, ordinances of the village or the council. The treasurer shall: 
(1)	Have custody of all monies of the village and all evidence of value belonging to the village, or held in trust by the village. 
(2)	Receive all monies belonging to and receivable by the village, that may be collected by any officials or employees of the village, including license fees, taxes, assessments, utility charges, and all other charges belonging to and payable to the village, and in all cases give a receipt therefor. 
(3)	Keep and deposit all monies or funds in such manner and only in such places as may be determined and report the same in detail to the village manager and in accordance with the Charter, state law, ordinances, and policies. 
(4)	Have such powers, duties, and prerogatives as are conferred by law to enforce the collection of state, county, village, and school taxes upon real and personal property. 
(5)	Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the village or in its possession in a fiduciary capacity. 
(6)	Safely keep all bonds and notes of the village.
(Ord. No. 146, § 3, 1-25-1999)
Secs. 2-134-2-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance appropriating money saved from repeal, § 1-13(3); any ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money saved from repeal, § 1-13(4).
State Law reference- Municipal finance act, MCL 131.1 et seq.; local government fiscal responsibility act, MCL 141.1201 et seq.; uniform budgeting and accounting act, MCL 141.421 et seq.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-161-2-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SALE OF PROPERTY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Authority for this division, MCL 67.4.

Sec. 2-181. - Private sale of public lands and buildings. 
(a)	The village, upon ordinance of the council, may sell lands or buildings acquired by it for any purpose, except park use, at private sale to any purchaser upon such terms as it deems to be in the public interest. 
(b)	The village shall give 28 days' prior published notice in a newspaper circulated in the village of its intent to consider a resolution authorizing such private sale of any publicly owned land or buildings. 
(Ord. No. 128, §§ 1, 2, 9-26-1989)
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 16.
State Law reference- Authority to adopt animal control ordinance, MCL 287.290; crimes related to animals and birds, MCL 750.49 et seq.; wildlife conservation, MCL 324.40101 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 4-1-4-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dog law, MCL 287.261 et seq.

Sec. 4-31. - Running at large; restraint. 
    It is unlawful to permit dogs to run at large at any time on public or private land within the village, other than on land owned by the owner or custodian of the dogs or on land where permission to allow the dogs to run has been obtained. Dogs on a leash no longer than eight feet or accompanied by the owner shall not be deemed to be running at large. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 1, 7-27-1982)
Sec. 4-32. - Barking or howling. 
    It is unlawful to keep or harbor any dog which by loud or frequent barking, yelping, or howling shall cause annoyance to the neighborhood or to people passing to and fro on the streets of the village. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 2, 7-27-1982)
Sec. 4-33. - Vicious dogs. 
    It is unlawful to harbor a dog which is fierce or vicious or a dog that is a dangerous animal as defined by Public Act No. 426 of 1988 (MCL 287.321 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 110, § 3, 7-27-1982)
Sec. 4-34. - Impoundment. 
    Any dogs found in violation of this article will be picked up and impounded by either the village police or the county animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 4, 7-27-1982)
Sec. 4-35. - Picking up strays. 
    It shall be the right of a private citizen to pick up any and all stray dogs running at large in violation of section 4-31 and turn such dogs over to the village police or the county animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 5, 7-27-1982)
Sec. 4-36. - Kennel license. 
    Any person keeping three or more dogs over the age of four months on his property shall obtain a kennel license from the county treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 6, 7-27-1982)
Sec. 4-37. - Violation; municipal civil infraction. 
(a)	The owner of any dog picked up and impounded by either the village police or the county animal control officer for running at large in violation of this article, or any person who fails to obtain a required kennel license or who violates any other provision of this article, is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not more than $50.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation (as authorized by chapter VI, section 2, of the General Law Village Act, Public Act No. 3 of 1895 (MCL 66.2), the village municipal civil infraction ordinance (article II of chapter 20), and other applicable laws.) 
(b)	Repeat offenses under this article shall be subject to increased fines as provided in subsections (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section. As used in this section, the term "repeat offense" means a second, or any subsequent, violation of the same requirement or provision of this article committed by a person within any 90-day period and for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. The increased fine for a repeat offense under this article shall be as follows: 
(1)	The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall not be more than $250.00, plus costs. 
(2)	The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense, or any subsequent repeat offense, shall not be more than $500.00 each, plus costs. 
(c)	Each day on which any violation of this article occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense subject to separate sanctions. 
(d)	The ordinance enforcement officer is designated as the authorized village official to issue municipal civil infraction citations for violations of this article, as provided by the village municipal civil infraction ordinance. As used in this article, the term "ordinance enforcement officer" means the village official, employee, agent or other entity appointed by resolution of the village council to perform the functions and tasks assigned by this article to the ordinance enforcement officer. 
(e)	In addition to any remedies available at law, the village may bring an action for an injunction or other process against any person to restrain, prevent or abate any violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 140, § 4, 6-30-1997)
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Engineering design standards, ch. 14; environment, ch. 16; land divisions and subdivisions, ch. 18; planning, ch. 28; solid waste, ch. 30; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 34; utilities, ch. 40; vegetation, ch. 42; zoning, ch. 46.
State Law reference- Single state construction code, MCL 125.1501 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - International Code. 
(a)	Code adopted. The, "International Code Council (ICC), 2003 version, is adopted by reference as the Property Maintenance Code for the Village of Cass City. Three copies of the Code designated as "The ICC Property Maintenance Code/2003" as published by ICC shall be placed on file in the office of the Village of Cass City Clerk. The regulations set forth in the adopted Code shall apply to all property, structures and buildings in the Village. 
(b)	Reference code. References in the ICC Property Maintenance Code/2003, to "local authorities" shall mean the Village of Cass City. 
(Ord. No. 166, §§ 1, 2, )
Secs. 6-2-6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SWIMMING POOLS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Public swimming pools, MCL 333.12521 et seq.

Sec. 6-31. - Findings of fact. 
    It is determined that private swimming pools may endanger public safety unless carefully regulated and supervised. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1, 6-25-1968)
Sec. 6-32. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Private means that it is not public or semipublic as provided in the current swimming pool regulations established by the state department of health. 
    Swimming pool means a structure either above or below grade, usable for swimming, bathing, or wading purposes, which has a normal water depth at any point in excess of 11/2 feet and which is located on private property for the private use of the owner or occupant of the property and his guests and for which no charge is made for its use. The pool service area shall include all of the area surrounding the swimming pool within a screening fence. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 2, 6-25-1968)
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-33. - Permits. 
(a)	Building permit required. No person shall construct, operate, maintain or use a private swimming pool in the first instance without first having obtained a permit from the zoning administrator in accordance with the provisions of this section. The application for such permit shall be accompanied by plans and specifications which include the following: plot plan; location of pool in relation to lot lines; type of pool and structural details and dimensions. Before any permit shall be issued, such plans and specifications shall be approved by the zoning administrator, and before any swimming pool shall be placed in use, a final inspection and approval shall be made by the zoning administrator. All applications for a permit shall be accompanied by a building permit fee as adopted by resolution of the village council from time to time, which shall replace all other permits or fees otherwise imposed. 
(b)	Operation permit required. No person shall operate, maintain, or use a swimming pool without first having obtained an annual operation permit which shall be valid during the calendar year of its issue from the zoning administrator. The application for such annual operation permit shall be accompanied by a fee as adopted by resolution of the village council from time to time, and the zoning administrator shall inspect the swimming pool to determine that it is fully equipped and in operating condition in all respects as established by this article. 
(Ord. No. 66, §§ 3, 4, 6-25-1968)
Sec. 6-34. - Construction standards. 
(a)	Setback. Swimming pools shall be classified as accessory structures and shall conform to the setback lines as required by the village building and zoning ordinances. No pool edge or accessory building shall be located closer than six feet from any rear or side lot line. 
(b)	Electrical wiring. All electrical wiring applicable to or in the vicinity of such swimming pool shall conform to the standards established in the National Electrical Code, provided further that no overhead electrical wires shall cross within five feet of the pool enclosures. Further, all metal fences, enclosures or railings near or adjacent to such swimming pool, to which bathers have access, which may become electrically alive as a result of contact with broken overhead conductors, or from any other cause, shall be effectively grounded. 
(c)	Plumbing. All plumbing and piping shall conform to the state plumbing code. 
(d)	Drainage. No swimming pool covered by this article shall be connected directly in the residence sewer system but shall be drained into the storm sewer. 
(e)	Enclosure. All swimming pools hereafter constructed shall be enclosed by a fence which is at least six feet in height, located at least five feet from the water surface, and of a type not readily climbed by children. The gates shall be of a self-closing and latching type with the latch on the inside of the gate, not readily available for children to open. If the entire premises of the residence is enclosed, then this subsection may be waived by the zoning administrator upon inspection and approval thereof. Horizontally woven wood fences are not considered acceptable for keeping a pool inaccessible. Doors and gates shall be securely locked when the premises are not being used or when the premises are not being supervised by the householder or his authorized attendant. A dwelling house or accessory building may be used as part of such fence. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 5, 6-25-1968)
Sec. 6-35. - Supervision. 
    No person shall maintain an outdoor swimming pool on his premises without providing adequate supervision at all times when the pool is in use so that no person may be injured or drowned therein. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 6, 6-25-1968)
Sec. 6-36. - Public health measures. 
    Any outdoor swimming pool shall not be used unless adequate public health measures are periodically taken to ensure that the use thereof will not cause the spread of disease. The current standards set by the state department of public health and the county department of public health, to protect health (public) in the use of such swimming pools, as amended from time to time, and any public safety or health regulations that may be adopted by Elkland Township or the village are adopted and made a part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 7, 6-25-1968)
Sec. 6-37. - Revocation of operating license. 
    At any time the operation of the swimming pool does not comply with the provisions of this article, the zoning administrator shall have the right to revoke the operating license of the pool for such period as the zoning administrator shall deem reasonable under the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 8, 6-25-1968)
Secs. 6-38-6-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. No. 160, §§ 1, 2, adopted July 25, 2005, did not specifically amend this Code. Hence, inclusion of said ordinance provisions as § 6-51 was at the editor's discretion.

Sec. 6-51. - Property maintenance code. 
(a)	Code adopted. The Building Officials and Code Administrators International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 version, is adopted by reference as the property maintenance code for the Village of Cass City. Three copies of the code designated as "The BOCA International Property Maintenance Code/2015" as published by BOCA shall be placed on file in the office of the Village of Cass City Clerk. The regulations set forth in the adopted Code shall apply to all property, structures and buildings in the village. 
(b)	Reference code. References in the BOCA International Property Maintenance Code/2015, to "local authorities" shall mean the Village of Cass City. 
(Ord. No. 160, §§ 1, 2, 7-25-2005; Motion No. 2015.8.31-07) 
Sec. 6-52. - Dangerous buildings. 
(a)	It is unlawful for any owner or agent thereof to keep or maintain any dwelling or part thereof which is a dangerous building as defined herein. 
(b)	As used in this section, "dangerous building" means any building or structure which has any of the following defects or is in any of the following conditions: 
(1)	Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit does not conform to the approved fire code of the village, it shall be considered that such dwelling does not meet the requirements of this section; 
(2)	Whenever any portion has been damaged by fire, wind, flood, or by any other cause in such a manner that the structural strength or stability is appreciably less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of any building code of the village where the building is located for a new building or similar structure, purpose or location; 
(3)	Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance is likely to fall or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property; 
(4)	Whenever any portion has settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds than is required in the case of new construction by the building code of the village where the building is located; 
(5)	Whenever the building or structure or any part, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, or because of the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building or portion thereof, or for other reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning is likely to fall or give way; 
(6)	Whenever, for any reason whatsoever, the building or structure or any portion is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used; 
(7)	Whenever the building or structure has been to damaged by fire, wind or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become an attractive nuisance to children who might play therein to their danger, or as to afford a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons, or as to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing a nuisance or unlawful or immoral acts; 
(8)	Whenever a building or structure used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay, damage or faulty construction or arrangement or otherwise, is unsanitary or unfit for human habitation or is in a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease when so determined by a health officer or is likely to work injury to the health, safety or general welfare of those living within; 
(9)	Whenever any building becomes vacant, dilapidated and open at door or window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or accessible to entrance by trespassers. 
(c)	Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, when the whole or any part of any building or structure is found to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition, the village manager shall issue a notice of the dangerous and unsafe condition. Such notice shall be directed to each owner of or party in interest in the building in whose name the property appears on the last local tax assessment records. The notice shall specify the time and place of a hearing on the condition of the building or structure at which time and place the person to whom the notice is directed shall have the opportunity to show cause why the building or structure should not be ordered to be demolished or otherwise made safe. 
(d)	All notices shall be in writing and shall be served upon the person to whom they are directed personally, or in lieu of personal service, may be mailed by certified mail-return receipt requested-addressed to such owner or party in interest at the address shown on the tax records, at least ten days before the date of the hearing described in the notice. If any person to whom a notice is directed is not personally served, in addition to mailing the notice, a copy thereof shall be posted upon a conspicuous part of the building or structure. 
(e)	A hearing officer shall be appointed by the village manager to serve at his or her pleasure, and the village manager shall file a copy of the notice of the dangerous and unsafe condition with the hearing officer. 
(f)	A hearing shall be conducted whereby the hearing officer shall take testimony of the village manager, and any other villages staff or consultants which have assisted the village manager with his or her findings; the owner of the property; and any other interested party. The hearing officer shall render his or her decision either closing the proceedings or ordering the building to be demolished or otherwise made safe. If it is determined by the hearing officer that the building or structure should be demolished or otherwise made safe, he or she shall so order, fixing a time in the order for the owner, agent or lessee to comply therewith. 
(g)	If the owner, agent or lessee fails to appear at the hearing or neglects or refuses to comply with the order, the hearing officer shall file a report of his or her findings and copy of his or her order with the village council and request that the necessary action be taken to demolish or otherwise make safe the building or structure. A copy of the findings and order of the hearing officer shall be served on the owner, agent or lessee in the manner prescribed herein. The village council shall fix a date for an appeal hearing, reviewing the findings and order of the hearing officer and shall give notice to the owner, agent or lessee in the manner prescribed herein of the time and place of the hearing. 
(h)	At the appeal hearing the owner, agent or lessee shall be given the opportunity to show cause why the building should not be demolished or otherwise made safe and the village council shall either approve, disapprove or modify the order for the demolition or making safe of the building or structure. 
(i)	The cost of the demolition or making the building safe, plus an additional 15 percent administrative fee, shall be a lien against the real property and shall be reported to the assessing officer of the village who shall assess the cost against the property on which the building or structure is located. The owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears upon the last local tax assessment records shall be notified of the amount of such cost by first class mail at the address shown on the records. If he or she fails to pay the same within 30 days after mailing by the assessor of the notice of the amount thereof, the assessor shall add the same to the next tax roll of the village and the same shall be collected in the same manner in all respects as provided by law for the collection of taxes by such. 
(j)	An owner aggrieved by any final decision or order of the village council herein may appeal the decision order to the circuit court by filing a petition for an order of superintending control within 20 days from the date of the village council's decision. 
(Ord. No. 161, § 1, 7-25-2005)
Editor's note- Ord. No. 161, § 1, adopted July 25, 2005, did not specifically amend this Code. Hence, inclusion of said ordinance provisions as § 6-52 was at the editor's discretion. 
Secs. 6-53-6-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV - OUTDOOR WOOD FURNACES 

Sec. 6-61. - Definitions. 
(a)	Outdoor wood furnace. Any equipment, device, appliance or apparatus, or any part thereof, which is installed outdoors for the primary purpose of combustion of fuel to produce heat or energy used as a component of a heating system providing heat for any interior space or water source. An outdoor wood furnace may also be referred to as an outdoor wood boiler or outdoor wood-fired hydronic heater. 
(b)	Chimney. Flue or flues that carries off exhaust from an outdoor wood furnace firebox or burn chamber. 
(c)	EPA OWHH phase 1 program. EPA OWHH (outdoor wood-fired hydronic heater program) phase 1 program administered by the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
(d)	EPA OWHH phase 1 program qualified model. An outdoor wood-fired hydronic heater that has been EPA OWHH phase 1 program qualified. The model has met the EPA OWHH phase 1 emission level and has the proper qualifying label and hangtag. 
(e)	Existing outdoor wood furnace. An outdoor wood furnace that was purchased and installed prior to the effective date of this article. 
(f)	Natural wood. Wood, which has not been painted, varnished, or coated with a similar material, has not been pressure treated with preservatives and does not contain resins or glues as in plywood or other composite wood products. 
(g)	New outdoor wood furnace. An outdoor wood furnace that is first installed, established or constructed after the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. No. 168, § III, 4-26-2010) 
Sec. 6-62. - Regulations for outdoor wood furnaces. 
(a)	No person shall, from the effective date of this article, construct, install, or establish, an outdoor wood furnace other than in compliance with the applicable sections of this article. 
(b)	No person shall, from the effective date of this article operate a new outdoor wood furnace unless such operation conforms with the requirements of this article regarding fuels that may be burned in an outdoor wood furnace as set forth in subsections 6-63 (a) and (b) of this article and chimney height as set forth in subsections 6-63 (d) and (f) of this article. 
(c)	All new outdoor wood furnaces shall be constructed, established, installed, operated, and maintained in conformance with the manufacturer's instructions and the requirements of this article. In the event of a conflict, the requirements of this article shall apply unless the manufacturer's instructions are stricter, in which case the manufacturer's instructions shall apply. 
(d)	The owner of any new outdoor wood furnace shall produce the manufacturer's owner's manual or installation instructions to the village manager or his/her designate to review prior to installation. 
(e)	All new outdoor wood furnaces shall be laboratory tested and listed to appropriate safety standards such as UL, CAN/CSA, ANSI or other applicable safety standards. 
(Ord. No. 168, § IV, 4-26-2010) 
Sec. 6-63. - Substantive requirements. 
    Outdoor wood furnaces shall be constructed, established, installed, operated, and maintained pursuant to the following conditions: 
(a)	Fuel burned in any new or existing outdoor wood furnace shall be only natural, untreated wood, wood pellets, corn products, biomass pellets, or other listed fuels specifically permitted by the manufacturer's instructions, such as natural gas or propane backup. 
(b)	The following fuels are strictly prohibited in new or existing outdoor wood furnaces:
(1)	Wood that has been painted, varnished, or coated with similar material and/or has been pressure treated with preservatives and contains resins or glues as in plywood or other composite wood products; 
(2)	Rubbish or garbage, including, but not limited to, food wastes, food packaging, food wraps; 
(3)	Any plastic materials, including but not limited to, nylon, PVC, ABS, polystyrene or urethane foam, and synthetic fabrics, plastic films and plastic containers; 
(4)	Rubber, including tires or other synthetic rubber-like products;
(5)	Newspaper, cardboard, or any paper with ink or dye products;
(6)	Any other items not specifically allowed by the manufacturer or this provision.
(c)	Setbacks for any new outdoor wood furnace (models not EPA OWHH phase 1 program qualified):
(1)	The outdoor wood furnace shall be located at least 25 feet from the property line;
(2)	The outdoor wood furnace shall be located on the property in compliance with manufacturer's recommendations and or testing and listing requirements for clearance to combustible materials; 
(3)	The outdoor wood furnace shall be located at least 50 feet from any residence that is not served by the outdoor wood furnace. 
(d)	Chimney heights for new and existing outdoor wood furnaces.
(1)	The chimney of any new outdoor wood furnace shall extend at least two feet above the peak of the nearest permanent building. 
(e)	Setbacks for new EPA OWHH phase 1 program qualified models.
(1)	The outdoor wood furnace shall be located at least 25 feet from the property line.
(2)	The outdoor wood furnace shall be located on the property in compliance with manufacturer's recommendations and or testing and listing requirements for clearance to combustible materials. 
(f)	Chimney heights for new EPA OWHH Phase 1 Program qualified models.
(1)	The EPA OWHH phase 1 program qualified model chimney shall extend at least two feet above the peak of the nearest permanent building. 
(g)	Outdoor furnaces that use corn, wood pellets, or other palletized biomass shall meet the same setback and stack height requirements as EPA OWHH phase 1 program qualified models. 
(Ord. No. 168, § V, 4-26-2010) 
Sec. 6-64. - Appeals. 
    Appeals from any actions, decisions, or rulings of the Village of Cass City or for a variance from the strict application of the specific requirements in sections 6-62 and 6-63 of this article may be made to the Village of Cass City Board of Appeals. Requests for all appeals shall be made in writing to the board of appeals not later than 30 days of the act, decision, or ruling from which relief is sought. 
(a)	Appeals fees. Appeals fees shall be established by Village of Cass City yearly fee schedule resolution. 
(b)	Public hearing. Within 60 days after receiving the written request, the board of appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal, with prior notice published in a newspaper of general circulation in the village at least 14 days before the date of the hearing and specifying the date, place, time, and purpose of the hearing. 
(c)	Decision of the board of appeals. Within 60 days of the final adjournment of a public hearing, the board of appeals shall affirm, modify, or deny the action, decision, or ruling of the Village of Cass City or correct any omission by the village manager or his/her designate, or approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the application. The decision of the board of appeals shall be in writing and shall contain findings and the factual basis for each finding from the record of the hearing, which shall support the decision of the board of appeals. As part of any decision, the board of appeals shall direct the officer to issue any appropriate permit in conformity with its ruling and shall state a time by which such permit shall be issued, in conformity with this article. 
(d)	Criteria for variances. In making its determination, the board of appeals shall take into consideration the benefit to the applicant if the variance is granted, as weighted against the detriment of the neighborhood or community by such grant. In making such determination the board shall also consider: 
(1)	Whether an undesirable change will be produced in the character of the neighborhood or a detriment to nearby properties will be created by the granting of the variance; 
(2)	Whether the benefit sought by the applicant can be achieved by some method, feasible for the applicant to pursue, other than a variance; 
(3)	Whether the requested variance is substantial;
(4)	Whether the alleged difficulty was self-created, which consideration shall be relevant to the decision of the board of appeals, but shall not necessarily preclude the granting of the variance. 
(Ord. No. 168, § VI, 4-26-2010) 
Chapter 8 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; law enforcement, ch. 20.
State Law reference- Emergency management act, MCL 30.401 et seq.; governor's emergency powers, MCL 10.31 et seq.; continuity of government during an emergency, Mich. Const., 1963 art. IV, § 39; emergency interim local succession act, MCL 31.101 et seq.

Sec. 8-1. - Organization. 
(a)	To ensure compliance with Public Act No. 390 of 1976 (MCL 30.401 et seq.), the village appoints the village manager the coordinator of emergency services activities within the village. 
(b)	The village establishes the position of deputy emergency services coordinator to provide liaison between this village and the county office of emergency services to ensure complete and efficient utilization of all resources during periods of emergency. 
(c)	This chapter will not relieve any elected official or municipal department of the normal responsibilities or authority given by general law or ordinance, nor will it affect the work of the American Red Cross or other volunteer agencies organized for relief in natural disasters. 
(Ord. No. 103, art. I, 12-29-1980)
Sec. 8-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Coordinator means the responsible head of the village office of emergency services, as appointed by the village president. 
    Deputy coordinator means the person appointed to provide liaison services between the village and the county office of emergency services. 
    Disaster means an occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from a natural or human-made cause, including, but not limited to, fire, flood, snowstorm, ice storm, tornado, windstorm, wave action, oil spill, water contamination, utility failure, hazardous peacetime radiological incident, major transportation accident, hazardous materials incident, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, or hostile military or paramilitary action, or similar occurrences resulting from terrorist activities, riots, or civil disorders. 
    Emergency services means preparations for, and relief from, the effects of natural and human-made disaster. 
    Emergency services forces means any employees, equipment, and facilities of any municipal department or agency designated in the official county emergency plan to be part of the total emergency services forces to provide emergency services in the event of a disaster. 
    State of disaster means an executive order or proclamation that activates the disaster response and recovery aspects of the state, local, and interjurisdictional emergency operations plans applicable to the counties or municipalities affected. 
(Ord. No. 103, art. II, 12-29-1980)
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 8-3. - Organization for emergency services. 
(a)	The village president, with the approval of the council, is authorized and directed to prepare for community disasters, utilizing to the fullest extent existing agencies within the village. The president as executive head of the municipal government, shall be responsible for the organization, administration and operation of the village's emergency services forces, if any, working through the county emergency services coordinator and the village coordinator. 
(b)	The employees, equipment, and facilities of all municipal departments, boards, agencies, and commissions suitable for, or adaptable to, emergency service activities may be designated as part of the total emergency services forces of the village. Such designations shall be made by the village president with the approval of the village council. 
(Ord. No. 103, art. III, 12-29-1980)
Chapter 10 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; engineering design standards, ch. 14; environment, ch. 16; land divisions and subdivisions, ch. 18; planning, ch. 28; special assessments, ch. 32; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 34; utilities, ch. 40; vegetation, ch. 42; zoning, ch. 46; franchises, app. A.
State Law reference- Downtown development authority, MCL 125.1651 et seq.; housing and slums clearance projects, MCL 125.651 et seq.; housing corporation law, MCL 125.601 et seq.; urban redevelopment corporations, MCL 125.901 et seq.; rehabilitation of blighted areas, MCL 125.71 et seq.; economic development corporations, MCL 125.1601 et seq.; shopping area redevelopment, MCL 125.981 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Downtown development authority, MCL 125.1651 et seq.

Sec. 10-31. - Establishment. 
    There is created in and for the village an authority to be known as the Cass City Downtown Development Authority pursuant to Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.). The boundaries of the downtown development district shall be as follows: a parcel of land situated in the village and more fully described in section 10-39. 
(Ord. No. 129, § 1, 6-30-1992)
Sec. 10-32. - Purpose. 
    The authority shall analyze the impact of economic changes and growth in the downtown district, and develop plans in coordination with the village's planning commission, to promote orderly economic growth in the downtown development district. With the advice and consent of the village council, the authority shall implement a development plan in the downtown district as necessary to achieve the purposes of the Downtown Development Act, all in accordance with the powers granted by such act. 
(Ord. No. 129, § 2, 6-30-1992)
Sec. 10-33. - Membership; appointment; term; vacancies. 
    The authority shall consist of nine members, consisting of the village president and eight members appointed by the president, subject to approval of the village council. At least five members shall be persons having an interest in property located in the downtown district, and at least one member shall be a resident of the downtown district. Of the members first appointed, two shall be appointed for one year, two for two years, two for three years and two for four years. A member shall hold office until the member's successor is appointed. Thereafter, a member shall serve for a term of four years. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be made by the president for the unexpired term only. Members of the authority shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses subject to approval by the authority. The chairperson of the authority shall be elected by the members. 
(Ord. No. 129, § 3, 6-30-1992)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.1654. 
Sec. 10-34. - Powers and duties. 
    The village downtown development authority shall have all the powers and duties as set forth in Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 129, § 4, 6-30-1992)
Sec. 10-35. - Meetings; rules; records; quorum; officers; employees. 
    The authority shall adopt its own rules governing its procedure and the holding of regular meetings, subject to the approval of the village council. Special meetings may be held when called in the manner provided in the rules of the authority. Meetings of the board shall be open to the public, and a record shall be kept of all proceedings. Five members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. A chairperson and vice-chairperson shall be elected by the authority. The authority may appoint a director who may also serve as secretary, and such other employees or officers as shall be necessary. The authority shall prescribe the duties of all its officers and employees and fix their compensation. All expense items of the authority shall be publicized monthly and financial records shall be open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 129, § 5, 6-30-1992)
Sec. 10-36. - Removal of member. 
    Pursuant to notice and an opportunity to be heard, a member of the authority may be removed for cause by the village council. 
(Ord. No. 129, § 6, 6-30-1992)
Sec. 10-37. - Fiscal year; adoption of budget; reports; audits. 
(a)	The fiscal year of the authority shall begin on July 1 of each year and end on June 30 of the following year, or such other fiscal year as may hereafter be adopted by the village. 
(b)	The authority shall annually prepare a budget and shall submit it to the village manager for submission to the village council. The authority shall not finally adopt a budget for any fiscal year until the budget has been approved by the council. The authority may, however, temporarily adopt a budget in connection with the operation of any improvements which have been financed by revenue bonds where required to do so by the ordinance authorizing the revenue bonds. 
(c)	The authority shall be audited annually by the same independent auditors auditing the village, and copies of the audit report shall be filed with the council. 
(Ord. No. 129, § 7, 6-30-1992)
Sec. 10-38. - Termination. 
    Upon completion of its purposes, the authority may be dissolved by an ordinance duly adopted by the village council. The property and assets of the authority, after dissolution and satisfaction of its obligations, shall revert to the village. 
(Ord. No. 129, § 8, 6-30-1992)
Sec. 10-39. - Boundary description. 
    The village shall be comprised of all that land situated in the village lying within the following described boundaries: 
Commencing at the intersection of the centerlines of Main Street (M-81) and Ale Street, thence east along the centerline of Main Street to its intersection with the east line of Block 1 of Orr's Addition to the village extended south; thence north along the east line of such Block 1 extended north to its intersection with the centerline of Church Street; thence west along the centerline of Church Street to its intersection with the centerline of Oak Street; thence north along the centerline of Oak Street to its intersection with the centerline of the alley in Block 4 of Hugh Seed's Addition to the village extended easterly; thence west along the centerline of such alley extended westerly to its intersection with the centerline of Seeger Street; thence south along the centerline of Seeger Street to its intersection with the centerline of Church Street; thence west along the centerline of Church Street to its intersection with the centerline of Leach Street; thence south along the centerline of Leach Street to its intersection with the centerline of the alley in Block 2 of Jesse Fox's Addition to the village extended easterly; thence west along the centerline of such alley extended westerly into and along the centerline of the alley in Blocks 5 & 6 of Jesse Fox's Second Addition to the village extended west to its intersection with the centerline of Brooker Street; thence north along the centerline of Brooker Street to its intersection with the centerline of Church Street; thence west along the centerline of Church Street to its intersection with the centerline of Hill Street; thence north along the centerline of Hill Street 20 rods; thence west to the west line of the southeast quarter of Section 28, Town 14 North, Range 11 East; thence south along the west line of the southeast quarter of Section 28 to the south quarter corner; thence west along the north line of Section 33, Town 14 North, Range 11 East, 654.25 feet; thence south 1,320 feet; thence east to the west line of the northeast quarter of Section 33; thence north along the west line of the northeast quarter of Section 33 to a point 32 rods south of the northwest corner of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 33; thence east to the easterly right-of-way line of the Grand Trunk Railroad; thence northwesterly along the easterly right-of-way line of the Grand Trunk Railroad to its intersection with the north line of Pine Street extended westerly; thence east along the north line of Pine Street and its westerly extension to its intersection with the centerline of Brooker Street; thence north along the centerline of Brooker Street to its intersection with the centerline of the alley in Wilsey and McPhail's Addition to the village extended westerly; thence east along the centerline of the alley in Wilsey and McPhail's Addition to the east line of Lot 13 of that Subdivision extended northerly; thence south to a point 42 feet south of the northeast corner of Lot 13; thence west to the east line of Lot 12 of that Subdivision; thence south along the east line of Lot 12 of such Subdivision extended south to its intersection with the centerline of Pine Street; thence east along the centerline of Pine Street to its intersection with the west line of Lot 6 of the Original Plat of Cass City extended southerly; thence north along such lot line extended north to its intersection with the center of the alley in Block 4 of the Original Plat of Cass City; thence east along the center of such alley extended easterly into and along the centerline of the alley in Blocks 9 and 10 of Segars Addition to the village extended easterly to its intersection with the centerline of Ale Street; thence north along the centerline of Ale Street to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 129, "Exhibit A", 6-30-1992)
Sec. 10-40. - Expansion of district boundaries. 
(a)	Legal description parcel A. Parcel A shall commence at a point 328 feet west of the southeast corner of the southwest quarter, thence west 200 feet, thence north 20 rods, thence east 200 feet, thence south 20 rods to the point of beginning. 
(b)	Legal description parcel B. Parcel B shall commence at a point 460 feet south of the north quarter corner of Section 33, Town 14 North, Range 11 East, thence west 165 feet, thence south 99 feet, thence east 165 feet, thence north nine feet to the point of beginning, being in part of the northwest quarter of Section 33, Town 14 North, Range 11 East. 
(Ord. of 8-30-1999)
Chapter 12 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2.
State Law reference- Michigan election law, MCL 168.1 et seq.; village elections, MCL 63.1.

Sec. 12-1. - Authority to establish; applicability. 
(a)	Pursuant to the authority conferred by Public Acts No. 254 and 255 of 1998, the village establishes nonpartisan elections. 
(b)	This section applies to all candidates seeking election for village office.
(Ord. No. 147, §§ I, II, 3-27-2000)
State Law reference- Authority to establish nonpartisan elections, MCL 63.3. 
Chapter 14 - ENGINEERING DESIGN STANDARDS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; community development, ch. 10; environment, ch. 16; land divisions and subdivisions, ch. 18; utilities, ch. 40.

Sec. 14-1. - Purpose of chapter. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide a reasonable and proper basis for the design and construction of subdivision and other project site improvements including sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main, paving and site grading. 
(Ord. No. 81, art. I, 5-15-1973)
Sec. 14-2. - General requirements. 
(a)	Plans submitted shall be on 24-inch by 36-inch white prints having blue or black lines, and shall be neatly and accurately prepared. Judgement should be exercised in the design, layout, and presentation of proposed improvements. 
(b)	For projects or subdivisions having more than one sheet of plans, a general plan having a scale of one inch equals 100 feet shall be provided showing the overall project or subdivision and indicating the location of all improvements shown in the detailed plans. Street names, lot lines and lot numbers shall be shown in all plans. Easements shall have a minimum width of 12 feet. Sewers in easements shall be kept at least two feet away from side or rear lot lines. Superimposed on this general plan shall be two-foot contours of the area including the area at least 100 feet outside of the subdivision. 
(c)	All sewers shall be shown in plan and profile. Profiles of sewers shall indicate the size, invert and slope of the sewer and shall indicate the existing ground along the route of the sewer and the proposed or existing top of curb or edge of pavement grade. 
(d)	Elevations shall be on United States Geological Survey (USGS) datum. Benchmarks for the work shall be indicated on the plan. 
(e)	Finished grades of structures shall be indicated on the plan or profile for all structures.
(f)	A copy of the computed plat shall be submitted.
(g)	All plans submitted shall bear the seal of the registered professional engineer responsible for the design. 
(h)	One mylar copy of an as-built plan of water, sanitary sewer, roads and storm sewer system and certification from a registered professional engineer that all surface grades, roads and structures are in conformance with the approved plan shall be provided prior to acceptance of the subdivision improvements by the village. 
(i)	Complete subdivision improvement plans shall be submitted prior to review and approval of any portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 81, art. II, 5-15-1973)
Sec. 14-3. - Sanitary sewers. 
(a)	Submittal procedure. For village approval of sanitary sewer systems, the applicant shall furnish to the village a detailed estimate of cost and three sets of the sanitary sewer plans and specifications, including the general plan, for the system on which he desires approval. The village engineers shall review the estimate and the plans for conformity to the standards set forth in this section, and certify that they are consistent with the overall utility plans of the village, after which they will return one of the three sets with appropriate comments. The applicant, after making any changes requested on the set of plans returned to him, shall then submit six sets of the revised plans to the village for final approval. The village engineer shall then review these revised plans for conformity to the comments mentioned, heretofore and, if they have been properly made, will transmit four copies to the state health department for a construction permit. An approved copy will be returned to the applicant via the state health department. 
(b)	Design standards. 
(1)	The following notes pertaining to the sanitary sewers shall appear on the plans:
a.	Downspouts, weeptile, footing drains, or any conduit that carries stormwater or groundwater shall not be allowed to discharge into this sewer. 
b.	No sewer installation or portion thereof shall have an infiltration exceeding 500 gallons per inch diameter per mile of pipe per 24-hour period. 
c.	Concrete pipe wye openings shall contain factory installed premium joint material of a type suitable and approved for use with house lead joint specified. 
d.	The village standard details and specifications are incorporated as part of these standards. 
e.	Wherever existing manholes or sewer pipe are to be tapped, holes shall be drilled at four inches center to center around the periphery of opening to create a plane of weakness joint before breaking the section out. 
f.	For the purpose of testing infiltration, a temporary 12-inch deep sump shall be provided in the first manhole above the connection which will be filled in, after successful completion of the infiltration test, up to the standard fillet provided for the flow channel. 
(2)	Prior to starting any sanitary sewer design, the applicant may make use of maps and information available at the village offices. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to verify utility locations provided by the village. 
(3)	The following table of minimum slopes for sanitary sewers shall be adhered to:
Size and Minimum Slope  10 inches@ 0.28  12 inches@ 0.22  15 inches@ 0.15  18 inches@ 0.12  21 inches@ 0.10  24 inches@ 0.08 
(4)	A note or detail shall show the type of bedding upon which the sewer pipe shall be installed. 
(5)	A house lead shall be installed from the lateral sewer to serve each building and shall be a minimum of six inches in diameter within the street right-of-way. House leads shall be constructed to the property line. 
(6)	Sanitary sewer manholes shall be spaced with the following recommended maximums:
10 inches= 300 feet12 inches to 21 inches= 350 feet24 inches and larger= 400 feet 
Manholes shall be placed in the street rights-of-way. In general, sanitary sewers will not be approved in the rear lot easement. Sanitary sewer manholes shall be of precast construction with modified grooved tongue with rubber gasket or block construction utilizing standard manhole blocks. 
(7)	The sewer profile shall indicate the length of run between each manhole, the size and slope of sewer between each manhole, and the class of bedding if concrete bedding is required. Top elevations of all manholes shall be indicated. 
(8)	A minimum depth from top of curb (or road centerline) to the top of any sanitary sewer of 81/2 feet at local control points, or a minimum of nine feet at locations where the sewer grade is parallel to the road grade shall be provided. In all cases, the sewer shall be deep enough to serve, by gravity, a standard depth basement. 
(9)	Each wye or end of house connection shall have a plug with the same type of joint as the main sewer. 
(10)	Allowable types of sewer pipe and joints shall be current village standards and shall be covered on the plans by note or on the profile, where applicable. 
(Ord. No. 81, art. III, 5-15-1973)
Sec. 14-4. - Storm sewers. 
(a)	Submittal procedure. For village approval of storm sewer systems, the applicant shall furnish to the village a detailed estimate of cost and three sets of storm sewer plans and specifications. Detailed storm sewer design computations and the drainage area map indicating the various areas going into the points of inlet shall be provided. The village engineer shall review the estimate and the plans for conformity to standards set forth in this section, and certify that they are consistent with the overall utility plans of the village, after which they will return one of the three sets with appropriate comments. The applicant, after making any changes requested on the set of plans returned to him, shall then submit four sets of revised plans to the village for final approval. The village engineer shall then review these revised plans for conformity to the comments mentioned heretofore and, if they have been properly made, will retain three copies for the village's records, and return one approved copy to the applicant. 
(b)	Design standards. 
(1)	Storm drainage systems shall be designed for a ten-year storm. The rational method for arriving at stormwater runoff shall be used. The formula for rainfall intensity in inches per hour shall be equivalent to I equals 175/T+25, in which T is the time of concentration. The consulting engineer shall use judgement in arriving at proper impervious factors. The consulting engineer shall submit a map outlining the various areas, including off-site upstream areas, which drain to the points of inlet used for design together with the storm sewer design computations. In general, sufficient capacity shall be provided in the storm sewer system to take fully developed (fully paved and sewered) upstream drainage into the system. 
(2)	Where the hydraulic gradient is above the top of the sewer pipe, the design elevation of the hydraulic gradient shall be indicated. 
(3)	Manhole spacing for storm sewers shall be as follows:
Diameter of SewerAbsolute
Maximum
Manhole
Spacing12 inches to 15 inches330 feet18 to 30 inches 350 feet36 inches and 42 inches400 feet48 inches450 feet54 inches and 60 inches500 feet66 inches and larger600 feet 
Note: Height of Lo-Hed pipe shall be used as the criteria for manhole spacing. Catchbasins shall not be constructed over a sewer line to replace manholes. 
(4)	The following information shall be indicated on the storm sewer profile:
a.	Length of run between manholes;
b.	Size and slope of sewer between manholes;
c.	Class of bedding where concrete is required;
d.	Top elevation of all manholes.
Where possible, the slope of the sewers shall provide a minimum velocity of 2.5 feet per second velocity. 
(5)	A note or detail shall show the type of bedding upon which the sewer pipe shall be installed. 
(6)	Where possible, provide a minimum of three feet of cover from the top of curb (or road centerline) to the top of any storm sewer. If the depth of cover to the top of the pipe is less than one foot, C-76-C1. 4 pipe shall be used. If the cover is between one foot and three feet from the top of the curb to the top of the pipe, use C-76-C1. 3 pipe. All catchbasin leads within a street shall be C-76-C1. 3 pipe, including the leads to the manholes. 
(7)	In general, catchbasins shall be located as follows:
a.	At the radius return of street intersections: 150 feet maximum distance along the street between a high point and a corner catchbasin is allowed when drainage is required to go around the corner. 
b.	At all low points in streets.
c.	At intermediate points along the street such that there is a maximum of 600 feet of drainage draining from a high point to a catchbasin or from a previous intercepting catchbasin to this catchbasin. 
d.	A maximum of 900 feet of drainage is allowed from two directions.
(8)	Field catchbasins shall be provided at all low points in easements. Intercepting field catchbasins shall be located so that not more than 600 feet of drainage runs into any one catchbasin other than a low point catchbasin, 1,200 feet of drainage is allowed to run into a low point catchbasin. Field catchbasins shall be located in rear lot easement swales when such swale changes direction by more than 45 degrees. 
(9)	Finished easement grades shall be indicated on the plans.
(10)	Improved open drains may be permitted upon special circumstances in accordance with section 14-11. 
(11)	Headwalls and inlet structures shall be placed as required.
(12)	Allowable types of sewer pipe and joints shall be current village standards and shall be covered on the plan by note or on the profile, where applicable. 
(Ord. No. 81, art. IV, 5-15-1973)
Sec. 14-5. - Water mains. 
(a)	Submittal procedure. For village approval of water main systems, the applicant shall furnish to the village a detailed estimate and three sets of the water main plans and specifications for the system on which he desires approval. The village engineer shall review the estimate and the plans for conformity to the standards set forth in this section, and certify that they are consistent with the overall utility plans of the village, after which they will return one of the three sets with appropriate comments. The applicant, after making any changes requested on the set of plans returned to him, shall then submit six sets of plans to the village for final approval. The village engineer shall then review these revised plans for conformity to the comments mentioned heretofore and, if they have been properly made, will transmit four copies to the state health department for a construction permit. 
(b)	Design standards. 
(1)	The type of pipe and joint shall be in accordance with the current village standards.
(2)	All water main shall be installed with a minimum cover of six feet below finished grade. Where water mains must dip to pass under a storm sewer or sanitary sewer, the sections which are deeper than normal shall be kept to a minimum length by the use of vertical 111/4 degree bends, properly anchored. 
(3)	In general, eight-inch mains will be alternated with six-inch mains in streets within a subdivision system. However, water mains which are main feeders within a subdivision shall be eight-inch. Any six-inch water mains shall not have a run longer than 1,400 feet between connections to an eight-inch water main. Gate valves shall be located in the system such that not more than four valves need be turned off to isolate any section of water main. Moreover, sufficient valves shall be placed such that not more than 30 lots shall be serviced within such section of water main which can be so isolated. Where possible, gate valves shall be located at street intersections five feet from the intersecting street right-of-way line. 
(4)	Hydrants shall be installed along the water main at least every 600 feet. In no case shall a house be more than 350 feet from a hydrant. In commercial or industrial districts, additional hydrants may be required. Hydrants shall be installed at the ends of all dead-end water mains. When near a street intersection hydrants shall be located five feet from the intersecting street right-of-way. Hydrants shall be village standard. 
(5)	The plans shall indicate the finished grades of all hydrants and gate wells.
(Ord. No. 81, art. V, 5-15-1973)
Sec. 14-6. - Paving. 
(a)	Submittal procedure. For village approval of paving design, the applicant shall furnish to the village a detailed estimate of cost and three sets of paving plans and specifications. The village engineer shall review the estimate and the plans for conformity to standards set forth in this section and certify that they are consistent with the overall utility plans of the village after which they will return one of the three sets with appropriate comments. The applicant after making any changes requested on the set of plans returned to him shall then submit four sets of revised plans to the village for final approval. The village engineer shall then review these revised plans for conformity to the comments mentioned heretofore and, if they have been properly made, will retain three copies for the village records, and return one approved copy to the applicant. 
(b)	Design standards. 
(1)	All streets and appurtenances thereto shall be constructed in accordance with the current village standards and specifications. All pavements, accepted as noted in subsection (b)(2) of this section, shall be asphalt pavement with concrete to curb and gutter on each side. 
_____ 
(2)	Street pavement width standards are as follows:
Street TypePavement Width (measured from back of curb to back of curb unless otherwise noted)a.Major thoroughfare48 feetb.Collector streets40 feetc.Industrial street40 feetd.Multiple-family residential streets1.Dedicated streets36 feet2.Undedicated streets32 feet (asphaltic or concrete pavement with or without curb and gutter on each side)e.Minor residential streets32 feetf.Marginal access streets20 feetg.Turnaround (loop) streetsNot less than 80 feet diameter at terminating loop 36 feet wide pavement 
_____ 
(3)	The smallest practical area of land should be exposed at any one time during development.
(4)	When land is exposed during development, the exposure should be kept to the shortest practical period of time. 
(5)	Temporary vegetation and/or mulching should be used to protect critical areas exposed during development. 
(6)	Sediment basins (debris basins, desilting basins, or silt traps) should be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters from land undergoing development. 
(7)	Provisions should be made to effectively accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development. 
(8)	The permanent final vegetation and structures should be installed as soon as practical in the development. 
(9)	The development plan should be fitted to the topography and soil so as to create the least erosion potential. 
(10)	Wherever feasible, natural vegetation should be retained and protected.
(Ord. No. 81, art. VI, 5-15-1973)
Sec. 14-7. - Compliance standards. 
    The approvals required under the provisions of this chapter shall be obtained prior to the installation of any subdivision or project improvements within the village, in public streets, public alleys, public rights-of-way, and public easements, and/or under the ultimate jurisdiction of the village shall comply with all of the provisions and requirements of this or any other related ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 81, art. VIII, 5-15-1973)
Sec. 14-8. - Interpretation. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion and preservation of public health, safety and general welfare in the village. The regulations of this chapter are not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any manner interfere with existing regulations or laws of the village, nor conflict with any state statutes or the county, except that the regulations of this chapter shall prevail in cases where such regulations impose a greater restriction than is provided by existing statutes, laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 81, art. IX, 5-15-1973)
Sec. 14-9. - Fees. 
(a)	At the time of the submittal of plans, specifications and detailed estimate of cost of the proposed subdivision and project improvements, the proprietor shall pay the clerk a fee for review of such equal to one percent of the estimate of cost of the improvements. 
(b)	Further, prior to the construction of subdivision and project improvements, the proprietor shall deposit with the clerk, at least 24 hours prior to the start of construction, a percentage of the total contract price for inspection as follows: 
Contract AmountPercent$0.00 to $5,000.0010$5,000.00 to $50,000.007 but not less than $500.00$50,000.00 to $100,000.005 but not less than $3,500.00Over $100,000.004 but not less than $5,000.00 
The actual fee for inspection, which will be supplied on a full-time basis and shall be borne by the proprietor, will be on a payroll cost, plus 125 percent basis. The fees and charges contained in this section shall be in addition to those charged for debt service charges, connection charges and other charges or fees imposed for sanitary sewer and water supply. 
(Ord. No. 81, art. X, 5-15-1973)
Sec. 14-10. - Insurance and bonds. 
(a)	Prior to construction of subdivision and project improvements, the contractor shall procure and maintain during the life of any contract or agreement for such construction insurance protecting the village from any claim for damages, real, personal or otherwise, in such amounts and form as established by resolution of the village council. 
(b)	Prior to the acceptance of improvements by the village, a one-year maintenance bond in an amount set by and acceptable to the village council shall be posted by the proprietor. 
(Ord. No. 81, art. XI, 5-15-1973)
Sec. 14-11. - Variance. 
(a)	The village council may authorize a variance from these engineering design standards when it determines that undue hardship may result from strict compliance. In granting any variance, the council shall prescribe other conditions that it deems necessary or desirable for the public interest. No variance shall be granted unless the village council finds that: 
(1)	There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the subdivision or project improvement such that a strict application of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his property. 
(2)	The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of the substantial property right of the applicant. 
(3)	The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the area in which such property is situated. 
(b)	Application for any such variance shall be submitted in writing by the proprietor at the time the preliminary plans are submitted, stating fully and clearly all facts relied upon by the proprietor and shall be supplemented with maps, plans, or other additional data which may aid in the analysis of the proposed project. The plans for such development shall include such covenants, restrictions or other legal provisions necessary to guarantee the full achievement of the plan. 
(Ord. No. 81, art. XV, 5-15-1973)
Chapter 16 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 4; buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; community development, ch. 10; engineering design standards, ch. 14; land divisions and subdivisions, ch. 18; design layout standards for environmental protection, § 18-105; parks and recreation, ch. 24; planning, ch. 28; solid waste, ch. 30; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 34; utilities, ch. 40; vegetation, ch. 42; zoning, ch. 46; franchises, app. A.
State Law reference- Natural resources and environmental protection act, MCL 324.101 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1-16-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BLIGHT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 30.
State Law reference- Dangerous buildings, MCL 125.539 et seq.

Sec. 16-31. - Method of determining. 
    The following uses, structures and activities are determined to be blight, or if allowed to exist will result in blighted and undesirable neighborhoods. No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained any of the following causes of blight upon any property owned, leased, rented or occupied by such person in the village: 
(1)	In any area, the existence of any structures or part of any structure which, because of disrepair, fire, wind or other natural disaster or physical deterioration, is no longer habitable, if a dwelling, nor useful for any other purpose of which it is intended. 
(2)	In any area, the existence of any partially unenclosed structure unless such structure is in the course of construction in accordance with a valid and existing building permit. 
(3)	In any area zoned for residential purposes, the open storage upon any property of new or used building materials unless there is in force a valid building permit issued for construction upon such property and such materials are intended for use in connection with such construction. 
(Ord. No. 142, § 1, 9-29-1997)
Sec. 16-32. - Regulations. 
(a)	All buildings and parts thereof erected either before or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be completed in accordance with the building permits issued therefor. If not so completed, the property owner shall put the property back in safe condition ("safe condition" shall be at the discretion of the village zoning administrator), or it may be torn down and removed from the property and any excavation thereunder filled to grade level. 
(b)	No building, structure or uninhabited residence, whether now existing or hereafter erected, shall be left in a dangerous or hazardous condition by virtue of disrepair, depreciation, damage by fire, collapse, or act of God, or by virtue of any other cause, but shall be forthwith repaired or rehabilitated, and the dangerous or hazardous condition removed by the owner or occupant thereof, or in the alternate, torn down and removed, and any excavation thereunder filled to grade level. Such repairs to rehabilitation shall comply in all respects with the provisions of the village building, plumbing and electrical codes governing such buildings. 
(c)	Every tract of land within the village shall be kept clean and free from the accumulation of refuse from repair, alterations or demolition of buildings; and used building materials including, but not limited to, lumber, bricks, concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete or cement, nails, screws and other materials. 
(Ord. No. 142, § 2, 9-29-1997)
Sec. 16-33. - Responsibility of owner and tenant. 
    The owner of each and every tract of land within the village, and any person occupying or controlling the property, shall be responsible for keeping the entire premises free and clear from all such matter as described in this article. The responsibility of an occupant shall not relieve the owner from complying with this article. 
(Ord. No. 142, § 3, 9-29-1997)
Sec. 16-34. - Violations; municipal civil infraction. 
(a)	Any person, firm, corporation, or entity of any kind found violating the provisions of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not more than $100.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation (as authorized by chapter VI, section 2, of the General Law Village Act, Public Act No. 3 of 1895 (MCL 66.2), and the village municipal civil infraction ordinance, article II of chapter 20). 
(b)	Repeat offenses under this article shall be subject to increased fines as provided by this section. As used in this section, the term "repeat offense" means a second, or any subsequent, violation of the same requirement or provision of this article for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. The increased fine for a repeat offense under this article shall be as follows: 
(1)	The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall not be more than $250.00, plus costs. 
(2)	The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense, or any subsequent repeat offense, shall not be more than $500.00 each, plus costs. 
(c)	The ordinance enforcement officer is designated as the authorized village official to issue municipal civil infraction citations for violations of this article, as provided by the village municipal civil infraction ordinance, article II of chapter 20. As used in this article, the term "ordinance enforcement officer" means the village official, employee, agent or other entity appointed by resolution of the village council to perform the functions and tasks assigned by this article to the ordinance enforcement officer. 
(d)	In addition to any remedies available at law, the village may bring an action for an injunction or other process against any person to restrain, prevent or abate any violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 142, § 4, 9-29-1997)
Secs. 16-35-16-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STORAGE OF DISMANTLED OR INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 38.
State Law reference- Abandoned vehicles, MCL 257.252 et seq.

Sec. 16-71. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dismantled motor vehicles and partially dismantled motor vehicles means motor vehicles from which some parts which are ordinarily components of such motor vehicles have been removed or are missing. 
    Dwelling means any house, building, structure, or trailer which is occupied in whole or in part as a home, residence, living or sleeping place, or which is intended to be occupied by one or more human beings, either permanently or transiently. 
    Inoperable motor vehicles means motor vehicles which by reason of dismantling, disrepair, or other cause are incapable of being propelled under their own power. 
    Inoperable motor vehicles also includes any motor vehicle which is not currently licensed, registered and insured. 
    Motor vehicles means any wheeled vehicles which are self-propelled. 
(Ord. No. 101, § 3, 5-27-1980; Ord. No. 162, § 1, 9-26-2005)
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 16-72. - Prohibited acts; exceptions; permit; fees. 
    It is declared to be unlawful for any person to store on or permit to be stored or placed on or allowed to remain on any platted or unplatted parcel of land located in any residential, special purpose, office service, and community business districts, as defined in chapter 46, zoning, or upon any parcel of land on which there is a structure used, in whole or in part, as a dwelling, any dismantled, partially dismantled, or inoperable motor vehicle or any parts of a motor vehicle unless kept in a wholly enclosed garage or other wholly enclosed structure. Any bona fide owner, co-owner, tenant or cotenant may store, permit to be stored or allow to remain on the premises of which he is the owner, co-owner, tenant or cotenant, any one such dismantled, partially dismantled or inoperable motor vehicle, for a period of not to exceed 48 hours if such motor vehicle is registered in his name. Any such owner, co-owner, tenant or cotenant may, in any event of hardship, upon payment of the fee provided in section 16-73, secure a permit from the village clerk to extend such period of 48 hours for an additional period of not to exceed one week for any one such dismantled, partially dismantled or inoperable motor vehicle if such motor vehicle is registered in his name. This section shall not be construed to permit parking or placing of dismantled or partially dismantled vehicles on any street or alley area in the village or in any front yard. 
(Ord. No. 101, § 1, 5-27-1980)
Sec. 16-73. - Issuance of permit; fee. 
    Upon application duly made by the registered owner of a motor vehicle and upon showing of hardship, the village clerk is authorized to issue the permits provided for in section 16-72. A fee as adopted by resolution of the village council from time to time for each permit issued shall be collected and shall be paid into the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 101, § 2, 5-27-1980)
Sec. 16-74. - Application of article provisions. 
    This article shall not apply to a dismantled, partially dismantled, or inoperable motor vehicle or any parts of a motor vehicle located on the premises of a garage, service station, or other business enterprise engaged in the repair, storage, or sale of motor vehicles in any of the zoning districts mentioned in section 16-72. 
(Ord. No. 101, § 4, 5-27-1980)
Sec. 16-75. - Public nuisance. 
    The presence of a dismantled, partially dismantled or inoperable motor vehicle or parts of a motor vehicle on any platted or unplatted parcel of land in violation of the terms of this article is declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 101, § 5, 5-27-1980)
Sec. 16-76. - Responsibility of motor vehicle owner and landowner. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to the owner of the motor vehicle or the person having charge, custody or control of the motor vehicle and also the owner of the private premises on which the motor vehicle or the part thereof is located, and both persons shall be responsible for the removal thereof. 
(Ord. No. 101, § 6, 5-27-1980)
Sec. 16-77. - Violations; municipal civil infraction. 
(a)	Any person who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not more than $50.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation (as authorized by chapter VI, section 2, of the General Law Village Act, Public Act No. 3 of 1895 (MCL 66.2), the village municipal civil infraction ordinance (article II of chapter 20), and other applicable laws). 
(b)	Repeat offenses under this article shall be subject to increased fines as provided by this section. As used in this section, the term "repeat offense" means a second, or any subsequent, violation of the same requirement or provision of this article committed by a person within any 90-day period and for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. The increased fine for a repeat offense under this article shall be as follows: 
(1)	The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall not be more than $250.00, plus costs. 
(2)	The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense, or any subsequent repeat offense, shall not be more than $500.00 each, plus costs. 
(c)	Each day on which any violation of this article occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense subject to separate sanctions. 
(d)	The ordinance enforcement officer is designated as the authorized village official to issue municipal civil infraction citations for violations of this article, as provided by the village municipal civil infractions ordinance. As used in this article, the term "ordinance enforcement officer" means the village official, employee, agent or other entity appointed by resolution of the village council to perform the functions and tasks assigned by this article to the ordinance enforcement officer. 
(e)	In addition to any remedies available at law, the village may bring an action for an injunction or other process against any person to restrain, prevent or abate any violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 140, § 6, 6-30-1997)
Secs. 16-78-16-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NOXIOUS WEEDS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Vegetation, ch. 42.
State Law reference- Control and eradication of noxious weeds, MCL 247.61 et seq.

Sec. 16-111. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Noxious weeds means Canada thistle (Circium arvense), dodders (any species of Cuscuta), mustards (charlock, black mustard and Indian mustard, species of Brassica or Sinapis), wild carrot (Daucus carota), bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis), perennial sowthistle (Sonchus arvensis), hoary alyssum (Berteroa incana), ragweed (ambrosia elatior 1.) and poison ivy (rhus toxicodendron), poison sumac (toxicodendron vernix) or other plant which, in the opinion of the village council, coming under the provisions of this article is regarded as a common nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 51, 6-24-1958)
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, MCL 247.62. 
Sec. 16-112. - Duty of landowner to cut or destroy. 
    It shall be the duty of all owners of lands on which noxious weeds are found growing, or grow in excess of 12 inches in height, to destroy or cut the weeds before they reach a seed bearing stage, and to prevent such weeds from perpetuating themselves, or to prevent such weeds from becoming a detriment to public health. The village clerk shall notify the owner, agent or occupant of any lands on which noxious weeds are found growing, in writing, of such fact. 
(Ord. No. 51, 6-24-1958)
Sec. 16-113. - Fine for refusal to destroy. 
    Any owner who shall refuse to destroy such noxious weeds, as provided for in this article, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $10.00, nor more than $100.00. Such fines, when collected, shall be paid to the village treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 51, 6-24-1958) 
Chapter 18 - LAND DIVISIONS AND SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance granting or accepting easements, plats or dedication of land to public use saved from repeal, § 1-13(10); buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; community development, ch. 10; engineering design standards, ch. 14; environment, ch. 16; planning, ch. 28; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 34; utilities, ch. 40; vegetation, ch. 42; zoning, ch. 46.
State Law reference- Land division act, MCL 560.101 et seq.; condominium act, MCL 559.101 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-31. - Purposes of article. 
    The purposes of this article are to provide for the orderly growth and harmonious development of the community; to secure adequate traffic circulation through coordinated street systems with relation to major streets, adjoining subdivisions, and public facilities; to achieve individual property lots of maximum utility and livability; to secure adequate provisions for water supply, drainage and sanitary sewerage, and other health requirements; to secure adequate provisions for recreational areas, school sites and other public facilities; and to provide logical procedures for the achievement of these purposes. 
(Ord. No. 131, art. I, 1-26-1993)
Sec. 18-32. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley means a dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Block means that property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets, or between the nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, river or live stream; or between any of such areas and any other barrier to the continuity of development. 
    Condominium Act means Public Act No. 59 of 1978 (MCL 559.101 et seq.). 
    Condominium subdivision means a subdivision developed under the regulations of the Condominium Act; sometimes referred to as a "site condominium subdivision." 
    Condominium subdivision plan means equivalent to the term "plat," and shall include the site, survey, and utility plans; floor plans; and sections, as appropriate, showing the existing and proposed structures and improvements including the location thereof on the land. 
    Easement means a specific area of land over which a liberty, privilege, or advantage is granted by the owner to the public, a corporation, or some particular person or part of the public for specific uses and purposes, and which shall be designated a public or private easement, depending on the nature of the user. 
    Improvements means grading, street surfacing, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains, fire hydrants, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, culverts, bridges, and other additions to the natural state of land which increase its value, utility or habitability. 
    Land division act means Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
    Lot means a portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended to be a unit for transfer of ownership or development. 
    Major streets or thoroughfare plan means the part of the master plan which sets forth the location, alignment and dimensions of existing and proposed streets and thoroughfares. 
    Master plan means the comprehensive land use plan for the village, including graphic and written proposals indicating the general locations recommended for the streets, parks, schools, public buildings, zoning districts, and all physical developments of the village, including any unit or part of such plan separately adopted, and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof adopted by the planning commission. 
    Municipal engineer and engineer mean the staff engineer or consulting engineer of the village. 
    Municipal planner and planner mean the staff planner or consulting planner of the village. 
    Parcel (tract) means a continuous area or acreage of land which can be described as provided for in the land division act. 
    Plat means a map or chart of a subdivision of land. 
(1)	Preliminary plat. A map showing all requisite details of a proposed subdivision submitted to an approving authority for purpose of preliminary consideration, prepared in conformance with the land division act and procedures set forth in this article. 
(2)	Final plat. A map of all or part of a subdivision providing substantial conformance to the preliminary plat of the subdivision prepared in conformance with the requirements of the land division act and this article and suitable for recording by the county register of deeds. 
    Proprietor means a natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or combination of any of them, which may hold any ownership interest in land, whether recorded or not. This includes the term "developer" as defined by the condominium act. 
    Public reservation means a portion of a subdivision which is set aside for public use and made available for public use and acquisition. 
    Public utility means any person, firm or corporation, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to furnish, and furnishing under governmental regulations to the public, the following: gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication, telegraph, transportation or water. 
    Public walkway means a right-of-way dedicated for the purpose of a pedestrian access through residential areas, and located so as to connect to two or more streets, or a street and a public land parcel. 
    Street means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct, alley or other way which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway; or, a street or way shown in a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law or approved by official action; or, a street or way on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the county register of deeds. A street includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas, and lawns. 
(1)	Major street. An arterial street of great continuity which is intended to serve as a large volume trafficway for both the immediate municipal area and region beyond, and may be designated in the major thoroughfare plan of the village master plan, as a major street, parkway, expressway, or equivalent term to identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the street plan. 
(2)	Secondary street. A street used primarily to carry traffic from minor streets to major streets. 
(3)	Minor street. A street of limited continuity used primarily for access to abutting properties. 
(4)	Marginal access street. A minor street paralleling and adjacent to a major street which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
(5)	Boulevard street. A street developed to two two-lane, one-way pavements, separated by a median. 
(6)	Turnaround. A short boulevard street permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
(7)	Cul-de-sac street. A minor street of short length, having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated at the other end by a vehicular turnaround. 
(8)	Loop street. A minor street of short length with two openings to traffic, beginning from the same street, and projecting parallel to each other and connecting at their termination by a loop. 
    Subdivide and subdivision mean the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors, or assigns for the purpose of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building development that results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and that is not exempted from the platting requirements by sections 108 and 109 of the land division act (MCL 560.108, 560.109). The terms "subdivide" and "subdivision" do not include a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel; and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of the land division act or the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 131, art. II, 1-26-1993)
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-33. - Compliance standards. 
    The approvals required under the provisions of this article shall be obtained prior to the installation of any subdivision or project improvements within the village, in public streets, public alleys, public rights-of-way, and public easements, and/or under the ultimate jurisdiction of the village. All subdivisions or project improvements within the village installed in public streets, public alleys, public rights-of-way, and public easements, and/or under the ultimate jurisdiction of the village shall comply with all of the provisions and requirements of this article or any other related ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 131, art. VII, 1-26-1993)
Sec. 18-34. - Interpretation. 
    The provisions of this article shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion and preservation of public health, safety and general welfare of the village. The regulations of this article are not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any manner interfere with existing regulations or laws of the state or county, except that the regulations of this article shall prevail in cases where this article imposes a greater restriction than is provided by existing statutes, laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 131, art. VIII, 1-26-1993)
Sec. 18-35. - Review fees. 
(a)	Generally. Preliminary and final plat review fees, engineering fees, attorney fees, water and connection charges and other municipal fees shall be paid by the proprietor as described in this section. 
(b)	Enumeration. If the village manager deems necessary, plats will be reviewed by the village planner. Fees shall be charged for such review on the basis of the following schedule. There shall be no additional planning review fee charged for final plats which are in substantial conformance to a previously approved preliminary plat. 
(1)	For subdivisions:
a.	Preliminary plats and condominium subdivisions (plus $3.50 per lot) .....$300.00 
b.	Final plats which substantially differ from preliminary plats (plus $3.50 per lot) .....200.00 
c.	Review of revised plats (plus $3.50 per lot) .....75.00 
(2)	For multiple-family residential plats (plus $0.75 per dwelling unit) .....300.00 
(c)	Other fees. Fees for review by other personnel or agencies, such as the village engineer or village attorney, shall be charged at an hourly rate. 
(Ord. No. 131, art. IX, 1-26-1993)
Sec. 18-36. - Variance. 
    The village council may authorize a variance from this article when, in its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance. In granting any variance, the village council shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary or desirable for the public interest. In making its findings, as required in this section, the village council shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the village council finds that: 
(1)	There are special circumstances or conditions affecting such property such that the strict application of the provisions of this article would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land. 
(2)	The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner. 
(3)	The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which such property is situated. 
(Ord. No. 131, art. XIII, 1-26-1993)
Secs. 18-37-18-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLATTING PROCEDURE 

Sec. 18-61. - Initial plat investigation. 
    Prior to the preparation of a plat, it is suggested that the proprietor meet informally with the municipal departments concerned to investigate the procedures and standards of the village with reference to this article and with the proposals of the master plan as they affect the area in which the proposed subdivision is located. The proprietor should pay particular attention to the following factors: 
(1)	The proprietor should secure a copy of chapter 46, zoning, this article, engineering specifications, and other similar ordinances or controls relative to the subdivision and improvement of land so as to make himself aware of the requirements of the village. 
(2)	The area for the proposed subdivision should be properly zoned for the intended use.
(3)	An investigation of adequacy of existing schools and the adequacy of public open spaces including parks and playgrounds to serve the proposed subdivision should be made by the proprietor. 
(4)	The relationship of the proposed subdivision with respect to major streets and plans for the widening of thoroughfares should be investigated by the proprietor. 
(5)	Standards for sewage disposal, water supply and drainage of the village and health standards of the county and the state should be investigated by the proprietor. 
(Ord. No. 131, art. III, § 300, 1-26-1993)
Sec. 18-62. - Subdivisions prepared under the plat act. 
    The preparation of a subdivision for platting under the regulations of the land division act may be preceded by an initial plat investigation and shall go through two phases: preliminary plat and final plat, all in accordance with the procedure as follows: 
(1)	Filing. 
a.	Ten copies of the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, together with written application in triplicate, shall be submitted to the clerk for the planning commission. 
b.	The preliminary plat shall be prepared in accordance with section 111 of the land division act (MCL 560.111) and in accordance with the requirements of this article. It shall not be necessary that initial submissions be prepared and sealed by a surveyor, provided that properly sealed copies of the preliminary plat are filed with the clerk prior to the grant of tentative approval by the village. 
c.	The clerk shall receive and check for completeness the preliminary plat as required under section 18-81. Should any of the data required in section 18-81 be omitted, the clerk shall notify the proprietor of the additional data required. If and when complete and basically in conformance with applicable municipal requirements, the clerk shall place the proposal on the agenda of the next regular planning commission meeting, which meeting shall be considered as the filing date of the preliminary plat and at which meeting the proprietor will be scheduled to appear. The planning commission shall act on the preliminary plat within 60 days after the date of filing unless the proprietor agrees to an extension of time in writing. 
d.	The clerk may transmit a copy of the preliminary plat to the village planner and the village engineer for technical review and recommendation. 
(2)	Preliminary plat review by planning commission. 
a.	The planning commission shall review all details of the proposed subdivision within the framework of chapter 46, zoning, within the various elements of the master plan, and within the standards of this article. 
b.	For plats utilizing the subdivision open space option, the planning commission shall review and render an opinion upon the proposed subdivision open space plan from the materials furnished, and such other information as deemed necessary, and render an opinion with respect to the following: 
1.	The suitability of the proposed open land for purposes proposed.
2.	The location and layout of the open spaces with relation to the lots within the subdivision.
3.	The effect upon neighboring areas which would result by the subdivision open space plan and the appropriateness of the development of the lot sizes proposed under the subdivision open space plan in the particular area involved. 
4.	The plan would not require undue changing of the natural grade.
5.	Any other factor related to the development and proper design of the proposed subdivision.
c.	For plats utilizing the subdivision open space option, the village attorney shall review the proposal for the subdivision open space plan option and render an opinion with respect to the following: 
1.	The proposed manner of holding title to the open land.
2.	The proposed manner of payment of taxes.
3.	The proposed method of regulating the use of the open land.
4.	The proposed method of maintenance of property and financing thereof.
5.	Any other factor related to the legal or practical problems of ownership, use and maintenance of the open land. 
d.	Not less than five days' notice shall be sent, by regular mail, to all persons to whom real property is assessed that is immediately adjoining the area to be platted, of the time and place at which the plan will be considered. 
e.	The planning commission shall approve or reject the preliminary plat as follows:
1.	Should the approval be a conditional approval, such conditions shall be met to the satisfaction of the planning commission within the time set by the planning commission or the plat shall be rejected. 
2.	Should the planning commission reject the preliminary plat, it shall record the reasons for rejection and requirements for tentative approval in its minutes. Copies of the minutes shall be sent to the proprietor and filed in the office of the clerk. 
3.	Should the planning commission find that all conditions have been satisfactorily met and the preliminary plat conforms to the land division act and this article, the planning commission shall give tentative approval to the preliminary plat. The chair shall make a notation to that effect on each copy of the preliminary plat and distribute copies of such plat as follows: 
i.	Return one copy to the proprietor;
ii.	Retain one copy which shall become a matter of permanent record in the planning commission files; 
iii.	Forward one copy to the school board or school superintendent of the school district having jurisdiction in the area concerned; 
iv.	File the remaining copies in the office of the clerk.
f.	The action of the planning commission shall become the action of the village council unless the village council shall request a hearing or unless, within 30 days after planning commission action on the preliminary plat, the proprietor files with the clerk a written request for a hearing before the village council. 
g.	If a request for a hearing is made by the village council or by the proprietor, the preliminary plat shall be placed on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled village council meeting occurring not less than ten nor more than 30 days after the planning commission action. The village council may approve, modify, or reject the action of the planning commission. The proprietor shall be required to attend such hearing. 
h.	Tentative approval of the preliminary plat shall confer upon the proprietor the rights granted by section 112 of the land division act (MCL 560.112). 
(3)	Final approval of preliminary plat. The procedure for the preparation and review of a preliminary plat for final approval under section 120 of the land division act (MCL 560.120) is as follows: 
a.	The proprietor shall file a valid preliminary plat with the clerk together with a list certifying all the authorities required for approval in sections 112 to 119 of the land division act (MCL 560.112-560.119). The proprietor shall also provide approved copies of plats from each of the required authorities. 
b.	The village council shall take action on the preliminary plat at its first regularly scheduled council meeting following the submission of the plat or within 20 days of the submission of all necessary approved plats. 
c.	If the preliminary plat conforms substantially to the tentatively approved preliminary plat and meets all conditions laid down for tentative approval, and conforms with all applicable village ordinances and standards, the village council shall give final approval to the preliminary plat. 
d.	For plats utilizing the subdivision open space option, if the village council gives final approval to the proposed subdivision open space plan and if the common open space is to be dedicated to the lot owners, it shall instruct the village attorney to prepare an agreement setting forth the conditions upon which such approval is based, which agreement, after approval thereof by the council, shall be entered into between the village and the proprietor or developer prior to the approval of the final plat based upon the approved preliminary plat. 
e.	The clerk shall promptly notify the proprietor of approval or rejection in writing; if rejected, reasons shall be given. 
f.	Final approval shall be effective for a period of two years from the date of final approval. The two-year period may be extended if applied for by the proprietor and granted by the village council in writing. 
g.	No installation or construction of any improvement shall be made before the preliminary plat has received final approval of the village council, engineering plans have been approved by the village engineer, and any deposits required under division 5 of this article, improvements, have been received by the village. 
(4)	Final plat review and approval. 
a.	Five copies on an approved polyester film and three paper prints of the final plat shall be filed by the proprietor with the clerk and shall deposit such sums of money as the village may require in this section or by other ordinances. 
b.	For plats utilizing the subdivision open space option at the time of application for final plat approval, the proprietor shall deposit cash, certified check, or irrevocable bank letter of credit in the amount of the estimated cost of the proposed improvements to the open land guaranteeing the completion of such improvements within a time agreed upon between the council and the proprietor. 
c.	The final plat shall,be reviewed by the village engineer as to compliance with the approved preliminary plat and plans for utilities and other improvements. 
d.	The village engineer shall forward a recommendation for either approval or rejection of the final plat to the village council. 
e.	The village council shall review all recommendations and take action on the final plat at its next regularly scheduled meeting or within 20 days of its date of filing. 
f.	Upon the approval of the final plat by the village council, the subsequent approvals shall follow the procedure set forth in the land division act. The three prints of the final plat shall be forwarded; one to the clerk, one to the planning commission, and one to the building department. The five polyester film copies shall be forwarded to the clerk of the county plat board. 
g.	If the village council rejects the plat, the clerk shall set forth the reasons for rejection in the minutes of the meeting and shall return the plat to the proprietor. 
(Ord. No. 131, art. III, § 301, 1-26-1993)
Sec. 18-63. - Condominium subdivisions. 
    The procedure for preparation and submittal of a condominium subdivision plan shall be as follows: 
(1)	Filing. 
a.	Ten copies of the condominium subdivision plan of the proposed subdivision, together with written application in triplicate, shall be submitted to the clerk for the planning commission. 
b.	The condominium subdivision plan shall show the name, location and position of the subdivision and the subdivision plan and layout in sufficient detail on a topographic map to enable a determination of whether the subdivision meets requirements for lots, streets, and roads, including drainage and floodplains. 
c.	The clerk shall receive and check the condominium subdivision plan for completeness as required under section 18-81. Should any of the data required in section 18-81 be omitted, the clerk shall notify the proprietor of the additional data required. If and when complete and basically in conformance with applicable municipal requirements, the clerk shall place the proposal on the agenda of the next regular planning commission meeting, which meeting shall be considered as the filing date of the condominium subdivision plan and at which meeting the proprietor will be scheduled to appear. 
(2)	Final approval of condominium subdivision plan. 
a.	The condominium subdivision plan shall be placed on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled village council meeting occurring not less than ten nor more than 30 days after planning commission action. 
b.	In consideration of the condominium subdivision plan, the village council or the proprietor may request a public hearing. The village council may approve, modify, or reject the action of the planning commission. 
c.	Approval of the condominium subdivision plan by the village council shall confer upon the proprietor approval of site sizes, site orientation and street layout for a period two years from the date of final approval. Such approval may be extended if applied for by the proprietor and granted by the village council in writing. 
d.	Upon approval of the condominium subdivision plan by the village council, one print of the final plat shall be forwarded to the village clerk, one to the planning commission and one to the building department. 
e.	If the village council rejects the condominium subdivision plan, the clerk shall set forth the reasons for rejection in the minutes of the meeting and shall return the plat to the proprietor. 
(Ord. No. 131, art. III, § 302, 1-26-1993)
Secs. 18-64-18-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PLAT OR PLAN PREPARATION 

Sec. 18-81. - Preliminary plats and condominium subdivision plans. 
    Condominium subdivision plans and preliminary plats shall contain the following information: 
(1)	Identification and description. The plat or plan shall include the following: 
a.	Proposed name of subdivision.
b.	Location of section, town and range, or by other legal description.
c.	Names and addresses of the proprietor, and the planner, designer, engineer or surveyor who designed the subdivision layout. The proprietor shall also indicate his interest in the land. 
d.	Scale of plat, one inch equals 100 feet as the minimum acceptable scale.
e.	Date and northpoint.
(2)	Existing conditions. The plat or plan shall include the following: 
a.	An overall area map at a scale of not less than one inch equals 1,000 feet showing the relationship of the subdivision to its surroundings within one-half mile such as section lines and/or major streets or collector streets shall be provided. 
b.	Boundary line of proposed subdivision, section or corporation lines within or adjacent to the tract and overall property dimensions. 
c.	Property lines of adjacent tracts of subdivided and unsubdivided land shown in relation to the tract being proposed for subdivision, including those of areas across abutting roads. 
d.	Location, widths, and names of existing public or private streets and public easements within or adjacent to the tract being proposed for subdivision, including those located across abutting roads. 
e.	Location of existing sewers, water mains, storm drains and other underground facilities within or adjacent to the tract being proposed for subdivision. 
f.	Topography drawn as contours with an interval of at least two feet. Topography to be based on USGS datum. 
g.	The school board or school board superintendent of the school district having jurisdiction in the area concerned shall be informed and made aware of the plat by the proprietor. The proprietor shall submit to the clerk a proof of mailing that written notice has been sent by certified mail to such school board or school board superintendent indicating that he has submitted a plat to the clerk for planning commission approval. 
(3)	Proposed conditions. The plat or plan shall include the following: 
a.	Layout of streets indicating proposed street names, right-of-way widths, and connections with adjoining platted streets and also the widths and location of alleys, easements and public walkways. 
b.	Layout, numbers and dimensions of lots or sites, including building setback lines showing dimensions. 
c.	Indication of parcels of land intended to be dedicated or set aside for public use or for the use of property owners in the subdivision. 
d.	An indication of the ownership, and existing and proposed use of any parcels identified as excepted on the plat or plan. If the proprietor has an interest or owns any parcel so identified as excepted, the plat or plan shall indicate how this property could be developed in accordance with the requirements of the existing zoning district in which it is located and with an acceptable relationship to the layout of the proposed plat or plan. 
e.	An indication of the system proposed for sewage by a method approved by the village council. 
f.	An indication of the system proposed for water supply by a method approved by the village council. 
g.	An indication of storm drainage proposed by a method approved by the village council and, if involving county drains, the proposed drainage shall be acceptable to the county drain commissioner. 
h.	In the case where the proprietor wishes to subdivide a given area, but wishes to begin with only a portion of the total area, the plat shall include the proposed general layout for the entire area. The part which is proposed to be subdivided first shall be clearly superimposed upon the overall plan in order to illustrate clearly the method of development which the proprietor intends to follow. Each subsequent plat shall follow the same procedure until the entire area controlled by the proprietor is subdivided. 
i.	Plats or plans utilizing the subdivision open space option shall include the following additional information. If there is any conflict between the provisions of this article and the provisions of section 46-433 (subdivision open space plan), the provisions of this article shall prevail. 
1.	A complete description of the land proposed to be dedicated as open land, including a map showing the boundaries of open land. 
2.	An indication of who will own the open land.
3.	The proposed uses of the open land.
4.	A site plan for the improvements to be constructed by the proprietor and an estimate of the cost thereof, both prepared by a landscape architect or civil engineer registered to practice in the state. Such plan shall be at a scale of at least one inch equals 50-foot minimum if containing any improvements or one inch equals 100 feet if the open space is to be left in its natural state. 
5.	Where secondary access to open space areas is located between residential lots, such access area shall be not less than 30 feet in width, but shall be encouraged to be as wide as practicable. 
j.	Section 46-434 permits one-family detached housing to be located on an interior side lot line. If such option is to be selected, the plat or plan shall include maintenance easements required by section 46-434. 
(Ord. No. 131, art. IV, § 400, 1-26-1993)
Sec. 18-82. - Final plats. 
    Condominium subdivisions are not required to submit final plats. Final plats prepared under the land division act shall contain the following information and be prepared as follows: 
(1)	The final plat shall comply with the provisions of the land division act.
(2)	The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved, and it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the proprietor proposes to record and develop at the time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to this article. 
(3)	Plats utilizing the subdivision open space option shall include a legal description of the open space boundaries approved on the tentative preliminary plat. 
(4)	Under this subdivision open space approach, the proprietor shall dedicate sufficient open space area so that each final plat does not exceed maximum density requirements; provided, however, that the entire open space, within a single block, shall be dedicated as a whole. 
(5)	The proprietor shall submit as evidence of title an abstract of title certified to date with the written opinion of an attorney-at-law thereon, or at the option of the proprietor, a policy of title insurance for examination in order to ascertain as to whether or not the proper parties have signed the plat. 
(Ord. No. 131, art. IV, § 401, 1-26-1993)
Secs. 18-83-18-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DESIGN LAYOUT STANDARDS 

Sec. 18-101. - Generally. 
    The subdivision design layout standards set forth under this division are development guidelines for the assistance of the proprietor. All final plans must be reviewed and approved by the village council or its designated representative. 
(Ord. No. 131, art. V(intro), 1-26-1993)
Sec. 18-102. - Streets. 
    Streets shall conform to at least the following minimum design layout standards: 
(1)	Location and arrangement. 
a.	The proposed subdivision shall conform to the various elements of the master plan and shall be considered in relation to the existing and planned major streets, secondary streets and such major streets and secondary streets shall be platted in the location and the width indicated on such plan. 
b.	The street layout shall provide for continuation of secondary streets in the adjoining subdivisions or for the proper projection of streets when adjoining property is not subdivided; or conform to a plan for a neighborhood unit drawn up and adopted by the planning commission. 
c.	The street layout shall include minor streets so laid out that their use by through traffic shall be discouraged. 
d.	Should a proposed subdivision border on or contain an existing or proposed major or secondary street, the subdivision shall provide marginal access streets paralleling the major street. This requirement may be waived by the planning commission if it finds such streets to be unnecessary for adequate protection of residential properties and for adequate separation and reduction of traffic hazards. 
e.	Half streets shall be prohibited, except where absolutely essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of this article, and where the planning commission finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is developed. Wherever there exists adjacent to the tract to be subdivided a dedicated or platted and recorded half street, the other half shall be platted. 
(2)	Right-of-way widths. Street right-of-way widths shall conform to at least the following minimum requirements: 
RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH REQUIREMENTS 
Street TypeRight-of-Way
WidthsMajor streets100 feetSecondary streets66 feetIndustrial service streets66 feetIndustrial collector streets66 feetMultiple-family residential streets (where platted)66 feetMinor (single-family residential) streets66 feetMarginal access streets34 feetTurnaround (loop) streets120 feetAlley33 feetCul-de-sac streets, turnarounds*(1) Industrial75 feet radius(2) Residential and others66 feet radius 
* Maximum length for cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed 600 feet. 
(3)	Street grades. For adequate drainage, the minimum street grade shall not be less than 0.5 percent. The maximum street grade shall be six percent. 
(4)	Street geometrics. Standards for maximum and minimum street grades, vertical and horizontal street curves and sight distances shall be established by resolution of the village council and shall in no case be less restrictive than the standards of the county road commission. 
(5)	Street intersections. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible to 90 degrees. 
(6)	Grading and centerline gradients. Grading and centerline gradients shall be per plans and profiles approved by the village council. 
(7)	Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided. 
(Ord. No. 131, art. V, § 500, 1-26-1993)
Sec. 18-103. - Blocks. 
    Blocks within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)	Sizes. 
a.	Maximum length for blocks shall not exceed 1,320 feet in length.
b.	Widths of blocks shall be determined by the condition of the layout and shall be suited to the intended layout. 
(2)	Walkways. 
a.	Location of walkways or crosswalks may be required by the planning commission to obtain satisfactory pedestrian access to public or private facilities such as, but not limited to, schools and parks. 
b.	Widths of walkways shall be at least 12 feet and shall be in the nature of an easement for this purpose. 
(3)	Easements. 
a.	Utility line easements shall be provided along the rear or side lot lines as necessary for utility lines. Easements shall give access to every lot, park or public grounds. Such easements shall be a total of not less than 24 feet wide, 12 feet from each parcel. 
b.	Recommendations on the proposed layout of utility easements should be sought from all the utility companies serving the area. It shall be the responsibility of the proprietor to submit copies of the preliminary plat to all appropriate public utility agencies. 
c.	Easements three feet in width shall be provided where needed along side lot lines so as to provide for streetlight dropouts. Prior to the approval of the final plat for a proposed subdivision, a statement shall be obtained by the proprietor from the appropriate public utility indicating that easements along specific lot lines will be sufficient for street lighting dropouts. A notation shall be made on the final plat indicating: "The side lot lines between lots (indicate lot numbers) are subject to streetlight dropout rights granted to the (name of utility company)." 
(Ord. No. 131, art. V, § 501, 1-26-1993)
Sec. 18-104. - Lots. 
    Lots within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)	Sizes and shapes. 
a.	The lot size, width, depth and shape in any subdivision proposed for residential uses shall be appropriate for the location and the type of development contemplated. 
b.	Lot areas and widths shall conform to at least the minimum requirements of chapter 46, zoning, for the district in which the subdivision is proposed. 
c.	Building setback lines shall conform to at least the minimum requirements of chapter 46, zoning. 
d.	Corner lots in residential subdivisions shall be platted at least ten feet wider than the minimum width permitted by chapter 46, zoning. 
e.	Excessive lot depth in relation to width shall be avoided. A depth-to-width ratio of three to one shall normally be considered a maximum. 
f.	Lots intended for purposes other than residential use shall be specifically designed for such purposes, and shall have adequate provision for off-street parking, setbacks, and other requirements in accordance with chapter 46, zoning. The intended purpose of such lots shall be marked on the plat. 
(2)	Arrangement. 
a.	Every lot shall front on or abut a street.
b.	Generally, side lot lines shall be at right angles to the street lines.
c.	Residential lots abutting major streets or collector streets where marginal access streets are not desirable or possible to attain shall be platted with reverse frontage lots or with side lot lines parallel to the major traffic streets, or shall be platted with extra depth to permit generous distance between building and such trafficway. 
d.	Generally, lots shall have a front-to-front relationship across all streets where possible. 
(Ord. No. 131, art. V, § 502, 1-26-1993)
Sec. 18-105. - Environmental protection. 
(a)	Natural features. The natural features and character of lands must be preserved wherever possible. Due regard must be shown for all natural features such as large trees, natural groves, watercourses and similar community assets that will add attractiveness and value to the property, if preserved. The preservation of drainage and natural stream channels must be considered by the proprietor and the dedication and provision of adequate barriers, where appropriate, shall be required. 
(b)	Floodplains. Areas under the jurisdiction of the state department of natural resources will require compliance with the land division act and the inland lakes and streams act, part 301 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.30101 et seq.). 
(c)	Wetlands. Areas under the jurisdiction of the state department of natural resources will require compliance with the Goemaere - Anderson wetlands protection act, part 303 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.30301). 
(Ord. No. 131, art. V, § 503, 1-26-1993)
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 16. 
Sec. 18-106. - Subdivision open space plan. 
    The following requirements apply in addition to all other requirements of this article where a subdivision is filed for approval under the subdivision open space plan section of chapter 46, zoning. 
(1)	Consideration by the planning commission and the village council of proposed optional use of the subdivision open space plan shall reflect the basic principles enumerated in section 46-433. 
(2)	The area to be dedicated, to the common use of the subdivision or to the village, for park and recreation purposes, shall in no instance be less than two acres and shall be in a location and shape approved by the village. 
(3)	The area so dedicated shall be centrally located in the subdivision except in those instances where the planning commission finds that another location in the subdivision will preserve natural features or cause continuity to an abutting open space, or that it will abut another natural feature justifying a logical off-center location. 
(Ord. No. 131, art. V, § 504, 1-26-1993)
Secs. 18-107-18-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 18-131. - General requirements. 
(a)	The improvements set forth under this division are to be considered as the minimum acceptable standard. All those improvements for which standards are not specifically set forth shall have such standards set by other ordinance of the village council. All improvements must meet the approval of the village council and must be paid for 100 percent by the subdivider or owner. 
(b)	Prior to undertaking any improvements, the proprietor shall file with the clerk a performance bond or a true copy of an escrow agreement showing that the proprietor has deposited with a bank, or other agent acceptable to the village, cash, certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit, sufficient to guarantee payment for and faithful completion of all improvements within the time specified. The amount of performance bond or deposit shall be determined by the village council based on an estimate by the engineer. The escrow agreement shall provide that the funds so deposited will only be released for payment of work completed on approval of the village. 
(c)	Prior to the acceptance of improvements by the village, a two-year maintenance bond in an amount set by the village council shall be posted by the proprietor. 
(d)	Improvements shall be provided by the proprietor in accordance with the standards and requirements established in this division and/or any other such standards and requirements which may, from time to time, be established by village ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 131, art. VI(intro), 1-26-1993)
Sec. 18-132. - Streets. 
    All streets and appurtenances thereto shall be constructed in accordance with details and specifications approved by the village council. Street pavement widths are measured from back of curb to back of curb. Pavement width standards are as follows: 
Street TypePavement Width1.Major streets40 feet or in conformance with the standards and specifications established by the village engineer or the village council2.Secondary streets40 feet3.Industrial streets40 feet4.Minor residential streets32 feet5.Marginal access streets20 feet6.Multiple-family residential streets (where dedicated)a.Multiple-family minor streeti.No on-street parking26 feetii.With parking on one side32 feetiii.With parking on both sides40 feetb.Multiple-family secondary streeti.No on-street parking32 feetii.With parking on one side40 feet7.Turnaround (loop) streetNo less than 120 feet diameter at terminating loop, 20 feet wide pavement8.Alley20 feet9.Cul-de-sac streets, turnaroundsa.Industrial65 feet radiusb.Residential and others60 feet outer radius, 30 feet inner radius 
(Ord. No. 131, art. VI, § 600, 1-26-1993)
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 34. 
_____
Sec. 18-133. - Utilities. 
(a)	Requirements for underground wiring. The proprietor shall make arrangements for all lines for telephone, electric, television and other similar services distributed by wire or cable to be placed underground entirely throughout a subdivided area, except for major street rights-of-way, and such conduits or cables shall be placed within private easements provided to such service companies by the proprietor or within dedicated public ways, provided only that overhead lines may be permitted upon written recommendation by the village engineer, planning commission, and the approval of the village council at the time of final plat approval where it is determined that overhead lines will not constitute a detriment to the health, safety, general welfare, plat design and character of the subdivision. All such facilities placed in dedicated public ways shall be planned so as not to conflict with other underground utilities. All such facilities shall be constructed in accordance with standards of construction approved by the state public service commission. All drainage and underground utility installations which traverse privately owned property shall be protected by easements granted by the proprietor. 
(b)	Sewage disposal. A sanitary sewer system including all appurtenances shall be required in all subdivisions. Where sanitary sewer lines must be extended to the proposed subdivision, the cost for such extension shall be borne by the proprietor. 
(c)	Water supply. When a proposed subdivision is located within, adjacent to or reasonably near the service area of a public water supply system, water mains, fire hydrants and required water system appurtenances shall be constructed in such a manner as to adequately serve all lots shown on the subdivision plat, both for domestic use and fire protection. Cost for the extension of water lines to the proposed subdivision shall be borne by the proprietor. In the event of the nonexistence or nonavailability of a public water supply system, a subdivision water supply system, if feasible, as determined by the village council, shall be installed by the proprietor. 
(d)	Storm drainage system. An adequate storm drainage system including necessary storm sewers, catchbasins, manholes, culverts, bridges, and other appurtenances shall be required in all subdivisions. Adequate provision shall be made for proper drainage of stormwater runoff from residential rear yards. Each yard shall be self-contained and shall be drained from rear to front except where topography or other natural features require otherwise. Rear yards shall slope at a minimum grade of 0.5 percent. 
(Ord. No. 131, art. VI, § 601, 1-26-1993)
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 40. 
Sec. 18-134. - Other improvements. 
(a)	Sidewalks. A four-foot concrete sidewalk located one foot from the property line on the private property side of all existing and proposed roadways shall be provided. In those instances where no good purpose would be served by the provision of sidewalks, the planning commission may waive this requirement. 
(b)	Public walkways. The walkways shall be developed with a hard surface. Fences and/or other improvements may also be required if the planning commission and/or council determines they are necessary to protect the adjacent property owners. 
(c)	Trees. Existing trees near street rights-of-way shall be preserved by the proprietor. Street trees shall be provided at least one per lot. 
(d)	Street signs. Street name signs will be provided at intersections of all streets by the village. 
(e)	Screening. In the instance where lots have a side or rear relationship to a major street, a wall, fence, berm or landscape plantings, six feet in height, shall be provided as a screening device. Such device shall be located on the property line and shall be of a material suitable to the planning commission. In those instances where no good purpose would be served by the provision of such screening device, the planning commission may waive this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 131, art. VI, § 602, 1-26-1993)
Chapter 20 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; civil emergencies, ch. 8; offenses, ch. 22; traffic and vehicles, ch. 38.
State Law reference- Commission on law enforcement standards act, MCL 28.601 et seq.; uniform crime reports, MCL 28.251 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Minimum employment standards for law enforcement officers. 
    The minimum employment standards for law enforcement officers as established and adopted by the Michigan Law Enforcement Officers Training Council in accordance with Public Act No. 203 of 1965 (MCL 28.601 et seq.) are adopted by reference as if set out fully in this section. 
(Ord. No. 72, § 1, 11-25-1969)
Secs. 20-2-20-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority for this article, MCL 600.8701 et seq.

Sec. 20-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means Public Act No. 236 of 1961 (MCL 600.101 et seq.). 
    Authorized village official means the personnel of the village authorized by this article or any other village ordinance to issue municipal civil infraction citations. In addition to any other designated village personnel, police officers are authorized to issue municipal civil infraction citations for violations of village ordinances. 
    Municipal civil infraction means an act or omission that is prohibited by any village ordinance, but which is not a crime under the ordinance, and for which civil sanctions including, without limitation, fines, damages, expenses and costs may be ordered, as authorized by chapter 87 of the act (MCL 600.8701 et seq.). A municipal civil infraction is not a lesser included offense of a violation of a village ordinance that is a criminal offense. 
    Municipal civil infraction action means a civil action in which the defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
    Municipal civil infraction citation means a written complaint or notice prepared by an authorized village official, directing a person to appear in court regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction violation by the person cited. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 2, 6-30-1997)
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 20-32. - Action; commencement. 
    A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by an authorized village official of a municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to appear in court. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 3, 6-30-1997)
Sec. 20-33. - Citations; issuance and service. 
(a)	A municipal civil infraction citation shall be issued and served by an authorized village official as follows: 
(1)	The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a reasonable time after the citation is issued. 
(2)	The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the district court.
(3)	Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form approved by the state court administrator. 
(4)	The first copy of the citation (the original citation) shall be filed with the district court. The second copy of the citation shall be retained by the village. The third copy (and any duplicate copies, as needed) shall be issued to the alleged violator. 
(5)	A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized village official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the complaint and if the citation contains the following statement immediately above the date and signature of the official: "I declare under the penalties of perjury that the statements above are true to the best of my information, knowledge, and belief." 
(6)	An authorized village official who witnesses a person commit a municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and as completely as possible, an original and any required copies of a citation. 
(b)	An authorized village official may issue a citation to a person if:
(1)	Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction; or 
(2)	Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for an infraction and if the village attorney approves in writing the issuance of the citation. 
(c)	A municipal civil infraction citation shall be served by an authorized village official as follows: 
(1)	Except as provided by subsection (c)(2) of this section, an authorized village official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged violator. 
(2)	If the municipal civil infraction action involves the use or occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged violator, but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first-class mail to the owner of the land, building, or structure at the owner's last known address. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 4, 6-30-1997)
Sec. 20-34. - Contents of citations. 
(a)	A municipal civil infraction citation shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction alleged, the place where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number of the court, and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made. 
(b)	Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that he may do one of the following: 
(1)	Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in person, or by representation, at or by the time specified for appearance. 
(2)	Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction "with explanation" by mail by the time specified for appearance or, in person, or by representation. 
(3)	Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing either of the following:
a.	Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is requested by the village; or 
b.	Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a judge, with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(c)	The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of the following:
(1)	If the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility "with explanation" in person or by representation, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time for an appearance. 
(2)	If the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing, unless a hearing date is specified on the citation. 
(3)	A hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing is requested by the alleged violator or the village. 
(4)	At an informal hearing, the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(5)	At a formal hearing, the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(d)	The citation shall contain a notice in boldface type that the failure of the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor and will result in entry of a default judgment against the alleged violator on the municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 5, 6-30-1997)
Sec. 20-35. - Sanctions; repeat offenses; continuing violations; injunctive relief. 
(a)	The sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil infraction shall be a civil fine in the amount as provided by the ordinance violated, plus any costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions, as authorized under chapter 87 of the act (MCL 600.8701 et seq.) and other applicable laws. 
(b)	Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeat offenses by a person of any requirement or provision of any ordinances. As used in this section, the term "repeat offense" means a second, or any subsequent, admission or determination of responsibility for the same municipal civil infraction made within the period as specified by the ordinance violated. 
(c)	Each day on which any violation designated as a municipal civil infraction continues constitutes a separate offense and shall be subject to sanctions as a separate violation. 
(d)	In addition to any remedies available at law, the village may bring an action for an injunction or other process against a person to restrain, prevent or abate any municipal civil infraction violation. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 6, 6-30-1997)
Chapter 22 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Law enforcement, ch. 20; traffic and vehicles, ch. 38.
State Law reference- Michigan penal code, MCL 750.1 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS 

Sec. 22-31. - Engaging in illegal occupation or business. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to engage in an illegal occupation or business. 
(Ord. No. 75, § 2, 4-25-1972; Ord. No. 91, § 1(c), 3-28-1978)
State Law reference- Such person deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(d). 
Sec. 22-32. - Loitering in place of illegal business or occupation. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly loiter in or about a place where an illegal occupation or business is being conducted. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 1(h), 3-28-1978)
State Law reference- Such person deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(j). 
Sec. 22-33. - False alarm of fire. 
    No person shall willfully or intentionally give any false alarm of fire with intent to deceive others within the village. 
(Ord. No. 75, § 5, 4-25-1972)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.240. 
Secs. 22-34-22-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 

Sec. 22-61. - Window peeping. 
    No person shall be found looking into the windows or doors of any house, apartment or other residence in the village in such a manner as would be likely to interfere with the occupant's reasonable expectation of privacy and without the occupant's express or implied consent. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 1(b), 3-28-1978)
Secs. 22-62-22-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 

Sec. 22-91. - Damage or destruction of personal property. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and maliciously injure or destroy the inanimate personal property of another not belonging to a utility, if the damage resulting from such injury shall be $200.00 or less. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously break down, injure, remove or destroy any monument created for the purpose of designating the boundaries of this village, or any tract or lot of land, or any tree marked for that purpose, or to break down, injure, remove or destroy any milestone, mileboard, guidepost or guide board, lawfully erected upon any highway, street, or any other public way or railroad, or to willfully or maliciously deface, or alter the inscription on any stone, post or board, or to willfully or maliciously mar or deface any building or signboard or extinguish any lamp, or break, injure, or destroy any streetlight, or to willfully or maliciously injure, remove, deface or destroy any board or structure lawfully erected or used for the posting of bills, posters or other notices, or to willfully or maliciously mutilate, deface or destroy any board or structure lawfully erected or used for the posting of bills, posters or other notices, or to willfully or maliciously mutilate, deface or destroy any bill, poster or other printed or written notice lawfully posted on any board or structure used for that purpose, without the consent of the owner or occupant thereof. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy or damage any house, barn, or other building of another, or the appurtenances thereof, if the damage resulting from such injury shall be $200.00 or less. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and maliciously, or wantonly and without cause, cut down or destroy or otherwise injure any tree or shrub not his own, standing or growing on the land of another, the damage for which such cutting down, destruction or injury to the owner of such tree or shrub shall amount to the sum of $200.00 or less. 
(e)	It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully tear down, destroy or in any manner deface any sign, bill or notice on any land, lot or premises in the village; provided, however, that such sign, bill or notice is not in violation of any general law of the state or municipal ordinance, and was placed by the owner or lessee or by his consent. 
(f)	It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously or wantonly tear, deface or mutilate or write upon, or by other means injure or mar any book, pamphlet, map, chart, painting, picture, photograph, periodical, newspaper, magazine, manuscript or exhibit or any part thereof belonging or loaned to any public library. 
(Ord. No. 62, § 1, 5-31-1966)
State Law reference- Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 22-92. - Trespass of business or commercial premises. 
(a)	This section shall apply to all premises in the village on which are located business, commercial or industrial establishments. 
(b)	It shall be a trespass and unlawful for any person, during the close of business hours, to go upon and loiter and remain upon vacant portions, including driveways and parking areas of any privately owned business, commercial or industrial establishments within the village, for any purpose not connected with attending to business in the establishment on such premises. 
(c)	Vacant portions shall include doorways, entranceways and indented or bay areas of any store front. 
(d)	It shall be a trespass and unlawful for any person, during the close of business hours, to loiter and remain upon or against any business, commercial or industrial building within the village, including standing or sitting in doorways or doorsteps, sitting or leaning against windows or doors of buildings, or other projecting parts of buildings, or leaning against windows or doors of buildings for any purpose not connected with attending to business within such building. 
(e)	Any owner may post a notice in or on a business, commercial or industrial building visible from outside of such building stating the business hours of the establishment and that such notice is posted pursuant to this section. Any acts prohibited by this section committed not within the posted business hours shall be a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 136, §§ 1-5, 12-21-1993)
Sec. 22-93. - Remaining in public or private places after closing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remain in any public or private place after its regular closing hours after being told to leave by one authorized to give such an order. 
(Ord. No. 135, § 1(l), 12-21-1993)
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 34. 
Secs. 22-94-22-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 

Sec. 22-121. - Disturbing the peace generally. 
    No person shall make or assist in making any noise, disturbance, or improper diversion, or any rout or riot, by which the peace and good order of the village are disturbed. 
(Ord. No. 75, § 1, 4-25-1972)
State Law reference- Disturbing public places, MCL 750.170. 
Sec. 22-122. - Fighting. 
    No person shall engage in any fight, except in self-defense, within the village. 
(Ord. No. 75, § 3, 4-25-1972)
Sec. 22-123. - Language or gestures causing public disorder. 
    A person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor if, with the purpose of causing public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, or if his conduct is likely to cause public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, such person willfully uses abusive or obscene language or makes an obscene gesture to any other person when such words by their very utterance inflict injury or tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace and invade the right of others to pursue their lawful activities. 
(Ord. No. 75, § 2, 4-25-1972)
Sec. 22-124. - Disorderly intoxication. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be intoxicated in a public place and to either endanger directly the safety of another person or of property or act in a manner that causes a public disturbance. 
(Ord. No. 75, § 2, 4-25-1972; Ord. No. 91, § 1(d), 3-28-1978)
State Law reference- Such person deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(e). 
Sec. 22-125. - Disturbance of assembly or congregation. 
    No person shall willfully disturb any congregation or assembly of persons within the village, who may be congregated or assembled in a lawful manner or for a lawful purpose. 
(Ord. No. 75, § 6, 4-25-1972)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.169, 752.525. 
Sec. 22-126. - Begging and soliciting alms by accosting or forcing oneself upon the company of another. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accosting means approaching or speaking to someone in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon the person, or upon property in his immediate possession. 
    Ask, beg or solicit means, without limitation, the spoken, written or printed word or such other acts as are conducted in furtherance of the purpose of obtaining alms. 
    Forcing oneself upon the company of another means continuing to request, beg or solicit alms from a person after that person has made a negative response, blocking the passage of the individual addressed or otherwise engaging in conduct which could reasonably be construed as intended to compel or force a person to accede to demands. 
(b)	Exceptions. Except when performed in the manner and locations set forth in subsections (c) and (d) of this section, it shall not be unlawful to ask, beg or solicit money or other things of value. 
(c)	Location. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value: 
(1)	On private property if the owner, tenant, or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; 
(2)	Within 15 feet of the entrance to or exit from any public toilet facility;
(3)	Within 15 feet of an automatic teller machine, provided that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance to or exit of the automated teller machine facility; 
(4)	Within 15 feet of any pay telephone, provided that when a pay telephone is located within a telephone booth or other facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the telephone booth or facility; 
(5)	In any public transportation vehicle or in any bus or subway station or within 15 feet of any bus stop or taxistand; 
(6)	From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the owner or passengers of such vehicle; 
(7)	From any person who is waiting in line for entry to any building, public or private, including any residence, business, or athletic facility; or 
(8)	Within 15 feet of the entrance to or exit from a building, public or private, including any residence, business, or athletic facility. 
(d)	Manner. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value by: 
(1)	Accosting another; or
(2)	Forcing oneself upon the company of another.
(Ord. No. 91, § 1(f), 3-28-1978)
Cross reference- Peddlers and solicitors, ch. 26. 
State Law reference- Such person deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(h). 
Sec. 22-127. - Harassment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, with an intent to harass, annoy or alarm another person, to: 
(1)	Follow a person in or about a public place; or
(2)	Engage in a course of conduct, or repeatedly commit acts that alarm, or seriously annoy another person and that serve no legitimate purpose. 
(Ord. No. 75, § 2, 4-25-1972)
Sec. 22-128. - Loitering. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Loitering means remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concept of spending time idly; to be dilatory; to linger; to stay; to saunter; to delay; to stand around and shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around." 
    Public place means any place to which the general public has access and a right of resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose, but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also public grounds, areas or parks. 
(b)	Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle either alone or in consort with others in a public place in such a manner so as to: 
(1)	Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians after having been told to move on by a police officer; 
(2)	Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone on or upon or facing or fronting on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress and regress, therein, thereon and thereto after having been told to move on by a police officer; 
(3)	Obstruct the entrance to any business establishment, without so doing for some lawful purpose, if contrary to the expressed wish of the owner, lessee, managing agent or person in control or charge of the building or premises. 
(Ord. No. 135, § 1(b), 12-21-1993)
State Law reference- Certain loiterers deemed as disorderly persons, MCL 750.167. 
Sec. 22-129. - Unauthorized persons on school property. 
(a)	Any person found to be creating a disturbance in any private, public or parochial school or on the surrounding school grounds, or on fields or recreational areas or other grounds lawfully used for school activities while such activities are in progress, shall leave immediately when so directed by the principal or by any other person designated by the principal. 
(b)	No person shall enter and remain in any public, private or parochial school building during regular or special session or other authorized activities of such schools, who is not a regular enrolled student, teacher, authorized volunteer or other school district employee, unless he shall have first and immediately proceeded to the administrative offices and identified himself to the principal or the principal's designee. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person to enter and remain in any public, private or parochial school, or on surrounding school grounds within 250 feet of the school building, after being requested to leave by the principal or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 135, § 2, 12-21-1993)
Secs. 22-130-22-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS 

Sec. 22-161. - Indecent or obscene conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in indecent or obscene conduct in a public place. 
(Ord. No. 75, § 2, 4-25-1972; Ord. No. 91, § 1(e), 3-28-1978)
State Law reference- Such person deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(f). 
Sec. 22-162. - Soliciting and accosting. 
    Any person, male or female, 17 years of age or older, who shall accost, solicit or invite another in any public place, or in or from any building or vehicle, by word, gesture or any other means, to commit prostitution or to do any other lewd or immoral act, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 1(a), 3-28-1978)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.448. 
Sec. 22-163. - Loitering in house of ill fame. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be found loitering in a house of ill fame or prostitution or place where prostitution or lewdness is practiced, encouraged, or allowed. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 1(g), 3-28-1978)
State Law reference- Such person deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(i). 
Sec. 22-164. - Operation of gambling devices. 
    No person shall operate any wheel of fortune, game of chance or device for gambling or induce others to engage in or operate any such wheel, game, or device within the village. 
(Ord. No. 75, § 4, 4-25-1972)
State Law reference- Gambling, MCL 750.301 et seq. 
Sec. 22-165. - Consumption, sale, purchase or possession of alcoholic liquors. 
(a)	No alcoholic liquors shall be consumed on the public streets, highways, parks and public places within the limits of the village. 
(b)	No person shall sell or furnish alcoholic liquors to persons under the age of 21 years.
(c)	No person under the age of 21 years shall purchase or knowingly possess or transport any alcoholic liquor, or knowingly possess, transport, or have under his control in any motor vehicle any alcoholic liquor in the village unless such person is employed by a licensee under Public Act No. 58 of 1998 (MCL 436.1101 et seq.), and is possessing, transporting, or having such alcoholic liquor in a motor vehicle under his control during regular working hours and in the course of his employment. 
(Ord. No. 75, § 7, 4-25-1972; Ord. No. 100, § 1, 5-27-1980)
State Law reference- Selling or furnishing alcoholic liquor to persons less than 21 years of age, MCL 436.1701; purchase, consumption or possession of alcoholic liquor by persons less than 21 years of age, MCL 436.1703; possessing or consuming alcoholic liquor in public places, MCL 436.1915. 
Sec. 22-166. - Controlled substances. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly loiter in any place within the village where marijuana or paraphernalia used or adapted for use with marijuana are used, sold, dispensed, furnished, given away, or stored, or otherwise illegally kept. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to be in a public place whose ability to walk, talk, or see is significantly impaired by the use of any controlled substance, as defined by article 7 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.7101 et seq.); provided, however, that this subsection shall not be construed to apply to a person whose faculties have been impaired by medication prescribed by a physician and taken as directed. 
(Ord. No. 135, § 1(i), (k), 12-21-1993)
Secs. 22-167-22-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Operation while transporting bows or firearms, § 38-39.

Sec. 22-201. - Throwing objects from moving vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any object from any moving vehicle or toward any person or moving vehicle if he knows or should know that damage to person or property, or alarm, which may forcibly produce damage to personal property, is likely to result. 
(Ord. No. 135, § 1(j), 12-21-1993)
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 38. 
Sec. 22-202. - Sale, possession or use of fireworks. 
(a)	Prohibited generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale, expose for sale, or sell at retail, have in possession, give, furnish, use, explode or cause to explode any firecracker, torpedo or other fireworks of like construction in the village. 
(b)	Permit required. The village council may, upon application in writing, grant a permit for the use of such fireworks, when handled by a competent operator, for public display of fireworks by municipalities, fair associations, amusement parks or other organizations or groups of individuals approved by the village council. After such permit shall have been granted, sales, possession and use of firecrackers, torpedoes and other fireworks of like construction may be only for such purposes as those to which the permit extends. 
(c)	Exemptions. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the sale, transportation, possession or use of any firecrackers, torpedos or other fireworks of like construction for signal purposes by railroads, trucks or automobiles. 
(Ord. No. 61, §§ 1-3, 5-31-1966)
Sec. 22-202.1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall be defined as hereafter stated: 
(a)	Consumer fireworks means fireworks devices that are designed to produce visible effects by combustion that are required to comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 3.5. Consumer fireworks do not include low-impact fireworks. 
(b)	Display fireworks means large fireworks devices that are explosive material intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce visual or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, as provided in 27 CFR 555.11, 49 CFR 172, and APA standard 87-1, 4.1. 
(c)	Firework or fireworks means any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare gun, or flare, designated for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. Fireworks consist of consumer fireworks, low-impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks, and special effects. 
(d)	Low-impact fireworks means ground and handheld sparkling devices as that phrase is defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8, and 3.5. 
(e)	Novelties or novelty means that term as defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.2, 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.2.4, and 3.2.5 and all of the following: 
(1)	Toy plastic or paper caps for toy pistol in sheets, strips, rolls, or individual caps containing not more than .25 of a grain of explosive content per cap, in packages labeled to indicate the maximum explosive content per cup. 
(2)	Toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy trick noisemakers, and toy guns in which toy caps as described in subparagraph 1 are used, that are constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion, and that are not designed to break apart or be separated so as to form a missile by the explosion. 
(3)	Flitter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding 1/8 inch in diameter.
(Ord. No. 171, § 1, 10-29-2012) 
Sec. 22-202.2. - Prohibition on use of all fireworks except as allowed; exception. 
    No person shall ignite, discharge, or use any fireworks within the village except as allowed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 171, § 1, 10-29-2012) 
Sec. 22-202.3. - Prohibition on use of display fireworks; exception. 
    No person shall ignite, discharge, or use display fireworks within the village at any time, unless the following are true: 
(1)	It is a professional, licensed fireworks company; and
(2)	The Village Council of Cass City approves the issuance of a license or permit.
    A permit shall not be issued under this act to a non-resident person, firm, or corporation for ignition of articles pyrotechnic or display fireworks in this state until the person, firm, or corporation has appointed in writing a resident member of the bar of this state or a resident agent to be the legal representative upon whom all process in an action or proceeding against the person, firm, or corporation may be served. 
(Ord. No. 171, § 1, 10-29-2012) 
Sec. 22-202.4. - Prohibition on use of consumer fireworks; exception. 
    No person shall ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks within the village, except this prohibition shall not preclude any person from the ignition, discharge and use of consumer fireworks on the preceding, the day of, or the day after a national holiday consistent with Sec. 7 (2) of Michigan Public Act 256 of 2011. Consumer fireworks ignited, discharged, or used on the dates allowed by this section to be shall strictly conform to the definition of consumer fireworks as stated in this chapter and state statute by only creating visual but not audible effects by their combustion and if not so conforming shall be prohibited on said dates as well as all other times. 
(Ord. No. 171, § 1, 10-29-2012) 
Sec. 22-202.5. - Use of consumer fireworks. 
    Low-impact fireworks shall be ignited, discharged, or used so as to not cause injury or damage to any person or property but shall not be ignited, discharged, or used inside any building or structure at any time without a license or permit issued by the Village Council of Cass City. Novelty fireworks may be ignited, discharged, or used without restriction but such shall only occur in a manner so as to not cause injury or damage to any person or property. 
(Ord. No. 171, § 1, 10-29-2012) 
Sec. 22-202.6. - Limitations on the use of low-impact or novelty fireworks. 
    Consumer fireworks use in the Village of Cass City is limited to the day before, the day of, and the day after, a federal holiday, contingent on the following: 
(1)	Fireworks shall not be sold to a minor.
(2)	No person under the age of 18 years shall use, possess, explode or cause to explode any fireworks, as defined herein, with the village. 
(3)	No person under the age of 18 years shall buy, purchase, acquire or obtain any fireworks, as defined herein, within the village. 
(4)	A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks on public property, school property, church property, or the property of another person without that organization's or person's express permission. 
(5)	For purposes of this section, federal holidays are: New Year's Day, Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr., Washington's Birthday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. 
(Ord. No. 171, § 1, 10-29-2012) 
Sec. 22-202.7. - Penalty. 
    Whosoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Title I, Chapter I, Sec. 1.110 in the Codified Ordinances of the Village of Cass City. 
(Ord. No. 171, § 1, 10-29-2012) 
Sec. 22-203. - Discharge of firearms, airguns or spring-loaded guns, or bows and arrows. 
(a)	Prohibited generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or discharge a firearm, air or spring-loaded gun, or bow and arrow within the limits of the village, except: 
(1)	Authorized officers of the law are permitted to discharge their weapons in the performance of their duties. 
(2)	A person shall be permitted to discharge any weapon for the protection of his life and property. 
(3)	A person may discharge a weapon for target practice purposes on a range which has been approved by the village council for the specific type of weapon so discharged. 
(b)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Firearm means any weapon or device from which is propelled any missile, projectile, bullet, shot, pellet, or other mass by means of explosives, compressed air or gas, or by means of springs, levers, or other mechanical devices. 
(c)	Use of ranges. An approved range, as used in this section, shall mean a range for the shooting of firearms, airguns and spring-loaded guns, or bows and arrows, constructed in such a manner as to prevent the projectile from any weapons so fired on such range from exceeding the physical limits of the range. Such range must be so designated by the village council. 
(d)	Use by minors. It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or custodian to knowingly permit any minor in his charge or custody to use or discharge a firearm, airgun or spring-loaded gun, or bow and arrow except on an approved range. 
(e)	Liability for damages by minors. Every parent or guardian of a minor under the age of 18 years shall be liable for damages in a civil action for any and all injuries to persons or property that may be caused by such minor as a result of the use or discharge of a firearm, airgun or spring-loaded gun, or bow and arrow within the limits of the village. 
(f)	Confiscation by police. Any police officer shall have authority to confiscate any firearm, airgun and spring-loaded gun, and bow and arrows being used by any person anywhere within the limits of the village, except on an approved target range as provided in subsection (c) of this section. A confiscated weapon shall be held for a period of six months. 
(Ord. No. 120, §§ 1-6, 4-30-1985)
Secs. 22-204-22-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES PERTAINING TO UNDERAGE PERSONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 22-231-22-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CURFEW[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Curfew, MCL 722.751 et seq.

Sec. 22-251. - Prohibited activities; restrictions and hours. 
(a)	As used in this section, the term "public place" means any street, highway, alley, or park in the village. 
(b)	A minor under 13 years of age shall not be in a public place between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. (immediately following); a minor under 16 years of age shall not be in a public place between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. (immediately following); a minor under 18 years of age shall not be in a public place between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. (immediately following). 
(Ord. No. 141, § 1, 6-30-1997)
Sec. 22-252. - Exceptions. 
    The curfew restrictions of this division do not apply to a minor child in a public place who is: 
(1)	Accompanied by a parent, guardian, or an adult delegated by a parent or guardian to accompany or have control of the child; 
(2)	Upon an emergency errand or other legitimate purpose directed by his parent, guardian, or adult person having delegated control of the child; 
(3)	Going to or from or attending supervised recreational, school, church, or municipal activities; or 
(4)	Going to or from a place of employment or while employed.
(Ord. No. 141, § 2, 6-30-1997)
Sec. 22-253. - Parental and guardian responsibility. 
    No parent or guardian of any minor child under the age of 18 years shall allow or permit that minor child, while in his custody, to be in or upon any public place at any prohibited time unless the minor child's presence there is excepted under section 22-252. 
(Ord. No. 141, § 3, 6-30-1997)
Sec. 22-254. - Violations; municipal civil infraction. 
(a)	Any parent or guardian who violates any provision of this division is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not more than $50.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation (as authorized by chapter VI, section 2, of the general law village act, Public Act No. 3 of 1895 (MCL 66.2), the village municipal civil infraction ordinance (article II of chapter 20), and other applicable laws). 
(b)	Repeat offenses under this division shall be subject to increased fines as provided by this section. As used in this section, the term "repeat offense" means a second, or any subsequent, violation of the same requirement or provision of this division for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. The increased fine for a repeat offense under this division shall be as follows: 
(1)	The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall not be more than $250.00, plus costs. 
(2)	The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense, or any subsequent repeat offense, shall not be more than $500.00, plus costs. 
(c)	The ordinance enforcement officer is designated as the authorized village official to issue municipal civil infraction citations for violations of this division, as provided by the village municipal civil infraction ordinance. As used in this division, the term "ordinance enforcement officer" means the village official, employee, agent or other entity appointed by resolution of the village council to perform the functions and tasks assigned by this division to the ordinance enforcement officer. 
(d)	In addition to any remedies available at law, the village may bring an action for any injunction or other process against any person to restrain, prevent or abate any violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 141, § 4, 6-30-1997)
Secs. 22-255-22-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - UNNECESSARY NOISE 

Sec. 22-301. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Unnecessary Noise Ordinance". 
(Ord. No. 167, § I, 7-30-2007)
Sec. 22-302. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect, preserve, and promote the health, safety, welfare, peace, and quiet of the citizens of the village through the reduction, control, and prevention of loud and raucous noise, or any noise which unreasonably disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivities. 
(Ord. No. 167, § II, 7-30-2007)
Sec. 22-303. - Definitions. 
    Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, or similar action, but excluding demolition, for or of public or private rights-of-way, structures utilities or similar property. 
    Demolition means any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces, or similar property. 
    Emergency work means work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity or act of God, or work required to protect the health and safety of persons or property. 
    Noise means any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans. 
    Off-road recreational vehicle means any motor driven off-road recreation vehicle capable of cross-country travel without benefit of a road or trail, on or immediately over land, snow, ice, marsh, swampland, or other natural terrain, including, but not limited to, a multitrack or multiwheel drive vehicle, an ATV, a motorcycle or related 2-wheel, 3-wheel, or 4-wheel vehicle, an amphibious machine, a ground effect air cushion vehicle, or other means of transportation deriving motive power from a source other than muscle or wind. 
    Person means any individual, firm, association, partnership, joint venture, or corporation. 
    Residential area means any real property which contains a structure or building in which one or more persons reside, provided that the structure or building is properly zoned, or is legally nonconforming, for residential use. 
    Village means the Village of Cass City, Tuscola County, Michigan. 
(Ord. No. 167, § III, 7-30-2007)
Sec. 22-304. - General prohibition. 
(a)	No person shall make, continue, or cause to be made or continued:
(1)	Any unreasonably loud or raucous noise; or
(2)	Any noise which unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity, within the jurisdictional limit of the village; or 
(3)	Any noise which is so harsh, prolonged, unnatural, or unusual in time or place as to occasion unreasonable discomfort to any persons within the neighborhood from which said noises emanate, or as to unreasonably interfere with the peace and comfort of neighbors or their guests, or operators or customers in places of businesses, or as to detrimentally or adversely affect such residences or places of business. 
(b)	Factors for determining whether a violation of this section exists shall include, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)	The proximity of the noise to sleeping facilities, whether residential or commercial;
(2)	The time of day or night the noise occurs;
(3)	The duration of the noise;
(4)	The volume and intensity of the noise;
(5)	Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant;
(6)	Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural; and
(7)	Whether the origin of the noise is usual or unusual.
(Ord. No. 167, § IV, 7-30-2007)
Sec. 22-305. - Per se violations. 
    By way of example, but in no respect by way of limitation, the following specific activities occurring on private property and clearly audible beyond the property line shall be deemed a per se violation of this article: 
(1)	Unreasonable noises: The unreasonable making of, or knowingly and unreasonably permitting to be made, any unreasonably loud, boisterous or unusual noise, disturbance, commotion or vibration in any boarding facility, dwelling, place of business or other structure, or upon any public street, park or other place or building. The ordinary and usual sounds, noises, commotion or vibration incidental to the operation of these places when conducted in accordance with the usual standard of practice and in a manner which will not unreasonably disturb the peace and comfort of adjacent residences or which will not detrimentally affect the operators of adjacent places of business are exempted from this provision. 
(2)	Vehicle horns, signaling device, and similar devices: The sounding of any horn, signaling device, or other similar device, on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle on any right-of-way or in any public space of the village, for more than ten consecutive seconds. The sounding of any horn, signaling device, or other similar device, as a danger warning is exempt from this prohibition. 
(3)	Non-emergency signaling devices: Sounding or permitting sounding any amplified signal from any bell, chime, siren, whistle or similar device, intended primarily for non-emergency purposes, from any place for more than ten consecutive seconds in any hourly period. 
(4)	Emergency signaling devices: The intentional sounding or permitting the sounding outdoors of any emergency signaling device including fire, burglar, civil defense alarm, siren, whistle, or similar emergency signaling device, except in an emergency or except as provided in subsections a. and b., below. 
a.	Testing of an emergency signaling device shall occur between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Any testing shall use only the minimum cycle test time. In no case shall such test time exceed five minutes. 
b.	Sounding or permitting the sounding of any exterior burglar or fire alarm or any motor vehicle burglar alarm, shall terminate within 15 minutes of activation unless an emergency exists. If a false or accidental activation of an alarm occurs more than twice in a calendar month, the owner or person responsible for the alarm shall be in violation of this ordinance. 
(5)	Construction noises: The creation of noise which is clearly audible beyond the property from which it is emanating, resulting from the erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building, and the excavation of streets and highways, at any of the following times: prior to 7:00 a.m. and after 10:00 p.m. A deviation from such limitation shall be authorized if a permit is obtained in advance from the village manager, or the manager's designee, upon a showing that the noise will not result in an unreasonable disturbance of one or more residential occupants. In cases of emergency work, construction or repair noises are exempt from this provision. 
(6)	Unloading of materials: The creation of noise in connection with the delivery, loading and/or unloading of materials, goods or other merchandise by the use of motorized equipment, metal-tired hand trucks, racks, conveyors, or other types of equipment at any of the following times: prior to 7:00 a.m. and after 10:00 p.m., Monday-Friday; prior to 10:00 a.m. and after 10:00 p.m. on Saturdays and Sundays, where the noise from such loading and/or unloading is clearly audible more than 100 feet from the property from which the noise is emanating. 
(7)	Off-road recreational vehicles: The creation of noise in connection with the operation and use of off-road recreational vehicles in such a manner as to cause a private or public nuisance. For purposes of this section, a public or private nuisance shall be deemed to have occurred when the operation of the off-road recreational vehicle is conducted in such a manner as to unreasonably intrude on the privacy or peaceful enjoyment of residential property owners. 
(8)	Radios, televisions, boomboxes, phonographs, stereos, musical instruments and similar devices: The use of operation of a radio, television, boombox, stereo, musical instrument, or similar device from any source, including a motor vehicle that produces or reproduces sound in a manner that is plainly audible to any person other than the player(s) or operator(s) of the device and those who are voluntarily listening to the sound, and which unreasonably disturbs the peace, quiet and comfort of neighbors in residential areas, or is plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from any person in a commercial, industrial area, or public space at any of the following times: prior to 7:00 a.m. and after 10:00 p.m. or at anytime or place as to unreasonably disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivities. 
(9)	Yelling, shouting, and similar activities: Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing in residential areas or in public places, prior to 7:00 a.m. and after 10:00 p.m., or at any time or place so as to unreasonably disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivities. 
(10)	Barking dog: Any person within the village who shall keep or harbor any dog which by loud, frequent or habitual barking, yelping, howling or other noise materially disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood or public, or causes annoyance to persons in the neighborhood who are of reasonable and ordinary sensibilities. 
(Ord. No. 167, § V, 7-30-2007)
Sec. 22-306. - Exemption. 
    The activities of government entities being provided for the public health, safety and/or welfare shall be exempt from this article. 
(Ord. No. 167, § VI, 7-30-2007)
Sec. 22-307. - Nuisance. 
    Any violation of any provision of this article is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se and enjoinable by appropriate legal action. 
(Ord. No. 167, § VII, 7-30-2007)
Sec. 22-308. - Violation penalties. 
(a)	A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or both fine and imprisonment. 
(b)	Each occurrence of a violation, or, in the case of continuous violations, each day a violation occurs or continues, constitutes a separate offense and may be punishable separately. 
(Ord. No. 167, § VIII, 7-30-2007)
Chapter 24 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 16; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 34; vegetation, ch. 42.
State Law reference- Authority to operate recreation and playgrounds, MCL 123.51 et seq.; playground equipment safety act, MCL 408.681 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1-24-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GRAND TRUNK RAILROAD PUBLIC WALKING TRAIL 

Sec. 24-31. - Established. 
    The village establishes a public walking trail over and encompassing the abandoned Grand Trunk Railroad bed and right-of-way lying between the north village limits and the Cass River. 
(Ord. No. 127, § 1, 9-26-1989)
Sec. 24-32. - Use of vehicles. 
    Motor vehicles, motorcycles, snowmobiles, and three-wheel and four-wheel off-road vehicles shall not be operated on any portion of the public walking trail. 
(Ord. No. 127, § 2, 9-26-1989)
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 38. 
Chapter 26 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Begging and soliciting alms by accosting or forcing oneself upon the company of another, § 22-126; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 34.
State Law reference- Home solicitation sales, MCL 445.111 et seq.; transient merchants, MCL 445.371 et seq.; charitable organizations and solicitations act, MCL 400.271 et seq.; public safety solicitation act, MCL 14.301 et seq.; veteran's license for peddlers, MCL 35.441 et seq.

Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Canvasser and solicitor mean any individual, whether a resident of the village or not, travelling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or any other type of conveyance from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services (including home repair and improvements) to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sale or services, or not, provided that such definition shall include any person who, for himself, or for another person, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, hotel room, lodginghouse, apartment, shop, or any other place within the village for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. 
    Peddler means any person, whether a resident of the village or not, travelling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any other type of conveyance from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck farm products or provisions, offering and exposing for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without travelling from place to place, shall sell or offer such articles for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car, or other vehicle or conveyance. The term "peddler" shall include the terms "hawker" and "huckster." 
(Ord. No. 82, § 2, 9-24-1974)
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-2. - Prohibited acts. 
    It shall be unlawful and is declared to be a nuisance for peddlers, solicitors, and canvassers of goods and services engaged in commercial business for profit to go in and upon private residences in the village not having been requested or invited to do so by the owners or occupants of such private residences for the purpose of disposing of or peddling goods, wares and merchandise or for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise to be delivered in the future and services to be furnished or performed in the future. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 1, 9-24-1974)
Chapter 28 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; community development, ch. 10; environment, ch. 16; land divisions and subdivisions, ch. 18; special assessments, ch. 32; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 34; utilities, ch. 40; vegetation, ch. 42; zoning, ch. 46; franchises, app. A.
State Law reference- Authority to regulate land use, MCL 125.581 et seq.; municipal planning, MCL 125.31 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 28-1-28-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal planning commission, MCL 125.32 et seq.

Sec. 28-31. - Creation. 
    There is created a commission which shall be known as the planning commission and shall have the rights and powers set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 52, § 1, 7-8-1958)
Sec. 28-32. - Membership; appointment; terms; removal; vacancies. 
    The planning commission shall consist of nine members, one of whom shall be a member of the village council to be selected by resolution of the village council to serve as an ex officio member, and the remainder of whom shall be appointed by the village president to represent, insofar as is possible, different professions or occupations. An appointment by the president shall be subject to approval of the village council by majority vote. All appointed members of the planning commission shall serve without compensation. An appointed member shall not hold another municipal office, except that one appointed member may be a member of the zoning board of adjustment or appeals. The term of the ex officio member shall correspond to the member's term of office as a member of the village council. The term of each appointed member shall be three years or until his successor takes office. After a public hearing, a member other than the member selected by the village council may be removed by the president for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. The village council may for like cause remove the member selected by the village council. All ex officio members appointed under this section shall have full voting rights. A vacancy on the planning commission occurring otherwise than through the expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term by the president in the case of a member selected or appointed by the president, or by the village council in the case of the member appointed by the village council. 
(Ord. No. 52, § 2, 7-8-1958; Ord. of 3-27-2000)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.33(4), (6). 
Sec. 28-33. - Officers; meetings; rules. 
    The planning commission shall elect its chair from among the appointed members and create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The term of the chair shall be one year with eligibility for reelection. The planning commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month. It shall adopt rules for transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolution, transactions, findings and determination, which record shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 52, § 3, 7-8-1958)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.34. 
Sec. 28-34. - Employees. 
    The planning commission may appoint such employees as it deems necessary for its work, whose appointment, promotion, demotion and removal shall be subject to the same provisions of law as govern other corresponding employees of the village. The planning commission may also contract with city planners, engineers, architects and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amount appropriated for the purpose by the village council which shall provide the funds, equipment and accommodations necessary for the planning commission's work. 
(Ord. No. 52, § 4, 7-8-1958)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.35. 
Sec. 28-35. - Master plan. 
    It shall be the function and duty of the planning commission to make and adopt a master plan for the physical development of the village, including any areas outside of its boundaries which, in the planning commission's judgment, bears relation to the planning of the village. Such plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts and descriptive matter, shall show the planning commission's recommendations for the development of such territory including, among other things, general location, character and extent of streets, viaducts, subways, bridges, waterways, floodplains, waterfronts, boulevards, parkways, playgrounds, and open spaces; the general location of public buildings and other public property; and the general location and extent of public utilities and terminals, whether publicly or privately owned or operated, for water, light, sanitation, transportation, communication, power, and other purposes; also the removal, relocation, widening, narrowing, vacating, abandonment, change of use or extension of any of such ways, grounds, open spaces, buildings, property, utilities or terminals; the general location, character, layout and extent of community centers and neighborhood units; and the general character, extent and layout of the replanning and redevelopment of blighted district and slum areas; as well as the zoning plan for the control of the height, area, bulk, location, the use of buildings and premises. As the work of making the whole master plan progresses, the planning commission may, from time to time, adopt and publish parts thereof. Any such part shall cover one or more major sections or divisions of the village or one or more of the items mentioned in this section or other functional matters to be included in the plan. The planning commission may from time to time amend, extend or add to the plan. 
(Ord. No. 52, § 5, 7-8-1958)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.36. 
Sec. 28-36. - Preparation of master plan; surveys for basis, purpose. 
    In the preparation of the master plan, the planning commission shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of present conditions and future growth of the village and with due regard to its relation to the neighboring territory. The plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted, and harmonious development of the village and its environs which will, in accordance with present and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development; including, among other things, adequate provision for traffic, the promotion of safety from fire and other dangers, adequate provision for light and air, the promotion of the healthful and convenient distribution of population, the promotion of good civic design and arrangement, wise and efficient expenditure of public funds, and the adequate provision of public utilities and other public requirements. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.37. 
Sec. 28-37. - Adoption of plan. 
    The planning commission may adopt the plan as a whole by a single resolution or may by successive resolutions adopt successive parts of the plan, such parts corresponding with major geographical sections or divisions of the village or with functional subdivisions of the subject matter of the plan, and may adopt any amendment or extension thereof or addition thereto. Before the adoption of the plan or any such part, amendment, extension, or addition, the planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon, notice of the time and place of which shall be given, not less than 15 days prior to such hearing, by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the village and in the official gazette, if any in the village, and by registered United States mail to each public utility company and to each railroad company owning or operating any public utility or railroad within the geographical sections or divisions of the village affected. The adoption of the plan or of any such part or amendment or extension or addition shall be by resolution of the planning commission carried by the affirmative votes of not less than six members of the planning commission. The resolution shall refer expressly to the maps and descriptive and other matter intended by the planning commission to form the whole or part of the plan, and the action taken shall be recorded on the map and plan and descriptive matter by the identifying signature of the chair and/or secretary of the planning commission. An attested copy of the plan or part thereof shall be certified to the village council and to the county register of deeds. 
(Ord. No. 52, § 6, 7-8-1958)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.38. 
Sec. 28-38. - Approval or disapproval of construction. 
    Whenever the planning commission shall have adopted the master plan of the village or of one or more major sections or districts thereof, no street, public park, or other public way, ground, or open space, or public building or structure, shall be constructed or authorized in the village or in such planned section and district until the location, character and extent thereof shall have been submitted to and approved by the planning commission, provided that in case of disapproval, the planning commission shall communicate its reasons to the village council which shall have the power to overrule such disapproval by a recorded vote of not less than two-thirds of its entire membership; provided, however, that if the public way, ground, space, building, structure, or utility is one the authorization or financing of which does not, under the law or Charter provision governing the same, fall within the provisions of the village council, then the submission to the planning commission shall be by the board, commission, or body having such jurisdiction, and the planning commission's disapproval may be overruled by such board, commission, or body by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its membership. The failure of the planning commission to act within 60 days from and after the date of official submission to the planning commission shall be deemed approval. For the purpose of furthering the desirable future development of the village under the master plan, the planning commission, after it has adopted a master plan, shall prepare coordinated and comprehensive programs of public structures and improvements. The planning commission shall annually prepare such a program for the ensuing six years, which program shall show those public structures and improvements, in the general order of their priority, which in the planning commission's judgment will be needed or desirable and can be undertaken within the six-year period. Such comprehensive coordinated programs shall be based upon the requirements of the community for all types of public improvements, and, to that end, each agency or department of such village concerned with such improvements shall, upon request, furnish the planning commission with lists, plans, and estimates of time and cost of public structures and improvements within the purview of such department. 
(Ord. No. 52, § 7, 7-8-1958)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.39. 
Sec. 28-39. - Orders; overrule. 
    Whenever the village council shall have ordered the opening, widening, or extension of any street, avenue or boulevard, or whenever the village council shall have ordered that proceedings are instituted for the acquisition or enlargement of any park, playground, playfield or other public open space, such resolution shall not be rescinded until after the matter has been referred back to the planning commission for a report and until after a public hearing shall have been held. The village council shall have power to overrule the recommendation of the planning commission by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its entire membership. 
(Ord. No. 52, § 8, 7-8-1958)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.40. 
Sec. 28-40. - Promotion of public interest in plan; related duties. 
    The planning commission shall have the power to promote public interest in, and understanding of, the plan, and, to that end, may publish and distribute copies of the plan or of any report and may employ such other means of publicity and education as it may determine. Members of the planning commission, when duly authorized by the planning commission, may attend city planning conferences or meetings of city planning institutes, or hearings upon pending city planning legislation, and the planning commission may, by resolution spread upon its minutes, pay the reasonable traveling expenses incident to such attendance. The planning commission shall, from time to time, recommend to the appropriate public officials programs for public structures and improvements and for the financing thereof. It shall be a part of its duties to consult and advise with public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional, and other organizations, and with citizens with relation to protecting or carrying out the plan. The planning commission shall have the right to accept and use gifts for the exercise of its functions. All public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the planning commission, within a reasonable time, such available information as it may require for its work. The planning commission, its members, officers and employees, in the performance of their functions, may enter upon any land and make examinations and surveys and place and maintain necessary monuments, and marks thereon. In general, the planning commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to fulfill its functions, promote municipal planning, or carry out the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 52, § 9, 7-8-1958)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.41. 
Sec. 28-41. - Recording or filing of plats. 
    Whenever the planning commission shall have adopted that sort of a master plan relating to the major street system of the territory within its subdivision, jurisdiction or part thereof, and shall have filed a certified copy of such plan in the office of the county register of deeds of the county in which such territory or part is located, then no plat of a subdivision of land within such territory or part shall be filed or recorded until it shall have been approved by such planning commission and such approval entered in writing on the plat by the chair or secretary of the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 52, § 10, 7-8-1958)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.43. 
Sec. 28-42. - Regulations for subdivision of land to be adopted. 
(a)	Before exercising the powers referred to in section 28-41, the planning commission shall adopt regulations governing the subdivision of land within its jurisdiction. Such regulations may provide for the proper arrangement of streets, in relation to other existing or planned streets, and to the master plan for adequate and convenient open spaces for traffic, utilities, access of firefighting apparatus, recreation, light and air, and for the avoidance of congestion of population, including minimum width and area of lots. 
(b)	Such regulations may include provisions as to the extent to which streets and other ways shall be graded and improved and to which water and sewer and other utility mains, piping, or other facilities shall be installed as a condition precedent to the approval of the plat. The regulations or practice of the planning commission may provide for a tentative approval of the plat previous to such installation; but any such tentative approval shall be revocable and shall not be entered on the plat. In lieu of the completion of such improvements and utilities prior to the final approval of the plat, the planning commission may accept a bond with surety to secure to the village the actual construction and installation of such improvements or utilities at a time and according to specifications fixed by or in accordance with the regulations of the planning commission. The village is granted the power to enforce such bond by all appropriate legal and equitable remedies. 
(c)	All such regulations shall be published as provided by law for the publication of ordinances, and before adoption, a public hearing shall be held thereon. A copy thereof shall be certified by the planning commission to the county recorder. 
(Ord. No. 52, § 11, 7-8-1958)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.44. 
Sec. 28-43. - Plat approval, modification or disapproval. 
    The planning commission shall approve, modify or disapprove a plat within 60 days after submission thereof to it; otherwise, such plat shall be deemed to have been approved, and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the planning commission on demand; provided, however, that the applicant for the planning commission's approval may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of such period. The grounds of disapproval of any plat shall be stated upon the records of the planning commission. Any plat submitted to the planning commission shall contain the name and address of a person to whom notice of a hearing shall be sent; and no plat shall be acted on by the planning commission without affording a hearing thereon. Notice shall be sent to such address by registered mail of the time and place of such hearing not less than five days before the date fixed therefor. Similar notice shall be mailed to the owners of land immediately adjoining the platted land, as their names appear upon the plats in the county auditor's office and their addresses appear in the directory of the village or on the tax records of the village or county. Every plat approved by the planning commission shall, by virtue of such approval, be deemed to be an amendment of or an addition to or a detail of the municipal plan and a part thereof. Approval of a plat shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an acceptance by the public of any street or any other open space shown upon the plat. The planning commission may, from time to time, recommend to the village council amendment of the zoning ordinance or map, or additions thereto, to conform to the planning commission's recommendations for the zoning regulation of the territory comprised within approved subdivisions. The planning commission shall have the power to agree with the applicant upon the use, height, area or bulk requirements or restrictions governing buildings and premises within the subdivision, provided that such requirements or restrictions do not authorize the violation of the then effective zoning ordinance of the village. Such requirements or restrictions shall be stated upon the plat prior to the approval and recording thereof and shall have the same force of law and be enforceable in the same manner and with the same sanctions and penalties and subject to the same power of amendment or repeal as though set out as a part of the zoning ordinance or map of the village. 
(Ord. No. 52, § 12, 7-8-1958)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.45. 
Chapter 30 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; environment, ch. 16; blight, § 16-31 et seq.
State Law reference- Garbage disposal act, MCL 123.361 et seq.; solid waste facilities, MCL 324.4301 et seq.; hazardous waste management act, MCL 324.11101 et seq.; hazardous materials transportation act, MCL 29.417 et seq.; solid waste management act, MCL 324.11501 et seq.; waste reduction assistance act, MCL 324.14501 et seq.; clean Michigan fund act, MCL 324.19101 et seq.; low-level radioactive waste authority act, MCL 333.26201 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1-30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 30-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ashes means the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible materials. 
    Dwelling unit means a building, or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by not more than three families for residential purposes and having cooking facilities. 
    Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    Multifamily dwelling means a building, or portion thereof, consisting of four or more dwelling units. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes, excluding ashes, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, grass and yard clippings, wood, leaves, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
    Solid waste means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, and solid market and industrial wastes. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 1, 10-30-1984)
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-32. - Licensed hauler; conditions; terms. 
    All solid waste produced and accumulated from a residential dwelling unit shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by a hauler under contract to the village. The village, by agreement, may grant exclusive rights, for a period not to exceed three years at a time, to one or more persons, firms, or corporations to take, carry away and dispose of all solid waste from residential dwelling units in the village. No person not under such a contract shall take or convey through the streets of the village any residential solid waste produced and collected from residences for hire without a contract with the village. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 2, 10-30-1984)
Sec. 30-33. - Collection of garbage, rubbish and solid waste. 
    There will be a pickup of residential garbage and rubbish at least once a week. Residents will be informed of the time and place to set garbage and rubbish containers for pickup. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 3, 10-30-1984)
Sec. 30-34. - Exception for industrial, business, multifamily dwellings, and actual producers. 
(a)	This article shall not prohibit industries, commercial businesses, and owners of multifamily dwellings from contracting for the disposal of their own solid waste. Actual producers of solid waste or the owners of premises upon which solid waste has accumulated shall provide for the collection and disposition of such solid waste in compliance with governing law or ordinances. 
(b)	Industries, commercial businesses, and owners of multifamily dwellings shall not allow the accumulation of solid waste on their premises for a period in excess of 48 hours, unless such solid waste is contained in a dumpster typically provided by rubbish hauling and disposal firms or in such other proper containers for storage and collection as expressly approved by the village manager. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 4, 10-30-1984)
Sec. 30-35. - Exception for outside contractors. 
    This article shall not prohibit collectors of solid waste from outside of the village from hauling such solid waste over village streets, provided that such collectors comply with the provisions of this article and with any other governing law or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 5, 10-30-1984)
Sec. 30-36. - Collection supervised by the village manager. 
    All solid waste accumulated in the village shall be collected, conveyed, and disposed of by the village under the supervision of the village manager. The village manager shall have the authority to make regulations concerning the days of collection, type and location of waste containers and such other matters pertaining to the collection, conveyance and disposal as he shall find necessary, and to change and modify such regulations after notice as required by law, provided that such regulations are not contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 6, 10-30-1984)
Sec. 30-37. - Precollection practices. 
(a)	Preparation of solid waste. 
(1)	Garbage. All garbage before being placed in garbage cans for collection shall have drained from it all free liquids and shall be wrapped in paper or plastic bags. 
(2)	Rubbish. All rubbish shall be drained of liquid before being deposited for collection. All rubbish shall be separated from garbage and placed in containers, piled and bundled, or placed for pickup in such a manner and in such a size that it shall be capable of being loaded in a packer-type truck. 
(3)	Trimmings and clippings. Tree trimmings, hedge clippings and similar material shall be cut to length not to exceed four feet and securely tied in bundles not more than two feet thick before being deposited for collection. 
(4)	Leaves and yard clippings. It shall be unlawful to cast, place, sweep, rake, scatter or otherwise deposit leaves and yard clippings onto the sidewalk, curb and gutter, street or any other village right-of-way, unless otherwise designated by the village council. Such leaves and yard clippings may be placed in proper locations for collection if placed in proper solid waste containers. 
(b)	Solid waste containers. 
(1)	Duty to provide and maintain in sanitary condition. Solid waste containers shall be provided by the owner, tenant, lessee, or occupant of the premises. Solid waste containers shall be maintained in good condition. 
(2)	Materials. Containers shall be made of metal or plastic, equipped with suitable handles and tightfitting covers, and shall be watertight. Disposable waterproof bags may also be used. 
(3)	Sanitation. Containers shall be of a type approved by the village and shall be kept in a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times. 
(4)	Capacity. Containers shall be of a capacity and a kind suitable for collection purposes, and shall be of such a weight that they can be handled by one man. 
(c)	Storing of solid waste. 
(1)	Public places. No person shall place any solid waste in any street, alley or other public place, or upon any private property whether owned by such person or not, within the village unless it is in proper containers for collection or under express approval granted by the village manager. Nor shall any person throw or deposit any solid waste in any stream or other body of water. No garbage cans or solid waste containers shall be stored on the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places except for a period of 24 hours prior to pickup. 
(2)	Scattering of solid waste. No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the village any solid waste in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place, or into any occupied premises within the village. 
(3)	Deposit in container of other person. It shall be unlawful to place or in any way deposit any solid waste, rubbish or garbage on property or in a dumpster belonging to, in the possession of, or designated for the use of another person. 
(d)	Points of collection. Solid waste containers shall be placed for collection at the curbside, or at such other place as determined by the village manager. 
(e)	Special solid waste problems. 
(1)	Contagious disease solid waste. The removal of wearing apparel, bedding or other solid waste from homes or other places where highly infectious or contagious diseases have prevailed should be performed under the supervision and direction of the village. Such solid waste shall not be placed in containers for regular collections. 
(2)	Inflammable or explosive solid waste. Highly inflammable or explosive materials shall not be placed in containers for regular collection but shall be disposed of as directed by the village manager at the expense of the owner or possessor thereof. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 7, 10-30-1984)
Sec. 30-38. - Trash not to be collected. 
    The following items shall not be picked up as rubbish by the contract hauler: materials resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, or demolition of buildings, such as stones, bricks, plaster, lumber, shingles, concrete, sand, gravel, excavated earth and surplus earth from grading, except one bushel basket full of any such items produced by the work of the resident upon such premises. Ashes which contain hot cinders or smoldering embers will not be collected. Junked automobile parts, including engines, transmissions, seats, doors, and fenders, will not be picked up and collected. Dead animals will not be picked up. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 8, 10-30-1984)
Sec. 30-39. - Tampering with garbage containers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person other than the owner or occupant, his employees or agents, or such persons, firms or corporations as the village manager shall designate to tamper or meddle with any garbage container, bundle or bushel basket or remove the contents thereof from the location of where such bundle or container shall have been properly placed pending collection. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 9, 10-30-1984)
Sec. 30-40. - Fees. 
    The fees for the collection of solid waste under this article shall be set by the village council and shall be billed quarterly on the water bill as a separate item and subject to the same collection procedure in effect for collecting water charges. Any charges under this article which are delinquent in excess of 60 days on March 1 of any year may be returned as unpaid taxes which shall become a lien on the land and premises which was furnished by the garbage pickup. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 10, 10-30-1984)
Sec. 30-41. - On-site burning. 
    No person shall burn or permit to be burned on the premises within his control any paper or rubbish unless such paper or rubbish shall be burned in a completely enclosed incinerator properly designed to prevent the emission of smoke, flying paper and ash therefrom. All burning in open barrels, wire mesh containers, etc., and the burning of leaves, grass and yard clippings is specifically prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 11, 10-30-1984)
Sec. 30-42. - Violations; municipal civil infraction. 
(a)	Any person who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not more than $50.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation (as authorized by chapter VI, section 2, of the general law village act, Public Act No. 3 of 1895 (MCL 66.2), the village municipal civil infraction ordinance (article II of chapter 20), and other applicable laws). 
(b)	Repeat offenses under this article shall be subject to increased fines as provided by this section. As used in this section, the term "repeat offense" means a second, or any subsequent, violation of the same requirement or provisions of this article committed by a person within any 90-day period and for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. The increased fine for a repeat offense under this article shall be as follows: 
(1)	The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall not be more than $250.00, plus costs. 
(2)	The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense, or any subsequent repeat offense, shall not be more than $500.00 each, plus costs. 
(c)	Each day on which any violation of this article occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense, subject to separate sanctions. 
(d)	The ordinance enforcement officer is designated as the authorized village official to issue municipal civil infraction citations for violations of this article, as provided by the village municipal civil infraction ordinance. As used in this article, ordinance enforcement officer means the village official, employee, agent or other entity appointed by resolution of the village council to perform the functions and tasks assigned by this article to the ordinance enforcement officer. 
(e)	In addition to any remedies available at law, the village may bring an action for an injunction or other process against any person to restrain, prevent or abate any violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 140, § 2, 6-30-1997)
Chapter 32 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; community development, ch. 10; planning, ch. 28; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 34.
State Law reference- Special assessments for public improvements, MCL 68.31 et seq.; notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq.; deferment of special assessments on homesteads, MCL 211.761 et seq.

Sec. 32-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Costs means, when referring to the cost of any local public improvement, the cost of services, plans, condemnation, spreading of rolls, notices, advertising, financing, construction, legal fees, interest on special assessment bonds for not to exceed one year and all other costs incident to the making of such improvement, the special assessments therefor and the financing thereof. 
    Local public improvement means any public improvement, any part of the cost of which is to be assessed against one or more lots or parcels of land to be especially benefited thereby, in proportion to the benefits derived therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 1, 6-5-1979)
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 32-2. - Council authority. 
(a)	The village council shall have the power to assess and reassess the cost, or any portion thereof, of any local public improvement to the property especially benefited by resolution in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(b)	The village council, in order to ascertain whether or not a reasonable number of property owners to be assessed desire any particular improvements to be made, may request and receive a petition therefor, or may receive such a petition voluntarily presented by property owners whose aggregate property in the proposed district was assessed for not less than 51 percent of the total assessed value of the privately owned real property located therein, as shown by the last preceding general tax records of the village. Such petition shall contain a brief description of the property owned by the respective signatories thereof and if it shall appear that the petition is signed by at least 51 percent, the clerk shall certify such petition to the village council. The petition shall be addressed to the village council and filed with the clerk and shall in no event be considered directory but as advisory only. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 2, 6-5-1979)
Sec. 32-3. - Preliminary proceedings. 
(a)	Before the village council shall consider the making of any local improvement, the village council shall cause to be prepared a report which shall include necessary plans, profiles, specifications and detailed estimates of cost, an estimate of the life of the improvement, a description of the assessment district, and such other pertinent information as will permit the village council to decide the cost, extent and necessity of the improvement proposed, what part or proportion thereof should be paid by special assessments upon the property especially benefited and what part, if any, should be paid by the village at large, and determine the number of installments in which assessments may be paid. The village council shall not finally determine to proceed with the making of any local public improvement until such report has been filed, nor until after a public hearing has been held by the village council for the purpose of hearing objections to the making of such improvement. 
(b)	After receiving the report required in subsection (a) of this section for making any local public improvement as requested in the resolution of the village council, and the village council has reviewed such report, a resolution may be passed tentatively determining the necessity of the improvement, setting forth the nature thereof, prescribing what part or proportion of the cost of such improvement shall be paid by special assessment upon the property especially benefited, determination of benefits received by affected properties, and what part, if any, shall be paid by the village at large; designating the limits of the special assessment district to be affected, designating whether to be assessed according to frontage or other benefits, placing the complete information on file in the office of the village clerk, where such assessment may be found for examination, and directing the village clerk to give notice of public hearing on the proposed improvement, at which time and place opportunity will be given interested persons to be heard. Such notice shall be given by one publication in a newspaper published or circulated within the village and by first class mail addressed to each owner or person in interest in property to be assessed as shown by the last general tax assessment roll of the village. The publication of notice and the mailing of notice shall be made at least ten full days prior to the date of the hearing. The hearing required by this section may be held at any regular, adjourned, or special meeting of the village council. 
(c)	At the public hearing on the proposed improvement, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard, after which the village council may modify the scope of the local public improvement in such a manner as they shall deem to be in the best interest of the village as a whole; provided, however, that if the amount of work is increased or additions are made to the district, then another hearing shall be held pursuant to notice prescribed in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)	If at, or prior to, the final confirmation of any special assessments the owners of privately owned real property to be assessed for more than 50 percent of the cost of an improvement, or in the case of paving or similar improvements tile owners of more than 50 percent of the frontage to be assessed for any such improvement, shall object in writing to the proposed improvement, the improvement shall not be made by proceedings delineated by this chapter without a four-sixths vote of the members elect of the village council, provided that this section shall not apply to sidewalk construction. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 3, 6-5-1979)
State Law reference- Special assessment notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq. 
Sec. 32-4. - Village council determination. 
(a)	After the report required in section 32-3(b) has been received and a public hearing held, the village council may, by resolution, determine to make the improvement and to defray the whole or any part of the cost of the improvement by special assessment upon the property especially benefited in proportion to the benefits thereto. By such resolution, the village council shall approve the plans and specifications for the improvement; determine the estimated cost thereof; determine what proportion of such cost shall be paid by special assessment upon the property especially benefited and what part, if any, shall be general obligation of the village; determine the number of installments in which assessments may be paid; determine the rate of interest to be charged on installments, not to exceed ten percent per annum; designate the district or land and premises upon which special assessments shall be levied; and direct the village assessor to prepare a special assessment roll in accordance with the village council's determination. 
(b)	Notwithstanding any provision of this section, the village council may, in its discretion, delay the preparation of the special assessment roll until after the completion of the improvement, in which case, the actual cost thereof shall be reported to the village council, and the special assessment roll shall be then made for such actual cost rather than for the estimated cost as in other cases. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 4, 6-5-1979)
Sec. 32-5. - Special assessment roll. 
(a)	The village assessor shall make a special assessment roll of all lots and parcels of land within the designated district benefited by the proposed improvement and assess to each lot or parcel of land the proportionate amount benefited thereby. The amount spread in each case shall be based upon the detailed estimate of cost as approved by the village council. 
(b)	When the assessor shall have completed such assessment roll, he shall file the roll with the village clerk for presentation to the village council for review and certification by it. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 5, 6-5-1979)
Sec. 32-6. - Hearing and confirmation. 
(a)	Upon receipt of the special assessment roll, the village council, by resolution, shall accept the assessment roll and order it to be filed in the office of the village clerk for public examination, shall fix the time and place the village council will meet to review such special assessment roll, and direct the village clerk to give notice of a public hearing for the purpose of affording an opportunity for interested persons to be heard. The notice shall be given by publication, at least ten full days prior to the date of the hearing, in a newspaper published or circulated within the village and by first class mail addressed to each owner of or person in interest in property to be assessed as shown by the last general tax assessment roll of the village, mailed at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. The hearing required by this section may be held at any regular, adjourned or special meeting of the council. At this meeting, any persons deeming themselves aggrieved by the special assessment roll shall present their objections thereto in writing with the village clerk prior to the close of such hearing, which written objections shall specify in what respect they deem themselves aggrieved. The assessor shall be present at every meeting of the village council at which a special assessment is to be reviewed. 
(b)	The village council shall meet at the time and place designated for the review of such special assessment roll, and at such meeting, or a proper adjournment thereof, shall consider all objections thereto submitted in writing. The council may correct the roll as to any special assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land or other errors appearing therein; or it may, by resolution, annul the assessment roll and direct that new proceedings be instituted. The same proceedings shall be followed in making a new roll as in the making of the original roll. If, after hearing all objections and making a record of such changes as the council deems justified, the council determines that it is satisfied with the special assessment roll and that assessments are in proportion to benefits received, it shall thereupon pass a resolution reciting such determinations, confirming such roll, placing it on file in the office of the village clerk and directing the village clerk to attach his warrant to a certified copy thereof within ten days therein commanding the assessor to spread and the treasurer to collect the various sums and amounts appearing thereon as directed by the council. The roll shall have the date of confirmation endorsed thereon and shall, from that date, be final and conclusive for the purpose of the improvement to which it applies. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 6, 6-5-1979)
State Law reference- Special assessment notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq. 
Sec. 32-7. - Assessing single lots. 
(a)	When any expense shall have been incurred by the village upon or in respect to any single premises, which expense is chargeable against such premises and the owner thereof, and is not of that class required to be prorated among several lots and parcels of land in a special assessment district, an account of the labor, material or service for which such expense was incurred, with a description of the premises upon or in respect to which the expense was incurred, and the name of the owner, if known, shall be reported to the village clerk who shall immediately charge and bill the owner, if known. The assessor shall annually on or before January 15, or at such other times as he may deem advisable, prepare a special assessment roll covering all such charges which shall not have been paid. Such roll shall be filed with the clerk who shall present the roll to the village council. 
(b)	The provisions of the preceding sections of this chapter with reference to special assessments generally and the proceedings necessary to be had before making the improvements shall not apply to assessments contemplated in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)	Upon confirmation of any special assessment roll authorized by this section, the village council shall determine the number of installments in which assessments may be paid and the rate of interest to be charged on installments, but not to exceed ten percent per annum. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 7, 6-5-1979)
Sec. 32-8. - Attachment of lien. 
    All special assessments contained in any special assessment roll, including any part thereof deferred as to payment, shall, from the date of confirmation of such roll, constitute a lien upon the respective lots or parcels of land assessed and, until paid, shall be a charge against the respective owners of the several lots and parcels of land. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as the lien created for village taxes and shall include accrued interest and penalties. No judgment or decree, nor any act of the village council vacating a special assessment, shall destroy or impair the lien of the village upon the premises assessed for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against such premises, or as by a regular mode of proceeding might be lawfully assessed thereon. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 8, 6-5-1979)
State Law reference- Special assessment lien, MCL 68.33. 
Sec. 32-9. - Payment of special assessments. 
(a)	All special assessments, except such installments thereof as the council shall make payable at a future time as provided in this chapter, shall be due and payable upon confirmation of the special assessment roll. 
(b)	After the village council has confirmed the roll, the village treasurer shall notify by first class mail each property owner on such roll that such roll has been filed, stating the amount assessed and the terms of payment, and shall give notice by one publication in a newspaper published or circulated within the village that such special assessment roll has been filed in his office and specifying when and where payment shall be made thereon. Failure on the part of the village treasurer to give such notice or of such owner to receive such notice shall not invalidate any special assessment roll of the village or any assessment thereon, nor excuse the payment of interest or penalties. 
(c)	The village council may provide for the payment of special assessments in annual installments. Such annual installments shall not exceed ten in number, the first installment being due upon confirmation of the roll or on such date as the village council may determine and deferred installments being due annually thereafter, or in the discretion of the village council, may be spread upon and made a part of each annual village tax roll thereafter until all are paid. Interest shall be charged on all deferred installments at a rate not to exceed ten percent per annum, or such other rate as may be established by the village council in accordance with state statute, commencing on the due date of the first installment, or 90 days after the date of confirmation if the first installment. is not due upon confirmation, and payable on the due date of each subsequent installment. The full amount of all or any deferred installments, with interest accrued thereon to the date of payment, may be paid in advance of the due dates thereof. If the full assessment or the first installment thereof shall be due upon confirmation, each property owner shall have 90 days from the date of confirmation to pay the full amount of such assessment, or the full amount of any installments thereof, without interest or penalty. Following such 90-day period, the assessment or first installment thereof shall, if unpaid, be considered as delinquent and the same penalties shall be collected on such unpaid assessments or first installments thereof as are provided by law to be collected on delinquent general village taxes. Deferred installments shall be collected without penalty until 90 days after the due date thereof, after which time such installments shall be considered as delinquent and such penalties on such installments shall be collected as are provided by law to be collected on delinquent general village taxes. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 9, 6-5-1979)
Sec. 32-10. - Delinquent special assessments. 
    Any assessment, or part thereof, remaining unpaid in the first Monday of March following the date when such assessment became delinquent shall be reported as unpaid by the treasurer to the village council. Any such delinquent assessment, together with all accrued interest, shall be transferred and reassessed on the next annual village tax roll in a column headed "Special Assessments" with a penalty of four percent upon such total amount added thereto, and when so transferred and reassessed upon such tax roll shall be collected in all respects as provided for the collection of village taxes. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 10, 6-5-1979)
Sec. 32-11. - Additional assessments; refunds. 
    The village clerk shall, within 60 days after the completion of each local or special public improvement, compile the actual cost thereof and certify the cost to the assessor who shall adjust the special assessment roll to correspond therewith. Should the assessment prove larger than necessary by less than five percent, the assessment shall be reported to the council which may place the excess in the village treasury or make a refund thereof pro rata according to the assessment. If the assessment exceeds the amount necessary by five percent or more, the entire excess shall be credited to owners of property as shown by the village assessment roll upon which such assessment has been levied, pro rata according to the assessment. No refunds of special assessments may be made which impair or contravene the provision of any outstanding obligation or bond secured in whole or part by such special assessments. In the case of assessments due in installments, the village council may order the refund given by credit against the installments last coming due. When any special assessment roll shall prove insufficient to meet the cost of the improvement for which it was made, the village council may make an additional pro rata assessment, but the total amount assessed against any one parcel of land shall not exceed the benefits received by such lot or parcel of land. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 11, 6-5-1979)
State Law reference- Additional assessments and excess assessments, MCL 68.32. 
Sec. 32-12. - Special assessment accounts. 
    Monies raised by special assessment to pay the cost of any local improvements shall be held in a special fund to pay such cost or to repay any money borrowed therefor. Each special assessment account must be used only for the improvement project for which the assessment was levied, expenses incidental thereto, including the repayment of the principal and interest on money borrowed therefor, and to refund excessive assessments, if refunds are authorized. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 12, 6-5-1979)
Sec. 32-13. - Contested assessments. 
    An action may not be instituted for the purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of a special assessment unless: 
(1)	Within 45 days after the confirmation of the special assessment roll, written notice is given to the village council indicating an intention to file such an action and stating the grounds on which it is claimed that the assessment is illegal; and 
(2)	The action is commenced within 90 days after the confirmation of the roll.
(Ord. No. 98, § 13, 6-5-1979)
State Law reference- Action to contest collection of special assessment, MCL 68.34. 
Sec. 32-14. - Reassessment in event of invalidity. 
    If a portion of an assessment roll is determined to be illegal, in whole or in part, or whenever the village council shall deem any special assessment invalid for any reason whatever, in whole or in part, the village council may revoke its confirmation, correct the illegality or defect, if possible, or reconfirm it. Property which is not involved in the illegality may not be assessed more than was imposed upon the original confirmation without further notice and hearing thereon as provided for in the original assessment. If any portion of the original assessment shall have been collected and not refunded, it shall be applied upon the reassessment, and the reassessment shall, to that extent, be deemed satisfied. If more than the amount reassessed shall have been collected, the balance shall be refunded to the persons making such payment. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 14, 6-5-1979)
Sec. 32-15. - Collection by court action. 
    In addition to any other remedies and without impairing the lien therefor, any delinquent special assessment, together with interest and penalties, may be collected as delinquent village property taxes or by a suit at law in the name of the village against the person assessed, in any court having jurisdiction of the amount. If in any such action it shall appear that by reason of any irregularities or informalities the assessment has not been properly made against the defendant or upon the premises sought to be charged, the court may, nevertheless, on satisfactory proof that expense has been incurred by the village which is a proper charge against the defendant or the premises in question, render judgment for the amount properly chargeable against such defendant or upon such premises. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 15, 6-5-1979)
Sec. 32-16. - Combination of projects. 
    The village council may combine several districts into one project for the purpose of effecting a saving in the costs. There shall be established for each district separate funds and accounts to cover the cost of each such district. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 16, 6-5-1979)
Sec. 32-17. - Division of parcels. 
    Should any lots or lands be divided after a special assessment thereon has been confirmed and divided into installments, the village assessor shall apportion the uncollected amounts upon the several lots and lands so divided, and shall enter the several amounts as amendments upon the special assessment roll. The village treasurer shall, within ten days after such apportionment, send notice of such action to the persons concerned at their last known address by first class mail. Such apportionment shall be final and conclusive on all parties unless protest in writing is received by the village treasurer within 20 days of the mailing of the notice. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 17, 6-5-1979)
Chapter 34 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance authorizing public improvements saved from repeal, § 1-13(7); any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the village saved from repeal, § 1-13(11); any ordiancne establishing or prescribing grades in the village saved from repeal, § 1-13(12); any ordinance prescribing traffic and parking restrictions pertaining to specific streets saved from repeal, § 1-13(14); buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; community development, ch. 10; environment, ch. 16; land divisions and subdivisions, ch. 18; improvements to streets in subdivisions, § 18-132; remaining in public or private places after closing, § 22-93; parks and recreation, ch. 24; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 26; planning, ch. 28; special assessments, ch. 32; telecommunications, ch. 36; traffic and vehicles, ch. 38; utilities, ch. 40; vegetation, ch. 42; vehicles for hire, ch. 44; zoning, ch. 46; frontage on a public street, § 46-486; regulation of streets, alleys and public places, app. A, § 4.
State Law reference- Streets and sidewalks, MCL 67.7 et seq.; paving and improvements, MCL 67.17 et seq.; street regulations, MCL 67.20 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 34-31. - Construction standards generally; supervision and control; payment for expenses. 
(a)	All sidewalks hereafter constructed in the public streets of the village shall be constructed by the village council and shall be under its supervision and control, and shall be of such width and on such grades as the council shall, by resolution, prescribe and shall be built of cement or Portland cement, or such other material as the council may by resolution prescribe; provided, however, that no plank or wooden sidewalks shall hereafter be constructed on any public street within the village. 
(b)	One-half of the expense of repair and replacement of all sidewalks under the provisions of this article shall be paid from the general street fund, and the remaining one-half shall be a charge upon the lots and premises adjacent to and abutting upon such walks. 
(Ord. No. 26, §§ 1, 2, 4-27-1901)
Sec. 34-32. - New sidewalks; payment for construction. 
    The total expense of construction of all new sidewalks in the village shall be paid by the property owner and shall be charged upon the lots and premises adjacent to and abutting upon such sidewalks. 
(Ord. of 10-31-1961)
Sec. 34-33. - Responsibility for clearing ice, snow, filth and nuisances. 
    The owners and occupants of lots and premises adjacent to and abutting upon any of the sidewalks, heretofore or hereafter constructed within the village, shall keep the sidewalks free from ice, snow, filth and nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 26, § 3, 4-27-1901)
Sec. 34-34. - Rebuilding, repairing and maintenance. 
    The expenses of rebuilding, repairing and maintaining all sidewalks constructed under the provisions of this article shall be paid from the general street fund. 
(Ord. No. 26, § 4, 4-27-1901)
Chapter 36 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 34; utilities, ch. 40; zoning, ch. 46.
State Law reference- Michigan telecommunications act, MCL 484.2101 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 36-1-36-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CABLE TELEVISION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 36-31-36-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FRANCHISING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Franchises, app. A.

Sec. 36-51. - Purpose of division. 
    The following purposes of this division are to provide: 
(1)	For the franchising and regulation of cable television within the village;
(2)	For a cable communications system that will meet the current needs of the village and that can be improved and upgraded to meet future needs; 
(3)	For the regulation by the village of certain rates to be charged to subscribers for certain cable communications services to the extent such regulation is not lawfully preempted by applicable state or federal statutes, rules or regulations; 
(4)	For the development of cable communications as a means to improve communication between and among the members of the public and public institutions of the village; and 
(5)	Remedies and prescribe penalties for violation of this division and any franchise granted under this division. 
(Ord. No. 125, art. I, § 1.01, 3-30-1987)
Sec. 36-52. - Applicability of division provisions. 
    This division is applicable to any application for a cable franchise or franchise renewal. 
(Ord. No. 125, art. I, § 1.02, 3-30-1987)
Sec. 36-53. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meanings. 
    Access channel means any channel set aside for public use, educational use, or governmental use without a channel usage charge. 
    Access user means any person or entity entitled to make use of an access channel consistent with the intended purpose of the channel. 
    Application means a proposal seeking authority to construct and operate a cable television system within the village pursuant to this division. It shall include the initial proposal, plus all related subsequent amendments and correspondence with the village. It also includes requests for renewal of existing franchises. 
    Basic service means subscriber cable television services which includes the delivery of local television broadcast signals as required by the FCC, access channels, and local origination channels, as covered by the regular monthly charge paid by all subscribers to any service tier, excluding premium services, two-way services and FM radio services. 
    Cable communications system and system mean a nonbroadcast facility consisting of a set of transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment, under common ownership and control, that distributes or is designed to distribute to public subscribers cable television services, institutional services or other communications services, but such term shall not include: 
(1)	A facility or combination of facilities that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; 
(2)	A facility or combination of facilities that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless such facility or facilities use any public right-of-way; 
(3)	A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or 
(4)	Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
    Cable television services means one-way or two-way transmission of video, voice and data programming and associated nonvideo signals to subscribers, together with subscriber interaction, if any, which is provided in connection with the video programming. 
    Commission means the village cablecasting commission provided for in this division. 
    Connection means the attachment of the drop to the radio or television set or other communications device of the subscriber. 
    Converter means an electronic tuning device which converts transmitted signals to a frequency which permits their reception on an ordinary television receiver. 
    Dedication means those dedications and easements for public roadways and public utilities and other rights-of-way maintained for the benefit of the public and controlled by the village, the terms, conditions, or limitations of which are not inconsistent with the erection, construction, or maintenance of a cable television system, its structures, or equipment. 
    Drop means the cable that connects a subscriber's premises to the nearest feeder line of the cable communications system. 
    Easement means a right to use all public rights-of-way, including public utility easements. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any legally appointed or designated agent or successor. 
    Feeder line means the coaxial or fiber optic cable running from the trunk line to line-extenders and taps for the purpose of interconnection to individual subscribers. 
    File means the delivery, by mail or otherwise, to the appropriate office, officer or agent of the village of any document or other thing which this division or the franchise requires the franchisee to file with the village. The date of receipt by the village shall be considered the filing date. Unless specified to the contrary, the filing shall be with the village clerk. 
    Franchise means the nonexclusive right and authority to construct, maintain, and operate a cable communications system through use of the public streets, dedications, public utility easements, other public rights-of-way, or public places in the village pursuant to a contractual agreement executed by the village and a franchisee. 
    Franchisee and grantee mean an entity authorized to construct and/or operate a cable communications system within the village pursuant to this division, including any lawful successor, transferee or assignee of the original grantee. 
    Installation means the connection of the system at the subscriber's premises. 
    Institutional services means one-way and two-way nonentertainment transmission services for businesses, public agencies and community institutions. Such services include, but are not limited to, video transmission and voice and data communications. 
    Leased channel and leased access channel mean any channel, or part of a channel, available for commercial use on a fee basis by persons or entities other than a franchisee. 
    Premium service means pay television offered on a per channel or per program basis. 
    Service tier means a specific set of cable subscriber services which are made available as, and only as, a group for purchase by subscribers at a separate rate for the group. 
    Street and public way mean the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, path, sidewalk, alley, court, or easement held by the village for the purpose of public travel or public utilities and shall include public easements or rights-of-way. 
    Subscriber means a recipient of cable television service or other services provided over a cable television system. 
    Two-way capability means a system designed and constructed to have technical capacity for nonvoice return communications. 
    User means a party utilizing a cable television system's facilities for purposes of production or transmission of material or information to subscribers. 
(Ord. No. 125, art. I, § 1.03, 3-30-1987)
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 36-54. - Authority. 
(a)	Requirement of a franchise. It shall be unlawful to construct, install, maintain or operate a cable communications system within the village without a valid franchise obtained pursuant to the provisions of this division. 
(b)	General franchise characteristics. Any franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be deemed to: 
(1)	Authorize the use of the public ways for installing cables, wires, lines, and other facilities in order to operate a cable communications system, but shall neither expressly or impliedly be deemed to authorize the grantee to provide service to, or install cables, wires, lines, or any other equipment or facilities upon private property without owner consent, or to utilize publicly or privately owned utility poles or conduits without a separate agreement with the owners therefor. 
(2)	Be nonexclusive, and shall neither expressly nor impliedly be deemed to preclude the issuance of subsequent franchises to operate one or more other cable communications systems within the village or the ownership or operation of a cable communications system by the village; and 
(3)	Convey no property right to the franchisee or right to renewal, except as may be otherwise provided by applicable law. 
(c)	Franchise as a contract. A franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be deemed to constitute a contract between the franchisee and the village. The franchisee shall be deemed to have contractually committed itself to comply with the terms, conditions and provisions of the franchise documents, and with all rules, orders, regulations, and determinations applicable to the franchise which are issued, promulgated or made pursuant to the provisions of this division. 
(d)	Conflicts. 
(1)	All terms, conditions and provisions of this division and the application for a franchise shall be deemed to be embodied in a franchise, and conflicts in terms, conditions or provisions between these documents shall be resolved as follows: 
a.	The express terms of this division shall prevail over conflicting or inconsistent provisions of the franchise; 
b.	The express terms of the franchise shall prevail over conflicting or inconsistent provisions in the application, except the express terms of this division; and 
c.	The express terms of any request for proposals shall prevail over conflicting or inconsistent provisions in the application for the franchise. 
(2)	The provisions of the franchise shall be liberally construed in order to effectuate its purposes and objectives consistent with this division and the public interest. A franchise agreement will be construed under the laws of the state, except to the extent such laws are lawfully preempted by applicable federal statutes, rules or regulations. 
(e)	Subject authority. A franchisee shall, at all times during the life of a franchise, be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power by the village and to such lawful regulations as the village shall hereafter enact; provided, however, that such regulations by ordinance or otherwise shall be reasonable and not in conflict with any rights granted in this section, nor in conflict with the applicable laws or regulations of the state or of the United States or their respective regulatory bodies having jurisdiction. The construction, operation and maintenance of the system shall also be in full compliance with all other applicable rules and regulations now in effect or hereafter adopted by the United States, the state, or any agency of such governments. 
(Ord. No. 125, art. II, 3-30-1987)
Sec. 36-55. - Franchise applications. 
(a)	Filing of applications. Applications for a cable television franchise will be considered pursuant to the following procedures: 
(1)	An application may be filed at any time or pursuant to a request for proposals (RFP) issued by the village. 
(2)	The village may request additional information from an applicant for a franchise at any time. 
(3)	All applications to be acceptable for filing must be accompanied by a filing fee as adopted by resolution of the village council from time to time. The village shall apply all filing fees received against all costs associated with its evaluation of any pending applications pursuant to section 36-57. If total costs are less than total filing fees, the village shall refund a portion of the filing fee on a pro rata basis to each applicant. 
(b)	Content of applications. To be acceptable for filing, an application must conform to any applicable RFP and all the information specified therein. Where an application is not filed pursuant to an RFP, it shall contain, at minimum, the following information: 
(1)	Identification of the ownership of the applicant, if not a natural person, including the names and addresses of all persons with one percent or more ownership interest and the ultimate controlling natural persons and identification of all officers and directors and any other primary business affiliation of each; provided, however, that when any parent corporation has in excess of 1,000 shareholders and its shares are publicly traded on a national stock exchange, then a list of all holders of five percent or more of the voting stock of such corporation shall be disclosed. 
(2)	An indication of whether the applicant, or any entity controlling the applicant, including any officer of a corporation or major stockholder thereof, has been adjudged bankrupt, has had a cable franchise revoked, or has been found guilty by any court or administrative agency in the United States of: 
a.	A violation of a security or antitrust law; or
b.	A felony or any other crime involving moral turpitude.
The application shall further identify any such person, or entity and fully explain the circumstances. 
(3)	A demonstration of the applicant's technical, legal and financial ability to construct and operate the proposed cable facility. 
(4)	A description of the physical facility proposed, including channel capacity (one-way and two-way, if any), the area to be served, a summary of technical characteristics, and head-end and access facilities. 
(5)	A description of how any construction will be implemented, identification of areas having aboveground or belowground cable facilities, the proposed construction schedule, and a description, where appropriate, of how service will be converted from any existing facility to a new facility. 
(6)	A description of the services to be provided over the system, including identification of television signals, both broadcast and nonbroadcast, to be carried and all nontelevision services to be provided initially. Where service will be offered by tiers, identify the signals and/or services to be included on each tier. 
(7)	The proposed rates to be charged, including rates for each service tier, as appropriate, and charges for installation, converters, and other services. 
(8)	Information as necessary to demonstrate compliance with all relevant requirements contained in this division. 
(9)	A demonstration of how the proposal future is reasonable to meet the future cable-related community needs and interests. In particular, the application should describe how the proposal will satisfy the needs as analyzed in any recent community needs assessment commissioned by the village. 
(10)	A demonstration that the proposal is designed to be consistent with all federal and state requirements. 
(11)	If requested by the village, pro forma financial projections for each year of the franchise term. The projections shall include a statement of income, balance sheet, statement of sources and uses of funds, and schedule of capital additions. All significant assumptions shall be explained in notes or supporting schedules that accompany the projections. 
(12)	A complete list of all cable communications systems in which the applicant, or a principal or affiliate thereof, holds an equity interest. 
(13)	An affidavit of the applicant, or duly authorized offer thereof, certifying, in a form acceptable to the village, the truth and accuracy of the information contained in the application and acknowledging the enforceability of application commitments. 
(14)	In the case of an application by an existing franchisee for a renewed franchise, a demonstration that such franchisee has substantially complied with the material terms of the existing franchise and with the applicable law. 
(15)	Other information that the village, or its agents, may request of the applicant.
(Ord. No. 125, art. III, §§ 3.01, 3.02, 3-30-1987)
Sec. 36-56. - Applicant representatives. 
    Any person who files an application with the village for a cable television franchise shall forthwith, at all times, disclose to the village, in writing, the names, addresses and occupations of all persons who are authorized to represent or act on behalf of the applicant in those matters pertaining to the application. The requirements to make such disclosure shall continue until the village shall have rejected an applicant's application or until an applicant withdraws its application. 
(Ord. No. 125, art. III, § 3.03, 3-30-1987)
Sec. 36-57. - Consideration of applications. 
(a)	The village will consider each application for a franchise where the application is found to be acceptable for filing and in substantial compliance with the requirements of this division and any applicable RFP. In evaluating an application, the village will consider, among other things, the applicant's past service record in other communities, the nature of the proposed facilities and services, proposed rates, and whether the proposal would adequately serve the public needs and the overall interests of the citizens of the village. Where the application is for a renewed franchise, the village shall consider whether: 
(1)	The cable operator has substantially complied with the material terms of the existing franchise and with applicable law; 
(2)	The quality of the operator's service, including signal quality, response to consumer complaints, and billing practices (but without regard to the mix, quality, or level of cable services or other services provided over the system) has been reasonable in light of community needs; 
(3)	The operator has the financial, legal and technical ability to provide the services, facilities, and equipment as set forth in the operator's proposal; and 
(4)	The operator's proposal is reasonable to meet the future cable-related community needs and interests, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and interests. 
(b)	Where the village determines that an applicant's proposal, including the proposed service area, would serve the public interest, it may grant, by ordinance, a franchise to the applicant. The franchise agreement will constitute a contract, freely entered into, between the village and the grantee. Such franchise agreement shall incorporate by reference the relevant provisions of this division. Any such franchise must be approved by ordinance of the village council. 
(c)	In the course of considering an application for a renewed franchise, the council shall hold a public hearing, in which the public and the franchisee seeking renewal shall be offered an opportunity to speak, offer evidence and question witnesses. Notice of any such public hearing shall, at least 30 days before the date of the hearing, be published in a local newspaper of general circulation in the village and be sent by certified mail to each applicant to be considered. A transcript or recording shall be made of such hearing. Based on the record of such hearing and the application, including any negotiations relative thereto, the council shall determine whether to grant a renewed franchise and shall issue a written opinion stating the reasons for its decision. 
(Ord. No. 125, art. III, § 3.04, 3-30-1987)
Sec. 36-58. - Franchise conditions. 
(a)	Franchise term. The term of a franchise shall be as specified in the franchise agreement, but it shall not exceed ten years. If a franchisee seeks authority to operate a cable system in the village beyond the terms of its franchise, it shall file an application for a new franchise not later than 30 months prior to the expiration of its franchise. 
(b)	Rescission of franchise. In addition to all other rights and powers pertaining to the village by virtue of this franchise, the constitution and laws of the state, or otherwise, the village reserves the right to terminate and cancel the franchise and all rights and privileges of the franchisee under this division if the franchisee: 
(1)	Materially breaches any material provision of the franchise. Notwithstanding, the franchisee shall have 30 days after written notice from the village in which to cure the default, or if the default is of such a nature it cannot reasonably be cured within 30 days, then the franchisee shall have a reasonable period of time to cure such default if it commences curing within 30 days and proceeds diligently thereafter. 
(2)	Becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, is adjudged as bankrupt, or makes an assignment for the benefit of creditors. 
(3)	Engages in fraud, deceit or deception upon the village or its residents.
Such termination or cancellation shall be by action of the village council to take effect after 60 days' notice to the franchisee and shall in no way affect any of the village's rights under this franchise or any provisions of law. If such termination and cancellation depends upon a finding of fact, such finding of fact as shall be made by the commission shall be conclusive. If the village council considers terminating or cancelling the franchise, the council shall hold a public hearing at which the public and the franchisee shall be offered an opportunity to present evidence and question witnesses. Notice of such public hearing shall be published at least 60 days before the date of the hearing in a local newspaper of general circulation in the village and be sent by certified mail to the franchisee. A transcript or recording shall be made of such hearing. Based on the record of such hearing, the council shall determine whether to terminate or cancel the franchise and shall issue a written opinion stating the reasons for its decision. The franchisee shall have the right to appeal therefrom. 
(c)	Franchise fee. 
(1)	The village reserves the right to assess a franchise fee, in consideration of the privilege granted under a franchise for the use of public ways and the privilege to construct and operate a cable television system, in an amount up to five percent of the franchisee's annual gross revenues during the period of its operation under the franchise. The village may exercise this right by including a provision for a fee in any franchise agreement executed pursuant to this division. If the requirement of paying a franchise fee is not set forth in the franchise agreement, that agreement cannot be modified to include the payment of a franchise fee during the term of that franchise. The obligation to pay a fee may be imposed upon any renewals of the original franchise only at the time of the execution of a renewal and not during the term of any renewal period. 
(2)	If a franchise fee is assessed, a franchisee shall file with the village, on a quarterly basis, a financial statement showing the gross revenues received by the franchisee during the preceding quarter. Such financial statements shall be prepared as of each September 30, December 31, March 31, and June 30 for the respective calendar quarters then ended and shall be filed on or before the 30th calendar day from and including the end of the applicable quarter. A franchisee shall pay the quarterly portion of the franchise fee to the village on or before the time such financial statement is due to be filed. A franchisee shall also file, no later than March 31 of each year, the franchisee's financial statements for the preceding year, certified by the chief financial officer and/or treasurer of the franchisee. If anytime during the term of the franchise the village shall have reasonable evidence that any franchise fee payment is erroneous, the village may request an audit. If the audit demonstrates an underpayment by more than five percent, the franchisee shall bear the cost of the audit; otherwise, the audit shall be at the village's expense. Any franchise fee payment in adjustment for any shortfall of the total quarterly payments for the year shall be made at that time. Adjustments for any overpayment shall be by credit to subsequent monthly payments. 
(3)	The village shall have the right to inspect a franchisee's income records, to audit any and all relevant records, and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable, under the franchise and this division. 
(4)	If any franchise payment is not received by the village on or before the applicable dates, interest shall be charged from such due date at an annual interest rate then chargeable for unpaid federal income taxes (26 USC 6621) or the maximum rate allowable under state law, whichever is less. Interest will not be chargeable to the franchisee for additional payment required under the yearly adjustment, provided that such payment does not exceed ten percent of the total quarterly payments made during the year. If such payment exceeds ten percent, the franchisee shall be liable for interest at an annual rate of ten percent for the entire amount. 
(5)	If a franchise is revoked or otherwise terminated prior to its expiration date, the franchisee shall file with the village, within 90 days of the date of revocation or termination, an audited financial statement showing the gross revenues received by the franchisee since the end of the previous year and shall make adjustments at that time for the franchise fees due up to the date of revocation or termination. 
(6)	Nothing in this division shall limit the village's authority to tax a franchisee as permitted by law. 
(d)	Insurance; bonds; indemnity. Upon the granting of a franchise and following simultaneously with the filing of the acceptance of the franchise and at all times during the term of the franchise, including the time for removal of facilities or management as a trustee as provided for in this division, the franchisee shall obtain, pay all premiums for, and deliver to the village written evidence of payment of premiums for and certificate evidencing the following: 
(1)	A general comprehensive public liability policy indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the village, its officers, boards, commissions, agents or employees from any and all claims by any person whatsoever (including the costs, defenses, attorney fees and interest arising therefrom) on account of injury to or death of a person occasioned by the operations of the franchisee under a franchise granted under this division, or alleged to have been so caused or occurred, with a minimum liability for personal injury, death, and property damages combined coverage as adopted by resolution of the village council from time to time. The village shall give the franchisee prompt notice of any claim received by it, will afford the franchisee the opportunity to defend, settle or otherwise resolve such a claim in the franchisee's sole discretion and, at the franchisee's request, assist the franchisee therein in any reasonable way, so long as the village is indemnified from liability and the costs referred to in this section. 
(2)	Workers' compensation insurance as provided by the laws of the state, as amended.
(3)	Michigan No-Fault Automobile Insurance with limits in the amounts set forth in subsection (d)(1) of this section for personal injury and property damage as set forth in subsection (d)(1) of this section covering all automobile equipment used by the franchisee or its employees and agents in the village. 
All of such insurance policies shall provide a 30-day notice to the village in the event of material alteration or cancellation of any coverage afforded in such policies prior to the date the material alteration or cancellation shall become effective. The franchisee will not operate without insurance coverage, and failure to maintain such coverage in place will constitute a violation of this division and a breach of any franchise granted under this division. 
(Ord. No. 125, art. IV, 3-30-1987)
Sec. 36-59. - System construction and installation. 
(a)	Construction standards. 
(1)	Any cable system constructed within the village shall meet or exceed all technical standards consistent with this division, the franchise agreement, and the franchisee's application. 
(2)	The cable system shall meet FCC guidelines at all times, and the franchisee shall provide a copy of each test report to the village within five working days of completion of such reports and shall maintain the resulting test data on file at its local office for the term of the franchise or at least five years, whichever is longer. The village subsequently may require a full report on any deficiencies as disclosed by the proof of performance tests within such reasonable period of time as it may designate. 
(3)	The village may require any other reasonable proof of performance within 90 days of the completion of the construction of a new system or the upgrading or reconstruction of an existing system. The tests and verification shall be at the expense of the franchisee. 
(4)	The franchisee shall submit to the village, as the village may request, a copy of all maps and charts of cable locations prepared by or for the franchisee during the duration of this franchise. 
(b)	Construction and installation work. 
(1)	The village shall have the right to inspect all construction and installation work performed by the franchisee subject to this division as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with governing ordinances and the franchise. 
(2)	All construction, installation and maintenance must comply with the National Electrical Safety Code, the National Electrical Code, as adopted by the village, the Bell System Code of Pole Line Construction, all state and local regulations, and good and accepted industry practices. 
(c)	Location of structures, lines and equipment. 
(1)	A franchisee shall utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities whenever possible, and shall not construct or install any new, different, or additional poles, conduits, or other facilities whether on public property or on privately owned property until approval of the property owner or appropriate governmental authority is obtained. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. However, the location of any pole or wire-holding structure by a franchisee shall not constitute a vested interest, and such poles, structures, or facilities shall be removed, replaced or modified by the franchisee at its own expense whenever the commission or other governmental authority determines that the public interest so necessitates. 
(2)	All transmission and distribution structures, lines, and equipment installed by the franchisee within the village shall be located so as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways and places and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the streets, alleys or other public ways or places and where they will not interfere with any gas, electric, telephone, water or other preexisting utility facility. 
(3)	All such poles and other fixtures in any street or public way shall be placed in accordance with all applicable statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(4)	In those areas of the village where electric and telephone utility lines have been placed underground, a franchisee shall place its lines and installations underground. In areas where either telephone or electric facilities are above the ground at the time of installation, the franchisee may install its service above the ground; provided, however, that at such time as both of those other facilities are placed underground, the franchisee shall forthwith place its facilities underground, and the cost of such shall be borne by the franchisee, with no special assessment being imposed upon any subscriber for such change. In new housing developments, a franchisee shall install distribution cables at the same time utility facilities are being installed if economically feasible. 
(d)	Replacement of paving. The franchisee, at its own cost and expense and in the manner approved by the village, shall replace and restore all paving, sidewalks, driveways, or surface of any street or alley disturbed, in as good condition as before the work was commenced and shall maintain the restoration in an improved condition for a period of one year. Failure of the franchisee to replace or restore such paving, sidewalk, driveway or street surface within 48 hours after completion of work shall authorize the village to cause the proper restoration to be made at the franchisee's expense. 
(e)	Alteration of streets by village. If the village shall lawfully decide to alter or change the grade of any street, alley, or other public way, the franchisee, upon reasonable notice by the village, shall, in a timely manner as requested by the village, remove and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, and other facilities at its own expense. 
(f)	Moving of buildings. A franchisee shall, on the request of any person holding a valid house-moving permit, temporarily raise or lower its wires or cables to permit the moving of buildings or other large objects. The expense of such temporary raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person making the request, and the franchisee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The franchisee shall be given not less than 48 hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(g)	Trimming trees. A franchisee shall have the authority to trim trees on public property or which overhang streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the village so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with wires and cables and other television conductors and fixtures of the franchisee. The village may require all trimming to be done at the franchisee's expense and under the village's supervision and direction. 
(Ord. No. 125, art. V, 3-30-1987)
Sec. 36-60. - System operation. 
(a)	Provision of service. A franchisee shall provide subscriber service on the following basis: 
(1)	A franchisee shall not deny service, access, or otherwise discriminate against any person, including subscribers and users, on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age, or sex. A franchisee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations. 
(2)	In providing service, a franchisee shall:
a.	Operate an office open during normal business hours Monday through Friday, excluding legal holidays. 
b.	Provide a local toll-free telephone service capable of receiving subscriber service complaints, on a seven-day-a-week, 24-hour-a-day basis. 
c.	Establish a maintenance service capable of promptly locating and correcting system malfunctions. Service trucks shall be equipped for voice communication with the franchisee's dispatcher. In order to permit a rapid response to any systemwide outage, the franchisee shall have service trucks available for emergency duty to repair system outages during nonbusiness hours. 
d.	Make every attempt to respond to customer complaints upon receipt, but in no case later than the next working day. 
1.	The franchisee, whenever reasonably practicable, shall make system repairs and testing (which would result in any interruption of service to subscribers) at times which will least affect typical subscriber television viewing habits; provided, however, that a franchisee shall not be required to conduct such system repairs and testing during nonbusiness hours. 
2.	In those cases where service is not restored within 24 hours due to unusual circumstances, the reasons for the delay shall be fully documented in a complaint log. If after 24 hours service is not restored to a subscriber, a franchisee shall, upon subscriber request, provide a refund or credit to such subscriber as set forth in this section for such full 24-hour period and subsequent fractions thereof. The refund or credit shall be in the amount of 1/30 the monthly charge for each tier of service and each premium service which is unavailable to the subscriber. The franchisee shall make a good faith effort to identify and correct malfunctions promptly, but in no event longer than 48 hours after receiving notification. 
e.	Maintain a log of billing complaints for inspection by the village. A franchisee shall respond to written complaints within seven days of receipt. 
(3)	As subscribers are connected or reconnected to the system, a franchisee shall, by appropriate means such as a card or brochure, furnish general subscriber information (including, but not limited to, terms of service, procedures for making inquiries or complaints, including the name, address, and local telephone number of the employees or agent to whom such inquiries or complaints are to be addressed) and furnish information concerning the village office responsible for the administration of the franchise, including the address and telephone number of such office. 
(4)	When similar complaints have been made by a number of subscribers, or where other evidence exists which, in the judgment of the village, casts doubt on the reliability or quality of the cable service, the village shall have the right and authority to require that the franchisee test, analyze, and report on the performance of the system. The franchisee shall prepare a written report of the results, if requested, within 30 days after notice. Costs of such testing shall be borne by the franchisee. 
(5)	Where the franchisee provides service which is not subject to rate regulation by the village, it shall give at least 60 days' prior written notice to the village and all subscribers before implementing any rate increases. 
(b)	Refunds and service terminations. 
(1)	A franchisee shall establish and conform to the following policy regarding refunds to subscribers and users: 
a.	If the franchisee collects a deposit or advance charge on any service or equipment requested by a subscriber or user, the franchisee shall provide such service or equipment within 30 days of the collection of the deposit or charge or it shall refund such deposit or charge within 30 days thereafter. Nothing in this section shall be construed: 
1.	To relieve a franchisee of any responsibility it may have under separately executed contracts or agreements with subscribers or users; 
2.	As limiting a franchisee's liability for liquidated damages, if any, which may be imposed under the franchise for the violation or breach of any provisions thereof; or 
3.	To limit the franchisee's liability for damages, if any, because of its failure to provide the service for which the deposit or charge was made. 
b.	If a subscriber terminates service during the first three months of service because of the failure of the franchisee to render service substantially in accordance with the requirements set forth in this division and the franchise, the franchisee shall, upon written request, refund to such subscriber an amount equal to the initial installation or reconnection charge paid by the subscriber; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be deemed to entitle a subscriber to a refund of any other charges due the franchisee for its cable television service. The subscriber shall bear the burden of proof in establishing that he is entitled to a refund of initial installation or reconnection charges under this division. 
c.	If such subscriber has made any additional advance payment, the amount so advanced shall be refunded to such subscriber within 30 days after service termination. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to relieve the franchisee of any liability established under any other provisions of this division or a franchise issued pursuant hereto. 
(2)	The following requirements shall apply to subscriber disconnection:
a.	There shall be no charge for disconnection of any installation service or outlet. All cable converters shall be removed within a reasonable time from a subscriber's property upon the subscriber's request, such time not to exceed 30 days from the date of request. 
b.	If any subscriber fails to pay a properly due monthly subscriber's fee, or any other properly due fee or charge, the franchisee may disconnect the subscriber's service; provided, however, that such disconnection shall not be affected until 30 days after the due date of the monthly subscriber fee or charges and shall include a minimum five days' written notice to the subscriber of the intent to disconnect. After disconnection, upon payment in full of all proper fees or charges, including the payment of any reconnection charge (which shall not exceed the fee for a new installation), the franchisee shall promptly reinstate the service. This subsection shall not apply to subscribers who have been previously disconnected for nonpayment in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(c)	Service area. A franchisee shall offer full cable television service to all areas of the village unless specifically authorized to serve a lesser area. A franchise issued pursuant hereto shall require that all dwelling units within the franchise territory shill be offered service on the same terms and conditions; provided, however, that multiple-family dwelling complexes, apartments or condominiums may be served on a master-billed basis and, further, service to motels, hotels, hospitals and similar businesses or institutions may be offered on terms and conditions different from single resident subscribers. If subsequent to the issuance of a franchise the village annexes additional territory, a franchisee shall extend its cable television services into the annexed area upon reasonable request of the village. 
(d)	Protection of privacy. Protection of subscriber privacy shall be ensured consistent with the provisions of 47 USC 551, or any similar successor provision. 
(e)	Tampering or unauthorized connections. 
(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person to make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively, or otherwise, with any part of the franchise cable television system within the village for the purpose of enabling anyone to receive any television signal or other information transmitted over the cable television system without proper authorization to do so. 
(2)	It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the cable system operator, to willfully tamper with, remove, or injure any cables, wires or other cable television system equipment; except, however, a subscriber may disconnect a television receiver from the cable system upon termination of service if the operator has not responded within the 30 days to a request for disconnection. 
(f)	Continuity of service. 
(1)	Where a franchisee rebuilds, modifies or sells its system, it shall ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service, regardless of the circumstances. 
(2)	As long as it is entitled to revenues from the operation of the cable system, a franchisee shall maintain continuity of service for a period of six months during any temporary transition in the franchise including, but not limited to, the following circumstances: 
a.	Revocation of the franchise;
b.	Nonrenewal of the franchise; or
c.	Transfer of the cable system to the village or another entity.
(g)	Transitional operation. If a franchisee continues to operate the system in a transitional period, with village acquiescence, following the expiration, revocation or other termination of the franchise, it shall be bound by all the terms, conditions and obligations of the franchise as if it were in full force and effect. The terminating franchisee shall cooperate with the village and any subsequent franchisee in maintaining and transferring service responsibility. 
(h)	Equal opportunity employment. Equal opportunity in employment shall be afforded by a franchisee to all qualified persons, and no person shall be discriminated against in employment because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, height, weight or marital status. A franchisee shall establish, maintain, and carry out a positive continuing program of specific practices designed to ensure equal opportunity in every aspect of company employment policy and practice. A franchisee shall immediately comply with all federal, state and local equal opportunity employment requirements and practices. 
(i)	Regulation of rates. The village reserves the right to regulate cable rates charged by the franchisee within the village at such time that the state and the United States government allows rate regulation by governmental units. The village and a franchisee may agree at the time of granting or renewing a franchise to freeze existing rates for a reasonable period satisfactory to the parties. 
(j)	Records and reports. The commission shall have full and complete access to the franchisee's records relating to the operation of the franchisee's system property. Such records shall include, but not be limited to, the franchisee's engineering, statistical, and customer and service records. The franchisee shall maintain separate records for the village system, and shall not integrate or commingle records with other systems so as to require separation of records by the commission. 
(k)	Channels provided. 
(1)	The franchisee's distribution systems shall be capable of carrying at least 30 television channels. 
(2)	Each franchisee shall provide, upon the request of any subscriber, a lockbox device whereby a subscriber may by key restrict the viewing of any one, or any combination of channels over which the franchisee has editorial control. 
(3)	The franchisee may sell, lease or use for program origination or for regular services or pay TV services and may permit advertising on all channels except as hereafter provided. The fees charged for use of such channels are to be set by the franchisee. 
(l)	Public access. 
(1)	The franchisee shall provide one public access channel at a rate approved by the commission intended to cover expenses only. The commission may hereafter amend or modify change or regulate the basis upon which access is gained to the public access channel without a showing of a need for such change. Until further direction by the village, this channel may be used by the franchisee to provide date, time, temperature, hour, etc., and advertising messages, audio/radio signals, and other messages when not used as a public access channel. Pursuant to CCPA § 611(d), until such time as a conflict arises, this section shall stand as the rules and procedures for access and operation of the public access channel. If a cause arises for the promulgation of further rules and procedures, the commission shall propose such rules and procedures and submit them to the village for approval by resolution. 
(2)	A franchisee shall provide at least one channel of public education television service such as the Delta College PBS station. 
(3)	The franchisee shall without charge provide one cable connection to each public school building and the municipal building located within the village providing the basic cable services only. 
(m)	Signal quality requirements. The franchisee shall: 
(1)	Transmit signals capable of producing a picture, whether in black and white or color, that is accompanied with proper sound of good quality on typical standard production TV sets in good repair, and as good as the state of the art allows. 
(2)	Transmit signals of adequate strength to produce good pictures with good sound at all outlets without causing cross modulation in the cables or interfering with other electrical or electronic systems. 
(3)	The signal quality shall meet the minimum signal strength requirements of the Federal Communications Commission on those frequencies which the franchisee is authorized to operate. The signal of the franchisee shall not encroach on frequencies for which it is not licensed beyond the limits thereof authorized by the FCC. 
(4)	Represent to the village the cable signal at the head-end and at the worst case tap in the system as a part of its franchise application. The point of measurement of the electrical signal shall be at a cable television connection installed by the franchisee for the subscriber. The worst case signal requirements shall not apply to any extensions not installed by the franchisee. 
(Ord. No. 125, art. VI, 3-30-1987)
Sec. 36-61. - Interconnection and cooperation. 
(a)	Interconnection. A franchisee's system shall be designed and constructed so as to be capable of interconnection with any systems existing in areas contiguous to the village and insofar as technically and economically feasible, with any such systems anticipated for future construction. 
(b)	Cooperation. A franchisee shall cooperate with any interconnection corporation, regional interconnection authority, or county or state regulatory agency which may be hereafter established for the purpose of regulating, facilitating, financing, or otherwise providing for the interconnection of cable communications systems beyond the boundaries of individual political jurisdictions. 
(Ord. No. 125, art. VII, 3-30-1987)
Sec. 36-62. - Cablecasting commission. 
(a)	Established. There is established a cablecasting commission consisting of the village council. The village manager shall serve as an ex officio member of the commission and shall be the individual charged with overseeing the implementation of this division and any franchise granted under this division. 
(b)	Powers and duties. 
(1)	The commission may employ such staff or consultants as is necessary.
(2)	The commission may examine engineering records including maps of cable locations, statistical records related to market penetration, and customer service complaints of the franchisee's operation. 
(3)	The commission has all powers provided elsewhere in this division and such other powers as are necessary to carry out the purposes of the village and council as expressed in this division. 
(c)	Procedure for hearing. 
(1)	Commission hearing. In any contested case, all parties shall be afforded an opportunity for hearing, after reasonable notice, in conformity with all applicable statutory regulations. The notice, in addition to complying with any other applicable statutory requirements, shall state the time, place and issues involved and opportunity shall be afforded all parties to present evidence and argument with respect thereto. Any officer of the commission may administer an oath or affirmation to a witness in any matter before the commission, verify to official acts, and take depositions. The commission shall prepare an official record which shall include testimony and exhibits in each contested case. A transcript or recording shall be made of the hearing. Informal dispositions, with the approval of the commission, may also be made of any contested case by stipulation, agreed settlement, consent order or default. The commission shall adopt appropriate rules of procedure for notice and hearing in contested cases. 
(2)	Scope of disputes considered by commission. The commission shall not hear disputes between a franchisee of a franchise and the village. Such matters shall be resolved before other appropriate forums. 
(d)	Action by majority. Any action of the commission shall require the concurrence of four members. 
(Ord. No. 125, art. VIII, 3-30-1987)
Sec. 36-63. - Changes in federal or state regulations. 
    Any franchise granted pursuant to this division shall be subject to the right of the village or the franchisee to renegotiate the terms of the franchise at any time after the effective date of the franchise upon 30 days' notice to the other party if federal or state regulations substantially alter the service, conditions or standards upon which the system is to operate. 
(Ord. No. 125, art. IX, 3-30-1987)
Secs. 36-64-36-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RATE REGULATION 

Sec. 36-81. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the Communications Act of 1934, as amended (and specifically as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, P. L. 102-385), and as may be amended from time to time. 
    Associated equipment means all equipment and services subject to regulation pursuant to 47 CFR 76.923. 
    Basic cable service means basic service as defined in the FCC Rules, and any other cable television service which is subject to rate regulation by the village pursuant to the Act and the FCC Rules. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    FCC Rules means all rules of the FCC promulgated from time to time pursuant to the Act. 
    Increase in rates means an increase in rates or a decrease in programming or customer services as provided in the FCC Rules. All other words and phrases used in this division shall have the same meaning as defined in the Act and FCC Rules. 
(Ord. No. 134, § 1, 9-28-1993)
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 36-82. - Purpose; interpretation. 
    The purpose of this division is to: 
(1)	Adopt regulations consistent with the Act and the FCC Rules with respect to basic cable service rate regulation; and 
(2)	Prescribe procedures to provide a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties in connection with basic cable service rate regulation by the village. 
This division shall be implemented and interpreted consistent with the Act and FCC Rules. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 2, 8-31-1993)
Sec. 36-83. - Rate regulations promulgated by FCC. 
    In connection with the regulation of rates for basic cable service and associated equipment, the village shall follow all FCC Rules. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 3, 8-31-1993)
Sec. 36-84. - Filing; additional information; burden of proof. 
(a)	A cable operator shall submit its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates in accordance with the Act and the FCC Rules. The cable operator shall include as part of its submission such information as is necessary to show that its schedule of rates or its proposed increase in rates complies with the Act and the FCC Rules. The cable operator shall file ten copies of the schedule or proposed increase with the village clerk. For purposes of this division, the filing of the cable operator shall be deemed to have been made when at least ten copies have been received by the village clerk. The village council may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt rules and regulations as allowed by law prescribing the information, data and calculations which must be included as part of the cable operator's filing of the schedule of rates or a proposed increase. 
(b)	In addition to information and data required by rules and regulations of the village pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, a cable operator shall provide all information requested by the village manager that is related and helpful in connection with the village's review and regulation of existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in these rates. The village manager may establish reasonable deadlines for submission of the requested information and the cable operator shall comply with such deadlines. 
(c)	A cable operator has the burden of proving that its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates complies with the Act and the FCC Rules including, without limitation, 47 USC 543 and 47 CFR 76.922 and 76.923. 
(Ord. No. 134, § 2, 9-28-1993)
Sec. 36-85. - Proprietary information. 
(a)	If this division, any rules or regulations adopted by the village pursuant to section 36-84(a), or any request for information pursuant to section 36-84(b) requires the production of proprietary information, the cable operator shall produce the information. However, at the time the allegedly proprietary information is submitted, a cable operator may request that specific, identified portions of its response be treated as confidential and withheld from public disclosure. The request must state the reason why the information should be treated as proprietary and the facts that support those reasons. The request for confidentiality will be granted if the village determines that the preponderance of the evidence shows that nondisclosure is consistent with the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act, 5 USC 552. The village shall place in a public file for inspection any decision that results in information being withheld. If the cable operator requests confidentiality and the request is denied: 
(1)	Where the cable operator is proposing a rate increase, it may withdraw the proposal, in which case the allegedly proprietary information will be returned to it; or 
(2)	The cable operator may seek review within five working days of the denial in any appropriate forum. Release of the information will be stayed pending review. 
(b)	Any interested party may file a request to inspect material withheld as proprietary with the village. The village shall weigh the policy considerations favoring nondisclosure against the reasons cited for permitting inspection in light of the facts of the particular case. It will then promptly notify the requesting entity and the cable operator that submitted the information as to the disposition of the request. It may grant, deny or condition a request. The requesting party or the cable operator may seek review of the decision by filing an appeal with any appropriate forum. Disclosure will be stayed pending resolution of any appeal. 
(c)	The procedures set forth in this section shall be construed as analogous to and consistent with the rules of the FCC regarding requests for confidentiality including, without limitation, 47 CFR 0.459. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 5, 8-31-1993)
Sec. 36-86. - Public notice; initial review of rates. 
(a)	Upon the filing of ten copies of the schedule of rates or the proposed increase in rates pursuant to section 36-84(a), the village clerk shall publish a public notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the village which shall state that: 
(1)	The filing has been received by the village clerk and (except those parts which may be withheld as proprietary) is available for public inspection and copying; and 
(2)	Interested parties are encouraged to submit written comments on the filing to the village clerk not later than seven days after the public notice is published. 
(b)	The village clerk shall give notice to the cable operator of the date, time, and place of the meeting at which the village council shall first consider the schedule of rates or the proposed increase. This notice shall be mailed by first class mail at least three days before the meeting. In addition, if a written staff or consultant's report on the schedule of rates or the proposed increase is prepared for consideration of the village council, then the village clerk shall mail a copy of the report by first class mail to the cable operator at least three days before the meeting at which the village council shall first consider the schedule of rates or the proposed increase. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 6, 8-31-1993)
Sec. 36-87. - Tolling order. 
    After a cable operator has filed its existing schedule of rates or a proposed increase in these rates, the existing schedule of rates will remain in effect or the proposed increase in rates will become effective after 30 days from the date of filing under section 36-84(a), unless the village council, or other properly authorized body or official, tolls the 30-day deadline pursuant to 47 CFR 76.933 by issuing a brief written order, by resolution or otherwise, within 30 days of the date of filing. The village council may toll the 30-day deadline for an additional 90 days in cases not involving cost-of-service showings and for an additional 150 days in cases involving cost-of-service showings. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 7, 8-31-1993)
Sec. 36-88. - Public notice; hearing on basic cable service rates following tolling of 30-day deadline. 
    If a written order has been issued pursuant to section 36-87 and 47 CFR 76.933 to toll the effective date of existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in these rates, the cable operator shall submit to the village any additional information required or requested pursuant to section 36-84. In addition, the village council shall hold a public hearing to consider the comments of interested parties within the additional 90-day or 150-day period, as the case may be. The village clerk shall publish a public notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the village which shall state: 
(1)	The date, time, and place at which the hearing shall be held;
(2)	Interested parties may appear in person, by agent, or by letter at such hearing to submit comments on or objections to the existing rates or the proposed increase in rates; and 
(3)	Copies of the schedule of rates or the proposed increase in rates and related information, except those parts which may be withheld as proprietary, are available for inspection or copying from the office of the clerk. 
The public notice shall be published not less than 15 days before the hearing. In addition, the village clerk shall mail by first class mail a copy of the public notice to the cable operator not less than 15 days before the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 8, 8-31-1993)
Sec. 36-89. - Staff or consultant report; written response. 
    Following the public hearing, the village manager shall cause a report to be prepared for the village council which shall (based on the filing of the cable operator, the comments or objections of interested parties, information requested from the cable operator and its response, staff or consultant's review, and other appropriate information) include a recommendation for the decision of the village council pursuant to section 36-90. The village clerk shall mail a copy of the report to the cable operator by first class mail not less than 20 days before the village council acts under section 36-90. The cable operator may file a written response to the report with the village clerk. If at least ten copies of the response are filed by the cable operator with the village clerk within ten days after the report is mailed to the cable operator, the village clerk shall forward it to the village council. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 9, 8-31-1993)
Sec. 36-90. - Rate decisions and orders. 
    The village council shall issue a written order, by resolution or otherwise, which, in whole or in part, approves the existing rates for basic cable service and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates, denies the existing rates or proposed increase, orders a rate reduction, prescribes a reasonable rate, allows the existing rates or proposed increase to become effective subject to refund, or orders other appropriate relief, in accordance with the FCC Rules. If the village council issues an order allowing the existing rates or proposed increase to become effective subject to refund, it shall also direct the cable operator to maintain an accounting pursuant to 47 CFR 76.933. The order specified in this section shall be issued within 90 days of the tolling order under section 36-87 in all cases not involving a cost-of-service showing. The order shall be issued within 150 days after the tolling order under section 36-87 in all cases involving a cost-of-service showing. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 10, 8-31-1993)
Sec. 36-91. - Refunds; notice. 
    The village council may order a refund to subscribers as provided in 47 CFR 76.942. Before the village council orders any refund to subscribers, the village clerk shall give at least seven days written notice to the cable operator by first class mail of the date, time, and place at which the village council shall consider issuing a refund order and shall provide an opportunity for the cable operator to comment. The cable operator may appear in person, by agent, or by letter at such time for the purpose of submitting comments to the village council. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 11, 8-31-1993)
Sec. 36-92. - Written decisions; public notice. 
    Any order of the village council pursuant to section 36-90 or section 36-91 shall be in writing, shall be effective upon adoption by the village council, and shall be deemed released to the public upon adoption. The village clerk shall publish a public notice of any such written order in a newspaper of general circulation within the village which shall: 
(1)	Summarize the written decision; and
(2)	State that copies of the text of the written decision are available for inspection or copying from the office of the clerk. 
In addition, the village clerk shall mail a copy of the text of the written decision to the cable operator by first class mail. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 12, 8-31-1993)
Sec. 36-93. - Rules and regulations. 
    In addition to rules promulgated pursuant to section 36-84, the village council may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt rules and regulations for basic cable service rate regulation proceedings (including, without limitation, the conduct of hearings), consistent with the Act and the FCC Rules. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 13, 8-31-1993)
Sec. 36-94. - Failure to give notice. 
    The failure of the village clerk to give the notices or to mail copies of reports as required by this division shall not invalidate the decisions or proceedings of the village council so long as there is substantial compliance with this division. 
(Ord. No. 134, § 3, 9-28-1993)
Sec. 36-95. - Additional hearings. 
    In addition to the requirements of this division, the village council may, in its sole discretion, hold additional public hearings upon such reasonable notice as the village council shall prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 134, § 4, 9-28-1993)
Sec. 36-96. - Additional powers. 
    The village shall possess all powers conferred by the Act, the FCC Rules, the cable operator's franchise, and all other applicable law. The powers exercised pursuant to the Act, the FCC Rules, and this division shall be in addition to powers conferred by law or otherwise. The village may take any action not prohibited by the Act and the FCC Rules to protect the public interest in connection with basic cable service rate regulation. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 16, 8-31-1993)
Sec. 36-97. - Failure to comply; remedies. 
    The village may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies against the cable operator (including, without limitation, all remedies provided under a cable operator's franchise with the village) for failure to comply with the Act, the FCC Rules, any orders or determinations of the village pursuant to this division, any requirements of this division, or any rules or regulations promulgated under this division. Subject to applicable law, failure to comply with the Act, the FCC Rules, any orders or determinations of the village pursuant to this division, any requirements of this division, or any rules and regulations promulgated under this division shall also be sufficient grounds for revocation or denial of renewal of a cable operator's franchise. 
(Ord. No. 132, § 17, 8-31-1993)
Secs. 36-98-36-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS REGULATIONS 

Sec. 36-101. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Village of Cass City Telecommunications Ordinance". 
(Ord. No. 155, § 1, 3-17-2003)
Sec. 36-102. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this article are to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002) ("Act") and other applicable law, and to ensure that the village qualifies for distributions under the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the Act. 
(Ord. No. 155, § 2, 3-17-2003)
Sec. 36-103. - Conflict. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict with the Act or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 155, § 3, 3-17-2003)
Sec. 36-104. - Terms defined. 
    The terms used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
    Act means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002), as amended from time to time. 
    Permit means a nonexclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this article to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the village for its telecommunications facilities. 
    Village means the Village of Cass City. 
    Village council means the village council of the Village of Cass City or its designee. This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the village council. 
    Village manager means the village manager or his or her designee. 
    All other terms used in this article shall have the same meaning as defined or as provided in the Act, including without limitation the following: 
    Authority means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to section 3 of the Act. 
    MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning as the term "commission" in the Act. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity, or any other legal entity. 
    Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. "Public right-of-way" does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way. 
    Telecommunication facilities or facilities means the equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals. "Telecommunication facilities" or "facilities" do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of title III of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. 
    Telecommunications provider, provider and telecommunications services mean those terms as defined in section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2102. Telecommunication provider does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of the Act and this article only, a provider also includes all of the following: 
(a)	A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service.
(b)	Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way. 
(c)	A person providing broadband internet transport access service.
(Ord. No. 155, § 4, 3-17-2003)
Sec. 36-105. - Permit required. 
(a)	Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the village for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit pursuant to this article. 
(b)	Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with section 6(1) of the Act. A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the application with the village clerk, one copy with the village manager, and one copy with the village attorney. Upon receipt, the village clerk shall make sufficient copies of the application and distribute a copy to additional recipients as mandated by statute and regulations. Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the Act, including without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with section 6(5) of the Act. 
(c)	Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, pursuant to section 6(5) of the Act, the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map. 
(d)	Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the application shall be accompanied by a one-time nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $500.00. 
(e)	Additional information. The village manager may request an applicant to submit such additional information, which the village manager deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the village manager. If the village and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested by the village, the village or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in section 6(2) of the Act. 
(f)	Previously issued permits. Pursuant to section 5(1) of the Act, authorizations or permits previously issued by the village under section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251 and authorizations or permits issued by the village to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this article. 
(g)	Existing providers. Pursuant to section 5(3) of the Act, within 180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the village as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251, shall submit to the village an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this article. Pursuant to section 5(3) of the Act, a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is not required to pay the $500.00 application fee required under subsection (d) above. A provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional 180 days to submit the permit application if allowed by the authority, as provided in section 5(4) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 155, § 5, 3-17-2003)
Sec. 36-106. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)	Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for a permit is hereby delegated to the village manager. Pursuant to section 15(3) of the Act, the village manager shall approve or deny an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under section 36-104(b) of this article for access to a public right-of-way within the village. Pursuant to section 6(6) of the Act, the village manager shall notify the MPSC when the village manager has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied. The village manager shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit. 
(b)	Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the village manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act. 
(c)	Conditions. Pursuant to section 15(4) of the Act, the village manager may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way. 
(d)	Bond requirement. Pursuant to section 15(3) of the Act, and without limitation on subsection (c) above, the village manager may require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use. 
(Ord. No. 155, § 6, 3-17-2003)
Sec. 36-107. - Construction/engineering permit. 
    A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the village without first obtaining a construction or engineering permit as required under the codified Ordinances of the Village of Cass City, as amended, for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for such a construction or engineering permit. 
(Ord. No. 155, § 7, 3-17-2003)
Sec. 36-108. - Conduit or utility poles. 
    Pursuant to section 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the Act or under this article does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles. 
(Ord. No. 155, § 8, 3-17-2003)
Sec. 36-109. - Route maps. 
    Pursuant to section 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the village, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the village. The route maps should be in paper format unless and until the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with section 6(8) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 155, § 9, 3-17-2003)
Sec. 36-110. - Repair of damage. 
    Pursuant to section 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the village, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition. 
(Ord. No. 155, § 10, 3-17-2003)
Sec. 36-111. - Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. 
    In addition to the nonrefundable application fee paid to the village set forth in section 36-105(d) above, a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the village's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance fee to the authority pursuant to section 8 of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 155, § 11, 3-17-2003)
Sec. 36-112. - Modification of existing fees. 
    In compliance with the requirements of section 13(1) of the Act, the village hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the Act, which shall be paid to the authority. In compliance with the requirements of section 13(4) of the Act, the village also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the village's boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required under section 8 of the Act. The village shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of this article, in compliance with the requirement of section 13(4) of the Act. To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the Act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the village's policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the village, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error. 
(Ord. No. 155, § 12, 3-17-2003)
Sec. 36-113. - Savings clause. 
    Pursuant to section 13(5) of the act, if section 8 of the act is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under section 36-112 above shall be void from the date the modification was made. 
(Ord. No. 155, § 13, 3-17-2003)
Sec. 36-114. - Use of funds. 
    Pursuant to section 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the village from the authority shall be used by the village solely for rights-of-way related purposes. In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the village from the authority shall be deposited into the major street fund and/or the local street fund maintained by the village under Act No. 51 of the Public Acts of 1951. 
(Ord. No. 155, § 14, 3-17-2003)
Sec. 36-115. - Annual report. 
    Pursuant to section 10(5) of the Act, the village manager shall file an annual report with the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the authority. 
(Ord. No. 155, § 15, 3-17-2003)
Sec. 36-116. - Cable television operators. 
    Pursuant to section 13(6) of the Act, the village shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through broadband internet transport access services. 
(Ord. No. 155, § 16, 3-17-2003)
Sec. 36-117. - Existing rights. 
    Pursuant to section 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this article shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the village may have under a permit issued by the village or under a contract between the village and a telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 155, § 17, 3-17-2003)
Sec. 36-118. - Compliance. 
    The village hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this article is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The village shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the Act, including but not limited to the following: 
(a)	Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, as provided in section 36-105(c) of this article; 
(b)	Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit requirements hereof, in accordance with section 36-105(f) of this article; 
(c)	Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the $500 application fee, in accordance with section 36-105(g) of this article; 
(d)	Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the village, in accordance with section 36-106(a) of this article; 
(e)	Notifying the MPSC when the village has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with section 36-106(a) of this article; 
(f)	Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance with section 36-106(a) of this article; 
(g)	Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, as provided in section 36-106(b) of this article; 
(h)	Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way, in accordance with section 36-106(c) of this article; 
(i)	Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's access and use, in accordance with section 36-106(d) of this article; 
(j)	Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with section 36-107 of this article; 
(k)	Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the village's right-of-way fees with a copy of this article, in accordance with section 36-112 of this article; 
(l)	Submitting an annual report to the authority, in accordance with section 36-115 of this article; and 
(m)	Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with section 36-116 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 155, § 18, 3-17-2003)
Sec. 36-119. - Reservation of police powers. 
    Pursuant to section 15(2) of the Act, this article shall not limit the village's right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the village's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 155, § 19, 3-17-2003)
Sec. 36-120. - Severability. 
    The various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections, and clauses of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section, or clause of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the constitutionality or validity of any remaining provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 155, § 20, 3-17-2003)
Sec. 36-121. - Authorized village officials. 
    The village manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the authorized village official to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal violations bureau) for violations under this article as provided by the village code. 
(Ord. No. 155, § 21, 3-17-2003)
Sec. 36-122. - Municipal civil infraction. 
    A person who violates any provision of this article or the terms or conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and shall be subject to municipal civil infraction fines as set forth in the codified ordinances of the Village of Cass City. Nothing in this section 36-122 shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the village in the event of a violation by a person of this article or a permit. 
(Ord. No. 155, § 22, 3-17-2003) 
Chapter 38 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance prescribing traffic and parking restrictions pertaining to specific streets saved from repeal, § 1-13(14); storage of dismantled or inoperable motor vehicles, § 16-71 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 20; offenses, ch. 22; throwing objects from moving vehicles, § 22-201; use of vehicles on walking trail, § 24-32; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 34; vehicles for hire, ch. 44.
State Law reference- Michigan vehicle code, MCL 257.1 et seq.; regulations by local authorities, MCL 257.605, 257.606, 257.610.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Michigan Vehicle Code adopted; references; penalties. 
    The Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.1 to 257.923 and as subsequently amended, is adopted by reference and Part 821 §§ 324.82101 to 324.82160 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (Act 451 of 1994), is adopted by reference. References in the Michigan Vehicle Code and the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act to "local authorities" shall mean the Village of Cass City. The penalties provided by the Michigan Vehicle Code are adopted by reference, provided, however, that the village may not enforce any provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code for which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days. 
(Ord. No. 150, §§ 1, 2, 4, 10-28-2002)
Sec. 38-2. - Uniform Traffic Code. 
(a)	Adopted; penalties. The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages as promulgated by the director of the Michigan Department of State Police pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, 1969 PA 306, MCL 24.201 to 24.328 and made effective October 30, 2002, and all future amendments and revisions to the Uniform Traffic Code when they are promulgated and effective in this state are incorporated by reference. References in the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages to a "governmental unit" shall mean the Village of Cass City. The penalties provided by the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages are adopted by reference. 
(b)	Amendments. Section 5.10 of the Uniform Traffic Code is hereby amended to provide as follows: 
Section 5.10. Business, residence and parks. 
    Subject to the provision of section 5.9 and except in those instances where a different speed is lawfully established and posted, it shall be prima facie lawful for the driver of a vehicle to drive such vehicle at a speed not to exceed 25 miles an hour on all streets in business and residence districts, 15 miles per hour upon any roadway within the municipal park, and ten miles per hour in any of the alleys of the village, but in any case when such speed would be unsafe it shall not be lawful. 
Section 8.10 of the Uniform Traffic Code is hereby amended by adding the following subsections thereto: 
(u)	It shall be unlawful to stand or park any vehicle on any street in the village continuously for a period of time longer than 48 hours, subject to the provisions of subsection (v) following; 
(v)	For the purpose of enabling the village to clean the streets and to properly remove snow, for the benefit of the community, it is hereby declared unlawful to: 
(1)	Park any vehicle on Main Street or Seeger Street between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on any day of the year; 
(2)	Park any vehicle on all other streets in the Village of Cass City between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. commencing on December 1 on any year and ending on April 1 of the following year. 
Whenever any vehicle has been so parked in violation of this section, any police officer is hereby authorized to remove, or to provide for the removal of such vehicle, to a garage within the village or other place of safety and the necessary costs for removal and storage of such vehicle shall become a lien thereon and the person in whose custody the vehicle is given may retain it until said costs have been paid or may dispose of such vehicle pursuant to section 2.5a as in such case of an abandoned vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 113, §§ 2, 3, 4-26-1983; Ord. of 12-20-1999, § I; Ord. No. 156, §§ 1, 2, 4, 6-30-2003) 
Sec. 38-3. - Resolution of conflicts. 
(a)	In the event of a conflict between the Michigan Vehicle Code adopted by section 38-1 and the Uniform Traffic Code adopted by section 38-2, the Michigan Vehicle Code shall prevail. 
(b)	In the event of a conflict between the Michigan Vehicle Code adopted by section 38-1 and this chapter or any ordinance, the Michigan Vehicle Code shall prevail. 
(c)	In the event of a conflict between the Uniform Traffic Code adopted by section 38-2 and this chapter or any ordinance, this chapter or the ordinance shall prevail. 
Secs. 38-4-38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SNOWMOBILES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 151, adopted Oct. 28, 2002, rescinded Ord. No. 68 as amended by Ord. No. 78, and enacted similar provisions. Former Art. II was comprised of §§ 38-31-38-39. The newly adopted provisions have been codified as §§ 38-31-38-37.
State Law reference- Snowmobiles, MCL 324.82101 et seq.; authority to regulate snowmobiles, MCL 324.82119, 324.82124, 324.82125.

Sec. 38-31. - Definitions. 
    Operate means to ride in or on, or to be in actual physical control of a snowmobile. 
    Operator means any person who operates or is in actual physical control of a snowmobile. 
    Owner means any of the following: 
(1)	A person who holds the legal title to a snowmobile in his or her name;
(2)	A vendee or lessee of a snowmobile that is subject of an agreement for conditional sale or lease thereof, with the right to purchase on performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee; 
(3)	A person renting a snowmobile or having the exclusive use of a snowmobile for more than 30 days. 
    Public property means property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the Village of Cass City, including, but not limited to, cemeteries, burial grounds, parks, recreational areas and parking lots. 
    Snowmobile means a motor-driven vehicle which is designed for travel primarily on snow or ice and which utilizes sled-type runners or skis, an endless belt tread, or a combination of sled-type runners, skis, endless belt or other similar means of contact with the surface on which it is operated. 
    Street means the entire width between the boundary lines of every right-of-way, including the shoulders and nonpaved areas thereof, which is publicly maintained within the Village of Cass City, and which is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 1(1), 10-28-2002)
Cross reference- Definitions generally, §1-2. 
Sec. 38-32. - Registration, certificate and display. 
(a)	A snowmobile shall not be operated within the Boundaries of the Village of Cass City unless and until it is registered by the owner, pursuant to Act No. 58 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1995 (MCLA 324.82101 et seq.), as amended, except that the following snowmobiles may be operated without being registered: 
(1)	A snowmobile operated exclusively on lands owned by or under the control of the snowmobile owner; 
(2)	A snowmobile used entirely in an approved safety education and training program conducted by a certified snowmobile safety instructor; or 
(3)	A snowmobile that is exclusively operated in a special event of limited duration, which is conducted according to a pre-arranged schedule under a permit from the Village of Cass City. 
(b)	A certificate of registration issued by the State of Michigan shall be carried on the snowmobile when it is in operation and shall be displayed on demand of a law enforcement officer. If the certificate is lost, mutilated or illegible, the owner shall immediately obtain a duplicate certificate by application to the secretary of state. 
(c)	The registration decal shall be prominently displayed on each side of the forward half of the cowl above the foot-well of the snowmobile, unless the snowmobile is operated exclusively on lands owned or under the control of the snowmobile owner or for a snowmobile used entirely in a safety education and training program. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 1(2), 10-28-2002)
Sec. 38-33. - Equipment. 
(a)	A snowmobile shall be equipped with brakes, which are capable of stopping the snowmobile not more than 40 feet from an initial steady speed of 20 miles per hour and which locks the snowmobile traction belt or belts, while the snowmobile travels on packed snow and carries an operator who weighs 175 pounds or more. 
(b)	A snowmobile shall be equipped with one headlight and one taillight, and the lights shall be illuminated when the snowmobile is operated between one-half hour before sunset and one-half hour after sunrise. 
(c)	A snowmobile shall be equipped with a muffler which is in good working order and from which noise emission does not constitute a public nuisance or disrupt the health, safety, welfare or peace of the public. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 1(3), 10-28-2002)
Sec. 38-34. - Operation. 
(a)	No person shall operate a snowmobile upon any public property, railroad right-of-way or public utility area, except as follows: 
(1)	Snowmobiles may be operated in these areas in the performance of official duties for law enforcement. 
(2)	Snowmobiles may be operated in these areas during a period of emergency or when travel by conventional automotive equipment is not possible, as declared by a police agency having jurisdiction. 
(3)	Snowmobiles may be operated in these areas for a special snowmobile event of limited duration, which is conducted according to a pre-arranged schedule under a permit from the Village of Cass City. 
(b)	No person shall operate a snowmobile upon any sidewalk or municipal right-of-way within the village, unless it becomes necessary to cross that sidewalk or right-of-way. However, the snowmobile shall be brought to a complete stop before entering the sidewalk or right-of-way and the operator shall yield to all approaching pedestrians and motorized and nonmotorized vehicles. 
(c)	Snowmobiles shall only be operated upon the streets, alleys or other public roadways of the village as follows: 
(1)	Snowmobiles shall not be operated on Main Street between Brooker Street and Ale Street, or on Seeger Street between Garfield Street and Huron Street, unless it becomes necessary to cross those streets. However, the snowmobile shall be brought to a complete stop before entering the street and the operator shall yield to all approaching pedestrians and motorized and nonmotorized vehicles. 
(2)	Snowmobiles shall not be operated in these areas with a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour. 
(3)	Snowmobiles shall only be operated in these areas between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Sundays through Thursdays, and between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Fridays and Saturdays. 
(4)	When operating snowmobiles in these areas, they shall only be driven along the extreme right side of the proper lane of traffic for that street, alley or other public roadway. 
(d)	When two or more snowmobiles are operated together, they shall be driven in single file. 
(e)	No person shall operate a snowmobile while under the influence of alcoholic liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination thereof. 
(f)	No person shall operate a snowmobile on private property without the consent of the property owner or his or her agent. 
(g)	No person shall operate or ride a snowmobile without wearing a crash helmet on his or her head, unless such person is riding or operating the snowmobile on his or her own private property. 
(h)	No person shall operate a snowmobile with more than the designated occupant/passenger capacity. 
(i)	No person shall operate a snowmobile within 100 feet of a slide, ski or skating area. However, a snowmobile may enter such an area for the purpose of servicing that area for medical emergencies. 
(j)	No person shall use a snowmobile to hunt, pursue, worry or kill a wild bird or animal.
(k)	No person shall transport a bow or firearm on a snowmobile unless the bow is unstrung or the firearm is securely encased or equipped with, and made inoperative by, a manufactured, key-locked, trigger-housing mechanism. 
(l)	The owner of a snowmobile shall not permit his or her snowmobile to be operated in violation of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 151, 1(4), 10-28-2002; Ord. No. 152, § 1(4), 1-29-2003)
Sec. 38-35. - Age restrictions. 
(a)	A parent or legal guardian shall not permit a child who is under the age of 12 years to operate a snowmobile without the direct supervision of an adult, except on land owned by or under the control of the parent or legal guardian. An operator under the age of 12 shall not cross a street. 
(b)	A person who is 12 to 17 years of age may operate a snowmobile if:
(1)	He or she is under the direct supervision of a person who is not less than 21 years of age. 
(2)	He or she has in his or her immediate possession a snowmobile safety certificate issued by the State of Michigan or under authority of law of another state or the Province of Canada. 
(3)	He or she is traveling upon land owned or controlled by his or her parent or legal guardian. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 1(5), 10-28-2002)
State Law reference- -Similar provisions, MCL 324.82120 
Sec. 38-36. - Accident, notice and liability. 
(a)	The operator of a snowmobile who is involved in an accident which results in injury to or the death of any person, or substantial property damage, estimated to exceed $100.00 dollars, shall immediately notify the Village of Cass City Police Department, the county sheriff department or the State of Michigan Police Department. 
(b)	The Village of Cass City Police Department shall complete a report of the accident on a form prescribed by the State of Michigan and shall forward the report to the state police within 14 days. A copy of the accident report shall be retained by the Village of Cass City for not less than three years. 
(c)	Any snowmobile operated within the Village of Cass City will be presumed to be operated with the consent of the owner. 
(d)	The owner of a snowmobile may be held jointly and severally liable with the operator of said snowmobile. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 1(6), 10-28-2002)
Sec. 38-37. - Violation, arrest and confiscation. 
(a)	A person who violates this article is guilty of a misdemeanor, unless such violation constitutes a felony as set forth under the laws of the state of Michigan. 
(b)	The operator of a snowmobile who is given a visual or audible signal by hand, voice, emergency light or siren, by a uniformed law enforcement officer who is acting in the lawful performance of his or her duties, which directs the operator to bring his or her snowmobile to a stop, shall do so. An operator shall not willfully fail to obey the directives by increasing his or her speed, extinguishing his or her lights or otherwise attempting to flee or elude the law enforcement officer. 
(c)	If a law enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person was, at the time of an accident, the operator of a snowmobile involved in the accident and was driving the snowmobile while under the influence of alcoholic liquor, a controlled substance or a combination thereof, the police officer may arrest the alleged operator of the snowmobile without an arrest warrant. 
(d)	Any snowmobile operated contrary to or in violation of any provision of this article or Public Act 58 of the Public Acts of Michigan 1995, as amended, by someone other than the owner of the snowmobile, who can prove such ownership, or any snowmobile operated with defective equipment, may be confiscated at the direction of a law enforcement officer. In the event a snowmobile is confiscated, the owner of the snowmobile must prove ownership of the snowmobile and pay any and all costs associated with the transportation, towing and storage of the snowmobile before it will be released to him or her. 
(Ord. No. 151, § 1(7), 10-28-2002)
Secs. 38-38-38-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- P-1 vehicular parking districts, § 46-401 et seq.; off-street parking requirements, § 46-475; off-street loading and unloading, § 46-477.
State Law reference- Authority to regulate standing or parking of vehicles, MCL 257.606(1)(a).

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-71. - School buses loading and unloading students. 
    Village public school buses are authorized and permitted to load and unload students of the village public schools at any location within the village for the purpose of transporting them to and from school. 
(Ord. No. 119, § 1, 3-26-1985)
Secs. 38-72-38-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU 

Sec. 38-91. - Established; purpose. 
    Pursuant to section 8395 of the Revised Judicature Act, State of Michigan, as added by Public Act No. 154 of 1968 (MCL 600.8395), a parking violations bureau is established for the purpose of accenting pleas of guilty to alleged violations of those sections of the Uniform Traffic Code pertaining to parking violations. The parking violations bureau shall be under the supervision and control of the village clerk. 
(Ord. No. 69, § 1, 2-4-1969)
Sec. 38-92. - Administration; hours; rules. 
    The village clerk shall administer the parking violations bureau at the village municipal building daily, Monday through Friday of each week, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight and 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m., and shall establish the rules and regulations for the operation thereof and may appoint qualified village employees to administer the bureau in his absence, subject to the approval of the village council. 
(Ord. No. 69, § 2, 2-4-1969)
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 38-93. - Disposition of scheduled violations. 
    No violation not scheduled in section 38-96 shall be disposed of by the parking violations bureau. The fact that a particular violation is scheduled shall not entitle the alleged violator to disposition of the violation at the bureau, and, in any case, the person in charge of such bureau may refuse to dispose of such violation in which case any person having knowledge of the facts may make a sworn complaint before any court having jurisdiction of the offense as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 69, § 3, 2-4-1969)
Sec. 38-94. - Settlement restrictions. 
    No violation may be settled at the parking violations bureau except at the specific request of the alleged violator. No penalty for any violation shall be accepted from any person who denies having committed the offense, and in no case shall the person who is in charge of the bureau determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to such alleged violation. No person shall be required to dispose of a parking violation at the parking violations bureau, and all persons shall be entitled to have any such violation processed before a court having jurisdiction thereof if they so desire. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the parking violations bureau shall not prejudice him or in any way diminish the rights, privileges and protection accorded to him by law. 
(Ord. No. 69, § 4, 2-4-1969)
Sec. 38-95. - Issuance of traffic ticket or notice of violation; deemed allegation; contents. 
    The issuance of a traffic ticket or notice of violation by a police officer of the village shall be deemed an allegation of a parking violation. Such traffic ticket or notice of violation shall indicate the length of time in which the person to whom such ticket or notice was issued must respond before the parking violations bureau. It shall also specify the parking violation charged, indicate the address of the bureau, the hours during which the bureau is open, and advise that a warrant for the arrest of the person to whom the ticket or notice was issued will be sought if such a person fails to respond within the time limited. 
(Ord. No. 69, § 5, 2-4-1969)
_____
Sec. 38-96. - Enumeration of parking violation penalties. 
    The following list of parking violations shall be subject to the penalties indicated: 
OffenseUTC
SectionPenaltyParking too far from curb(8.1, 8.2)$ 6.00Angle parking violations(8.3)6.00Obstructing traffic(8.5)15.00Prohibited parking (signs unnecessary unless indicated):(8.10)(a)On sidewalk15.00(b)In front of drive15.00(c)Within intersection30.00(d)Within 15 feet of hydrant15.00(e)On crosswalk15.00(f)Within 20 feet of crosswalk (signs required)15.00(g)Within 30 feet of street side traffic sign or signal or 15 feet of corner lot lines (signs required) 15.00(h)Within 50 feet of railroad crossing15.00(i)Within 20 feet of fire station entrance (sign required)15.00(j)Within 75 feet of fire station entrance on opposite side of street (signs required)15.00(k)Beside street excavation when traffic obstructed15.00(l)Double parking15.00(m)On bridge or viaduct or within tunnel30.00(n)Within 200 feet of accident where police in attendance9.00(o)In front of theater (signs required)9.00(p)Blocking emergency exit15.00(q)Blocking fire escape15.00(r)On street continuously over 48 hours15.00In prohibited zones and fire lanes (signs required)(8.10(r))15.00In alley(8.13)9.00Parking for prohibited purpose:(8.14)(a)Displaying vehicle for sale15.00(b)Working on or repairing vehicle15.00(c)Displaying advertising15.00(d)Selling merchandise15.00(e)Storage over 48 hours15.00Loading zone violation(8.16, 8.17)6.00Exceeding two-hour parking limit (signs required)15.00Not parked within space as marked(8.22)6.00Failure to set brakes(5.58)9.00Parked on grade wheels not turned to curb(5.58)6.00Keys in vehicle or motor running(5.58)30.00Bicycle parking violations(6.17)3.00Impounded vehicles (plus towing and storage charge):(a)Abandoned in streets(2.5)15.00(b)Abandoned on private property without owner's consent(2.5a)30.00Disabled vehicle failure to move(2.5)30.00Night parking from 2:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. on Main Street and Seeger Street(8.10v)15.00Night parking from 2:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. on all streets from December 1 through April 1 of following year (8.10v)15.00Between sidewalk and curb15.00 
(Ord. No. 137, § 1, 6-17-1996)
Chapter 40 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance establishing utility rates saved from repeal, § 1-13(5); any ordinance relating to sewage treatment or industrial waste control saved from repeal, § 1-13(16); administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; community development, ch. 10; engineering design standards, ch. 14; environment, ch. 16; land divisions and subdivisions, ch. 18; improvements to utilities in subdivisions, § 18-133; planning, ch. 28; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 34; telecommunications, ch. 36; public utility permits, § 42-44.
State Law reference- Local government authority to provide and regulate water and sewer service, MCL 324.4301 et seq.; collection of water or sewer charges, MCL 123.161 et seq.; sewage disposal, water supply and solid waste management system, MCL 124.281 et seq.; rates charged for use of public improvement in order to pay bonds, MCL 141.121.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 40-1. - Water and sewer rates and charges. 
    All rates and charges for water and sewer service in the village shall be as currently adopted or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the village council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 107, 12-1-1981; Ord. No. 111, 7-27-1982; Ord. of 12-22-1997; Ord. of 12-18-2000; Ord. No. 149, 6-24-2002) 
Secs. 40-2-40-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 40-31-40-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CROSS CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 40-51. - Adoption of state rules. 
    The village adopts by reference the Water Supply Cross Connection Rules of the state department of environmental quality, being R 325.114.1 to R 325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative Code. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 1, 3-27-1973)
Sec. 40-52. - Inspections. 
    It shall be the duty of the department of public works superintendent to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply where cross connections with the public water supply is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the village and as approved by the state department of environmental quality. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 2, 3-27-1973)
Sec. 40-53. - Right of entry of inspectors; refusal of information or access. 
    The representative of the department of public works superintendent shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the village for the purpose of inspecting the piping systems for cross connections. On request, the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 3, 3-27-1973)
Sec. 40-54. - Discontinuance of water service; restoration. 
    Water service shall be discontinued after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation of this division exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connection has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 4, 3-27-1973)
Sec. 40-55. - Protection of potable water supply; labeling of nonpotable sources. 
    The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by this division and by the state and village plumbing code. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: 
WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING 
(Ord. No. 79, § 5, 3-27-1973)
Secs. 40-56-40-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 40-81-40-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SEWER USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 40-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in parts per million by weight. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, wastes and other drainpipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Chlorine demand means the difference between the amount of chlorine added to water or wastewater and the amount of residual chlorine remaining at the end of a specified contact period. 
    COD (chemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test. 
    Combination sewer and combined sewer mean a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Compatible pollutant means a substance amenable to treatment in the wastewater treatment plant such as BOD, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES permit of the wastewater treatment plant which was designed to treat such pollutants, and in fact does remove such pollutants to an acceptable degree. These additional pollutants may include COD, total organic carbon, phosphorus and phosphorus compounds, nitrogen and nitrogen compounds, fats, oils, and greases of animal or vegetable origin. 
    Critical materials means the organic and inorganic substances, elements or compounds listed in the register compiled by the water resources commission of the state department of natural resources. 
    Daily average means a minimum of eight grab samples at one-hour intervals. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, processing and sale of produce. 
    Incompatible pollutant means any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant. 
    Industrial user means any nongovernmental or nonresidential user of the wastewater treatment system, identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972 edition, under Divisions A, B, C, E or I. 
    Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes, solids or semisolids from industrial processes as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of water, either surface water or groundwater. 
    Nonindustrial user means all users not defined under the term "industrial user" in this section . 
    Operation and maintenance costs means the expenditures required for operating, maintaining and replacement of the treatment works. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the cooking, preparation and dispensing of food that has been cut or shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half of an inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting property have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
    Replacement costs means the expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances during the useful life of the treatment works necessary to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works are designed and constructed. 
    Sanitary sewage means any liquid wastes discharged from residences, business buildings and institutions, as distinct from industrial wastes with strengths not exceeding the following limits: Suspended solids equals 300 ppm, BOD equals 240 ppm and Phosphorus equals 12 ppm. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage means any combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments together with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer means any pipe, tile, tube or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Sewer service charges means the total charges for sewer system operation, maintenance and replacement as passed on to the system users. 
    Slug means any discharge of water or wastewater, which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Storm sewer and storm drain mean a sewer which carries stormwater and surface water and drainage but which excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Surcharge means the additional treatment charges made by the village for the treatment of wastewater containing pollutants in excess of normal domestic wastewater. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are suspended in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    SWRC means the state water resources commission or any of its affiliates, the state health department, state conservation commission of the state highway department all being departments of the state. 
    User charges means any and all charges passed on to the system users, including sewer service charges, surcharges and industrial cost recovery charges. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 108, art. I, 3-30-1982)
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 40-102. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit, or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon any public or private property within the village or in any area under the jurisdiction of the such village any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural watercourse within the village or in any area under the jurisdiction of the such village any sanitary sewage, industrial waste or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with standards established by the SWRC. 
(c)	Except as provided in this division, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facilities intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(d)	The owner of any houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the Village of Cass City and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer in the Village of Cass City is hereby required at his own expense to connect the sanitary sewer service directly to the public sewer, except as provided in subsection (1), in accordance with the provisions of this section, within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so has been issued by the Village of Cass City, provided that said public sewer is within 100 feet of the nearest property line of said premises. 
(1)	Exception to required use of sewerage system. The owner of any houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the Village of Cass City is not required to connect the sanitary sewer service directly to the public sewer if all of the following are true: 
a.	The property is located in an Industrial Zone;
b.	The property's sewer discharge averages 250,000 gallons or more per day;
c.	The property is of sufficient size for a private sewage disposal system while still meeting all applicable zoning codes; 
d.	The property has a private sewage disposal system that will only discharge directly to the "Center B Drain" or the Cass River; 
e.	The property has all of the necessary permits and approvals from local, state, and federal government for the private sewage disposal; 
f.	The property owner submits an application for an exception to required use of sewerage system, and the village, or its designated agent, approves of the request. 
Even if approved, this private sewage disposal system is used only for the benefit of that particular piece of property and may not accept waste from an outside source or separate piece of property even if owned, leased, or rented by the same owner. 
(Ord. No. 108, art. II, 3-30-1982; Ord. No. 175, 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 40-103. - Private sewage disposal. 
(a)	Where a public sanitary sewer or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of section 40-102(d), the building sewer shall be connected with a private disposal system complying with the provisions and requirements of the SWRC, the county board of health or any health officer having jurisdiction over such provisions and requirements as outlined in the 1948 state compiled laws and all amendments thereto. 
(b)	At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 40-102(d), a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this division, and any septic tanks, privy, privy vault, cesspool or similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(c)	The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the village. 
(d)	No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the SWRC or the county board of health or other health officers that have proper jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 108, art. III, 3-30-1982)
Sec. 40-104. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)	No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or open into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or any appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the village council. 
(b)	All connections with the sanitary or combined sewers of the village shall be made only on written authorization, and permits issued by the village on such forms and on payments of such fees as shall be established from time to time by the village. 
(c)	All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner of such property. The owner shall indemnify the village from all loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(d)	All applicants for sewer connection permits shall first submit plans and specifications of all plumbing construction within such building or premises, and such plans and specifications shall meet the requirements of the state and village plumbing codes and all provisions, rules and regulations of the SWRC or its affiliates. When such plans and specifications have been approved by the village council, a temporary construction permit shall be issued, subject to a final inspection and approval when construction is completed and ready for connection with the village sewer system. 
(e)	The applicant for a building sewer permit shall notify the village council when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The village council or its authorized representatives shall then inspect such building and plumbing construction therein and if such construction meets previous requirements as approved in the construction permit, the village council shall issue a sewer connection permit subject to the provisions of any other sections of this division. 
(Ord. No. 108, art. IV, 3-30-1982)
Sec. 40-105. - Use of public sewers. 
(a)	No person shall discharge or cause to be discharge any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)	Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the village council and/or the SWRC. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon approval of the village council and the SWRC into a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. 
(c)	Except as hereafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer. Sewage discharges shall conform in all respects to the criteria set forth in this section, unless specifically excepted by the village council. Future conditions imposed on the village by federal or state agencies may require subsequent reappraisal and modifications to these criteria by the village council. Where federal or state regulations, including, but not limited to, the village's NPDES permit, require limits on parameters not covered in this division or limits more stringent than those specified in this division, the federal or state limits shall take precedence. 
(1)	Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit.
(2)	Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per million, by weight, of fat, oil or grease. 
(3)	Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(4)	Any garbage which has not been properly shredded.
(5)	Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, wood pulp, paunch manure, or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewer works. 
(6)	Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 10.5, or having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazards to the structures, equipment and personnel of the sewer works. 
(7)	Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, fish or aquatic life or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
(8)	Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage disposal plant. 
(9)	Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance.
(10)	Any waters or wastes containing any explosive substance. In the case of gas or vapors, the concentration shall not exceed 20 percent of lower explosive limit. 
(11)	Any substance with a viscosity greater than 110 percent of water.
(12)	Any material causing coloration or light absorbency, to interference with plant processes or analytical determinations, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(13)	Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by applicable state or federal regulations. 
(14)	Any waters or wastes containing sludge which results from a treatment process, either potable water, municipal or industrial wastes, but only if it is completely amenable to conventional wastewater treatment without application of unusual means or expenses. Septic tank sludge will be accepted from licensed operators when delivered to a designated disposal site upon compliance with the conditions imposed by the village council and after payment to the village a fee assessed by the village council. 
(15)	Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs.
(16)	Concentrations of certain special wastewater constituents in amounts greater than set forth in section 40-110. 
(17)	Any waters or wastes that exceed the hydraulic capacity of any downstream conveyance or treatment works. 
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this division shall be determined in accordance with the current edition of Standard Method for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association and in accordance with 40 CFR 136, entitled, "Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants," or as specified in section 40-110. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods. The village shall determine the method of sampling to be used. 
(d)	Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the village council and/or the SWRC, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease, in excessive amounts, or any inflammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients except that such interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the village council and/or the SWRC and shall be located as to be readily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be substantially constructed, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight. 
(e)	Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(f)	If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged, to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances, possess the characteristics, or exceed the limitations enumerated in subsection (c) of this section, or which, in the judgment of the village council, may have a deleterious effect on the treatment works, the village council may: 
(1)	Prohibit the discharge of the wastes to a public sewer;
(2)	Temporarily permit the discharge of the wastes to a public sewer subject to any condition that the village council may recommend, based on its review of such factors as quantity of the waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment works, degree of treatability of the waste, NPDES permit limitations, and any other pertinent factors; 
(3)	Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to a public sewer including, but not limited to, the standard set forth in 40 CFR 403, entitled, "Pretreatment Standards"; and/or 
(4)	Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge to public sewers.
In all cases, the village council shall require payment to cover any additional costs it may incur in connection with the inspection, sampling, testing, handling and treating of the wastes not covered by existing sewage charges. When the pretreatment or equalization of sewage flows is permitted, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the village council and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
(g)	Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained in satisfactory and effective operation, by the owner at his expense. 
(h)	When required by the village council or the SWRC, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the village council. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(i)	All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in subsections (c) and (f) of this section shall be determined in accordance with "Standard Methods for the Determination of Water and Sewage" and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for in subsection (h) of this section, or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. If no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(j)	No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the village and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the village for treatment, subject to the payment therefor by the industrial concern. 
(Ord. No. 108, art. V, 3-30-1982)
Sec. 40-106. - Protection from damage. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage works. Any person violating this section shall be subject to immediate arrest under charges of disorderly conduct where the damage amounts to less than $50.00, and if the damage amounts to more than $50.00, then such charge shall be malicious destruction of property. 
(Ord. No. 108, art. VI, 3-30-1982)
Sec. 40-107. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
    The village council and other duly authorized employees of the village, and agents of the SWRC bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purposes of inspection, measurement, sampling, and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this division at any time during reasonable or usual business hours. 
(Ord. No. 108, art. VII, 3-30-1982)
Sec. 40-108. - Rates and charges. 
    The village council shall establish by resolution, which may be amended from time to time, connection charges which shall be considered to be initial charges for the rendition of service by the system. Such charges shall be sufficient, as a minimum, to reimburse the village for all of the actual costs incurred by the village in connection of each property to the water mains or sewers and, in addition, may include a privilege fee, which fee shall be deposited in and become part of the reserve or receiving fund. 
(1)	The village council shall establish by resolution, which may be amended from time to time, increase in use charges which shall be considered to be charges for the rendition of increased service by the system. Such charges shall be used to reimburse the village for costs incurred by the village in supporting the increased use of the system by such users, such charge shall be deposited in and become a part of the receiving fund. 
(2)	Rates for service shall be fixed by resolution of the village council and shall be sufficient to provide for the payment of expenses of administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the water supply and sewage disposal systems as are necessary to preserve such systems in good repair and working order and to provide for the payment of such other expenses as may become due and payable, and the creation of the reserve therefor as may be required in accordance with Public Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq.), and to provide for such other funds and expenditures of such systems as may be required under Act 94. 
(3)	Bills shall be rendered to water and/or sewer users on a monthly basis.
(4)	Charges for water or sewage disposal services shall constitute a lien on the property served. On or before April 1 of each year, the water department shall deliver to the village council a certified statement of all utility and sewer charges then past due and unpaid for three months or more. The village council shall then place such charges on the general tax roll and such charges shall be collected as a part of the general village taxes. 
(5)	No free service shall be furnished to any person, firm or corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality. 
(Ord. No. 108, art. VIII, 3-30-1982; Ord. of 12-18-2000)
Sec. 40-109. - Accounting. 
(a)	The revenues of the water supply and sewage disposal systems shall be accounted for in separate funds using the chart of accounts as prescribed for local units of government by the National Council on Governmental Accounting (NCGA). 
(b)	Out of the revenues in the sewage disposal fund, there shall be set aside quarterly, into a separate depository fund designated "replacement fund," a sum sufficient to meet the annual replacement requirements of the system. The fund shall be used to replace equipment associated with the system as such equipment's useful life ends. The village council shall determine the amount to be deposited in the fund. 
(c)	The village council shall, prior to the commencement of each operating year, adopt a budget covering the anticipated expenses for each system for the ensuring year. Such total expenses shall not exceed the total amount specified in such budget except by a majority vote of the village council. In addition, a review of the system per 40 CFR 35.929-2 shall be completed biennially. 
(d)	All industrial users discharging an extra strength industrial wastewater to the sewage disposal system shall be monitored and surcharged in accordance with the schedule of charges to be set forth by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 108, art. IX, 3-30-1982; Ord. No. 149, § 3, 6-24-2002)
_____
Sec. 40-110. - Special wastewater constituents. 
Limitations and Standard Methods for Examination 
ParameterUnitsLimit (Average Daily Concentration)MethodReferenceCadmium**mg/l2.0DithizoneChromiumHexavalent**mg/l3.0DiphenylcarbazideChromiumTotal**mg/l5.0DiphenylcarbazideCopper*mg/l2.0NeocuproineCyanidemg/l1.0Silver Nitrate or Benzidine Pyridine or Chloramine TIron**mg/l17.0O-PhenanthrolineLead**mg/l1.0DithizoneMercurymg/l0.005Hatch & OttAnalytical Chemist 40, page 208Nickel**mg/l3.0HeptoximePhenolmg/l0.05 4-Amino AntipyrinePhosphorusmg/l13.0Ascorbic Acid or Vanadate MolybdateZinc**mg/l5.0Dithizone 
(These parameters to be expressed or reported as the actual element, radical or ion by atomic of molecular weight.) 
* Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, current edition, unless otherwise specified. 
** These elements may be determined by Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer. 
(Ord. No. 108, art. X, 3-30-1982)
_____
Sec. 40-111. - Penalties for violation of division. 
(a)	Any person found to be violating any provision of this division except section 40-106 shall be served by the village with written notice stating the nature of such violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the time period stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)	Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in section 40-108 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)	Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall become liable to the village for any expense, loss or damage occasioned to the village by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 108, art. XI, 3-30-1982)
Secs. 40-112-40-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRETREATMENT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 40-131. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)	This division sets forth requirements for contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment systems for the village and enables the village to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403). 
(b)	The objectives of this division are to:
(1)	Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the village wastewater system which will interfere with the normal operation of the system or contaminate the resulting municipal sludge; 
(2)	Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the village wastewater system which do not receive adequate treatment in the POTW, and which will pass through the system into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)	Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the system.
(c)	This division provides for the regulation of contributors to the village wastewater system through the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user reporting, assumes that existing customer's capacity will not be preempted, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established in this division. 
(d)	This division shall apply to the village and to persons outside the village who are, by contract or agreement with the village, users of the village publicly owned treatment works (POTW). This division is a supplement to division 2 of this article. Except as otherwise provided in this division, the superintendent of the village POTW shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 118, § 1.1, 12-18-1984)
Sec. 40-132. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act and the Act mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
    Approval authority means the state department of natural resources or the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Authorized representative of industrial user means: 
(1)	A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president, if the industrial user is a corporation; 
(2)	A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; 
(3)	A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in subsection (2) of this definition if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the discharge originates; 
(4)	The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales for expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00, if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at 20 degrees Celsius expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)). 
    Building sewer means a sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the POTW. 
    Categorical standards means national categorical pretreatment standards or pretreatment standard, as promulgated under the authority of the Act. 
    Commercial user means all nondomestic sources of discharge other than industrial users, including, but not limited to, the following: A publicly or privately owned facility where persons are engaged in the exchange or sale of goods or services, hospitals, retail establishments, schools and facilities operated by local and state governments. 
    Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
    Control authority means the approval authority; or the superintendent if the village has an approved pretreatment program under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.11. 
    Domestic source means a source, the waste of which normally emanates from residential living units and result from the day-to-day activities usually considered to be carried on in a domicile. 
    Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a wastestream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the wastestream and without consideration of time. 
    Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
    Industrial user means a source of discharge under regulations issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342), which source originates from, but is not limited to, facilities engaged in industry, manufacturing, business, trade or research, including the development, recovery or processing of natural resources. 
    Industrial waste means any liquid, solid or gaseous waste or form of energy, or combination thereof, resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, business, trade or research, including the development, recovery or processing of natural resources. 
    Interference means the inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any requirement of the village's NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with section 405 of the Act (33 USC 1345), or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent state criteria applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW. 
    National categorical pretreatment standard and pretreatment standard mean any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial user. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System and NPDES permit mean a permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342). 
    National prohibitive discharge standard and prohibitive discharge standard mean any regulation developed under the authority of section 307 (b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5. 
    New source means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the publication of proposed regulations prescribing a section 307(c) (33 USC 1317) categorical pretreatment standard which will be applicable to such source, if such standard is thereafter promulgated. 
    pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
    Pollution means the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water. 
    Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural wastes discharged into water. 
    Pretreatment and treatment mean the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction of alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
    Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirements related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on a user. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works, as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292), which is owned in this instance by the village. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this division, the term "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the village who are, by contract or agreement with the village, users of the village's POTW. 
    POTW treatment plant means that portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
    Significant industrial user means any industrial user of the village's wastewater disposal system who has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average work day, or has a flow greater than five percent of the flow in the village's wastewater treatment system, or has in his wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to section 307 of the Act or state statutes and rules or is found by the village, state department of natural resources or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the system. 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972. 
    Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
    Superintendent means the person designated by the village to supervise the operation of the publicly owned treatment works and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this division, or his duly authorized representative. 
    Suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of the Clean Water Act, section 307(a), 33 USC 1317, or other Acts, or included in the Critical Materials Register promulgated by the state department of natural resources or other acts. 
    User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the village's POTW. 
    Wastewater means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW. 
    Waters of the state means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 118, § 1.2, 12-18-1984)
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 40-133. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
BODBiochemical oxygen demandCFRCode of Federal RegulationsCODChemical oxygen demandEPAEnvironmental Protection AgencylLitermgMilligramsmg/lMilligrams per literNPDESNational Pollutant Discharge Elimination SystemPOTWPublicly owned treatment worksSICStandard industrial classificationSWDASolid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC 6901 et seq.USCUnited States CodeTSSTotal suspended solids 
(Ord. No. 118, § 1.3, 12-18-1984)
Sec. 40-134. - General discharge prohibitions. 
    No user shall contribute, or cause to be contributed, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. A user may not contribute the following substances to the POTW: 
(1)	Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or any point in the system), be more than five percent nor any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides and any other substances which the village, the state or EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the system. 
(2)	Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimensions, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining, or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes. 
(3)	Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.5, or greater than 10.5, or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the POTW. 
(4)	Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, to create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to section 307(a) of the Act. 
(5)	Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(6)	Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW, such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(7)	Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit.
(8)	Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(9)	Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the POTW which exceeds 40 degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit). 
(10)	Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which a user knows or has reason to know will cause interference to the POTW. In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentrations of quantities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration, quantities, or flow during normal operation. 
(11)	Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such halflife or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(12)	Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance.
When the superintendent determines that a user is contributing to the POTW any of the substances enumerated in this section in such amounts as to interfere with the operation of the POTW, the superintendent shall advise the user of the impact of the contribution on the POTW, and develop effluent limitations for such user to correct the interference with the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 118, § 2.1, 12-18-1984)
Sec. 40-135. - Federal categorical pretreatment standards. 
    Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this division for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this division. The superintendent shall notify all affected users of the applicable pretreatment standards. 
(Ord. No. 118, § 2.2, 12-18-1984)
Sec. 40-136. - Modification of federal categorical pretreatment standards. 
    The village may apply to the approval authority for modification of specific limits in the federal pretreatment standards, as set forth in 40 CFR 403.7(c)(2), general pretreatment regulations for existing and new sources of pollution, promulgated pursuant to the Act. The village may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the federal pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR 403.7 are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval authority is obtained. 
(Ord. No. 118, § 2.3, 12-18-1984)
Sec. 40-137. - Specific pollutant limitations. 
(a)	Limitations for selected materials. Users who fall into categories for which federal categorical pretreatment standards have been established shall comply with these standards. More stringent standards may be applied by the village, where necessary, to achieve the goals of the village's pretreatment program. 
(b)	Limitations for compatible pollutants. Compatible pollutants include biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, phosphorus, oil and grease, fecal coliform and ammonia nitrogen. Discharge levels for these parameters shall not create a slug load. 
(c)	Local Limits for compatible pollutants. Compatible pollutants shall not be discharged in amounts greater than the following, as approved by the Michigan Department of Environmental Qualtity on November 28, 2006. 
Compatible PollutantProposed Limit, Mg/lCBOD500 mg/lSuspended Solids500 mg/lPhosphorus100 mg/lAmmonia Nitrogen50 mg/l 
(Ord. No. 118, § 2.4, 12-18-1984; Ord. No. 165, 1-29-2007)
Sec. 40-138. - State requirements. 
    State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this division. 
(Ord. No. 118, § 2.5, 12-18-1984)
Sec. 40-139. - Village's right of revision. 
    The village reserves the right to establish by this division more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in section 40-131. 
(Ord. No. 118, § 2.6, 12-18-1984)
Sec. 40-140. - Excessive discharge. 
    No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the federal categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the village or state. 
(Ord. No. 118, § 2.7, 12-18-1984)
Sec. 40-141. - Accidental discharges. 
(a)	Plans and operating procedures. Significant industrial users and all industrial/commercial users with the potential to discharge toxic substances or prohibited pollutants shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this division. Upon request by the village, detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the village for review. Review of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this division. 
(b)	Responsibility of user. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume and corrective actions. 
(c)	Written notice. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the superintendent a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this division or other applicable law. 
(d)	Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of an accidental discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or discover such a discharge are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. No. 118, § 2.8, 12-18-1984)
Sec. 40-142. - Fees. 
(a)	Purpose. It is the purpose of this division to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the village's wastewater disposal system for the implementation of the program established in this division. The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth within the village's schedule of charges and fees. 
(b)	Charges and fees. The village may adopt charges and fees which may include: 
(1)	Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the village's pretreatment program; 
(2)	Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;
(3)	Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction;
(4)	Fees for filing appeals;
(5)	Fees for permit applications; and
(6)	Other fees as the village may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in this division. 
These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this division and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the village. 
(Ord. No. 118, § 3, 12-18-1984)
Sec. 40-143. - Administration. 
(a)	Wastewater dischargers. It shall be unlawful to discharge without a village permit to the POTW any wastewater except as authorized by the superintendent in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(b)	Wastewater discharge permits. 
(1)	General permits. All significant industrial users and any industrial/commercial users, as required by the village, shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or contributing to the POTW. All existing significant industrial users and any industrial/commercial users, as required by the village connected to or contributing to the POTW, shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit within 270 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
(2)	Permit application. Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the village an application in the form prescribed by the village. Existing significant industrial users shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 180 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, and new significant industrial users shall apply at least 90 days prior to connecting to or contributing to the POTW. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
a.	Name, address, and location of the discharger.
b.	Standard industrial classification (SIC) number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended. 
c.	Wastewater constituents and characteristics, as determined by the superintendent. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the U.S. EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR 136, as amended; Where 40 CFR 136 does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the EPA publication, "Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants," April 1977, and amendments thereto, or with any other sampling and analytical procedures approved by the administrator of the U.S. EPA. The permit application shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW. 
d.	Time and duration of discharges.
e.	Average daily and instantaneous peak wastewater flow rates, in gallons per day, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any. 
f.	Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, inspection manholes, sampling chambers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation. 
g.	Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials which are or may be discharged to the POTW. 
h.	Nature and concentration of any pollutants or materials in the discharge which are limited by any village, state or federal pretreatment standards or requirement, together with a statement regarding whether or not compliance is being achieved with the pretreatment standards or requirements on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance activities and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to comply with applicable pretreatment standards. 
i.	Where additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance activities will be required to comply with applicable pretreatment standards, the user shall provide a declaration of the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or implementation of additional operational and maintenance activities. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
1.	The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to comply with applicable pretreatment standards including, but not limited to, dates relating to hiring an engineer, hiring other appropriate personnel, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, and all other acts necessary to achieve compliance with this division. 
2.	Under no circumstance shall the village permit a time increment for any single step directed toward compliance which exceeds nine months. 
3.	Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the village, including no less than a statement as to whether or not it complied with the increment of progress represented by that date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the approved schedule. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the village. 
j.	Each product produced by type, amount, process and rate of production.
k.	Type and amount of raw materials utilized (average and maximum per day).
l.	Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system. 
m.	All permit applications shall be signed by a principal executive officer of the user.
n.	A listing of all environmental control permits held by or for the user.
o.	Any other information as may be deemed by the village to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
The village will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the village may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided in this section. 
(3)	Permit modifications. Within nine months of the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater discharge permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standards within the timeframe prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit as required by subsection (b)(2) of this section, the user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standards. In addition, the user with an existing wastewater discharge permit shall submit to the superintendent within 180 days after the promulgation of an applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard the information required by subsections (b)(2)h and (b)(2)i of this section. 
(4)	Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this division and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the village. Permits may contain the following: 
a.	The user charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer; 
b.	Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics;
c.	Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge of requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
d.	Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities;
e.	Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reports schedule; 
f.	Compliance schedules;
g.	Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports (see subsection (c) of this section); 
h.	Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the village, and affording village access thereto; 
i.	Requirements for notification of the village or any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituent being introduced into the wastewater treatment system; 
j.	Requirements for notification of slug discharges as per section 40-144(b); 
k.	Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the village to ensure compliance with this division. 
(5)	Permit's duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the village during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in sections 40-134-40-141 are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(6)	Permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be assigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the village. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit. 
(c)	Reporting requirements for permittee. 
(1)	Compliance date report. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance by the user with applicable pretreatment standards or 90 days following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW by a new user, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the village a report indicating the nature and concentration of all prohibited or regulated substances contained in its discharge, and the average and maximum daily flow in gallons. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O & M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user, and certified to by an engineer licensed to practice in the state. 
(2)	Periodic compliance reports. 
a.	Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new user, after commencement of the discharge to the POTW, shall submit to the POTW during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently by the village, a report indicating the nature and concentration of prohibited or regulated substances in the effluent which are limited by the pretreatment standards hereof. In addition, this report shall include a record of all measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows during the reporting period reported in subsection (c)(1) of this section. Flows shall be reported on the basis of actual measurement; provided, however, that where cost or feasibility considerations justify, the village may accept reports of average and maximum flows estimated by verifiable techniques. The village, for good cause shown considering such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, or other extenuating factors, may authorize the submission of such reports on months other than those specified in this subsection. 
b.	Reports of users shall contain all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass where required by the village. The frequency of monitoring by the user shall be as prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard. All analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the administrator pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR 136 does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the EPA publication, "Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants," April 1977, and amendments thereto, or with any other sampling and analytical procedures approved by the administrator of the U.S. EPA. 
(d)	Monitoring facilities. When required by the village, each user shall provide and operate, at the user's own expense, a monitoring facility to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of each sewer discharge to the village. Each monitoring facility shall be situated on the user's premises, except where such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, the village may concur with the facility being constructed in the public street or sidewalk area providing that the facility is located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. All monitoring facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable local construction standards and specifications. 
(e)	Inspection and sampling. The village may inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this division is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the village or its representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination or in the performance of any of its duties. The village, state department of natural resources and the EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into his premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with his security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the village, state department of natural resources and the EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. The village shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the user, and the user shall be held harmless for injury or death to the village employees, and the village shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by the village employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the user and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligency or failure of the user to maintain safe conditions. 
(f)	Pretreatment. Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this division and shall achieve compliance with all federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the village shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the village for review. The village will review such plans and respond with suggested modifications within 30 days following plan submittal. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the village under the provisions of this division. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to the village prior to the user's initiation of the changes. The village shall annually publish in the Cass City Chronicle newspaper a list of the users which had significantly violated any pretreatment requirements or standards during the 12 previous months. All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards and requirements shall be made available to officials of the EPA or approval authority upon request. 
(g)	Confidential information. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the village that the release of such information would divulge information processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this division, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of the report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(Ord. No. 118, § 4, 12-18-1984)
Sec. 40-144. - Enforcement of division provisions. 
(a)	Harmful contributions. The village may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater discharge permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the village, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, causes interference to the POTW or causes the village to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the village shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The village shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the village within 15 days of the date of occurrence. 
(b)	Revocation of permit. Any user who violates the following conditions of this division, or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having his permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of this section: 
(1)	Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge; 
(2)	Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)	Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or 
(4)	Violation of conditions of the permit.
(c)	Notification of violation. Whenever the village finds that any user has violated or is violating this division, wastewater discharge permit, or any prohibition, or limitation or requirements contained within, the village shall serve or cause to be served upon such user a written notice either personally or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, stating the nature of the alleged violation. Within 30 days of the date of receipt of the notice, the user shall respond personally or in writing to the village, advising of its position with respect to the allegations. Thereafter, the parties shall meet to ascertain the veracity of the allegations and, where necessary, establish a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof. 
(d)	Show cause hearing. The village may order any user which causes or allows conduct prohibited by subsection (b) of this section to show cause before the village or its duly authorized representative why the proposed service termination action should not be taken. A written notice shall be served on the user by personal service, certified or registered, return receipt requested, specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the village or its designee regarding the violation, the reasons why the enforcement action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before the village or its designee why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail not less than ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent, officer, or authorized representative of a user. The village council may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence or may designate any of its members or any office or employee of the assigned department to: 
(1)	Issue in the name of the village council notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings; 
(2)	Take the evidence;
(3)	Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts, and other evidence, together with recommendations to the village council for action thereon. 
At any hearing held pursuant to this division, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any part to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof. After the village council has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed on existing treatment facilities, and that such devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
(e)	Judicial proceedings. Following the entry of any order by the village with respect to the conduct of a user contrary to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, the attorney for the village may, following the authorization of such action by the village, commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the appropriate local court. 
(f)	Right of appeal. Any user or any interested party shall have the right to request in writing an interpretation or ruling by the village on any matter covered by this division. If such inquiry is by a user and deals with matters of performance or compliance with this division for which enforcement activity relating to an alleged violation is the subject, receipt of a user's request shall stay all enforcement proceedings pending receipt of the written reply. Appeal of any final judicial order entered pursuant to this division may be taken in accordance with applicable local and state law. 
(g)	Operating upsets. Any user which experiences an upset in operations which places the user in a temporary state of noncompliance with this division shall inform the village thereof within 24 hours of first awareness of the commencement of the upset. Where such information is given orally, a written followup report thereof shall be filed by the user with the village within five days. The report shall specify the following: 
(1)	Description of the upset, the cause thereof and the upset's impact on a user's compliance status. 
(2)	Duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of noncompliance, and if the noncompliance continues, the time by which compliance is reasonably expected to occur. 
(3)	All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of such an upset or other conditions of noncompliance. 
(Ord. No. 118, § 5, 12-18-1984)
Sec. 40-145. - Penalty; costs. 
(a)	Civil penalties. Any user who is found to have violated an order of the village, or who willfully or negligently failed to comply with any provision of this division and the orders, rules, and regulations and permits issued under this division, shall be fined not more than $500.00 for each offense. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided in this subsection, the village may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this division or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued under this division. 
(b)	Falsifying information. Any persons who knowingly make any false statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this division, or wastewater discharge permit, or who falsify, tamper with, or knowingly render inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this division shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 118, § 6, 12-18-1984)
Sec. 40-146. - Records retention. 
    All users subject to this division shall retain and preserve, for no less than three years, any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and any and all summaries thereof, relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analyses made by or in behalf of a user in connection with its discharge. All records which pertain to matters which are the subject of administrative adjustment or any other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the village pursuant hereto shall be retained and preserved by the user until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired. 
(Ord. No. 118, § 8, 12-18-1984)
Chapter 42 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; community development, ch. 10; environment, ch. 16; noxious weeds, § 16-111 et seq.; land divisions and subdivisions, ch. 18; parks and recreation, ch. 24; planning, ch. 28; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 34; zoning, ch. 46.
State Law reference- Municipal forests, MCL 324.52701 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1-42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREES AND SHRUBS IN PUBLIC AREAS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Planting of trees along highways, MCL 247.231 et seq.; care of trees and shrubs along highways, MCL 247.241 et seq.

Sec. 42-31. - Definitions. 
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Park means all public parks and all areas owned by the village, or to which the public has free access. 
    Public utility means any person, organization, firm or corporation, public or private, duly authorized to supply electric, gas, telephone, telegraph, or water service to, or for the general benefit of the public. 
    Right-of-way means any public street, highway, alley or avenue of the village. 
    Trees and shrubs means all woody vegetation. 
(b)	The terms of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated, shall apply only to public streets, alleys, highways, highway easements, parkways, parks and other land publicly owned or controlled by the village. 
(Ord. No. 59, § 1, 7-27-1965)
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-32. - Administration; control. 
    The village council shall have control over the planting, pruning, spraying, cultivating, preserving, and removal of all trees, shrubs, and plants in the streets, alleys, parks, and other public areas of the village. 
(Ord. No. 59, § 2, 7-27-1965)
Sec. 42-33. - Enforcement of article provisions. 
    The superintendent of the department of public works shall be charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this article as directed or required by the village council. 
(Ord. No. 59, § 3, 7-27-1965)
Sec. 42-34. - Prohibited acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following acts: 
(1)	No person shall plant, cut down, destroy, or remove any shrubs or trees on the streets, alleys, parks, and other public areas of the village at any time without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent of public works. 
(2)	No person shall have the right to plant any trees in such a location that their roots are likely to injure sewers or heave walk or street surfaces. 
(3)	No person shall plant any tree that will exceed a maximum growth height of 40 feet in a public right-of-way where police, fire, street lighting, traffic signal or public utility overhead wires and equipment are located. 
(4)	No person shall use any tree as an anchor and no material shall be fastened to or hung on any tree in any right-of-way or park. No electrical wires or insulation, or any other lines or wires shall be attached to any tree in any manner that shall cause damage thereto. 
(5)	No person shall keep any building material and other debris less than four feet from any tree or shrub. 
(6)	No person shall break, injure, mutilate, kill or destroy any tree or shrub on public property and rights-of-way, or permit any fire or the heat thereof, to injure any portion of any tree. 
(7)	No person shall allow any toxic chemicals or other injurious materials to seep, drain, or be emptied on, near or about any tree; provided, however, that this shall not prohibit the use of village approved chemical control of trees and brush growth. 
(Ord. No. 59, § 4, 7-27-1965)
Sec. 42-35. - Interference with spread of light, visibility of wires and equipment; right to trim. 
    The village shall have the right to trim any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight, or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign, or visibility at street intersections, or interferes with any public utility wires or equipment necessary to serve police or fire communication systems or street lighting or traffic control systems. 
(Ord. No. 59, § 5, 7-27-1965)
Sec. 42-36. - Removals. 
    The village council is authorized to direct the superintendent of public works to remove any trees or shrubs growing on any rights-of-way, park or public place in the village when such trees or shrubs interfere with fire hydrants, sewers and water mains, visibility at street intersections, traffic control devices or construction affecting the public health and safety within rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 59, § 6, 7-27-1965)
Sec. 42-37. - Growth controlled at intersections. 
    All shrubs or plants located on the triangle formed by two right-of-way lines at the intersection of two streets, and extending for a distance of 25 feet each way from the intersection of such streets on any corner lot within the village, shall not be permitted to grow to a height of more than two feet above the surface of the roadway, in order that the view of the driver of a vehicle approaching a street intersection shall not be obstructed. Trees may be maintained in this area, provided that all branches are trimmed to maintain a clear vision for a vertical height of ten feet above the roadway surface. 
(Ord. No. 59, § 7, 7-27-1965)
Sec. 42-38. - Public improvements; special assessments. 
    Whenever deemed necessary by the village council, the superintendent of public works shall lay out and plant trees and shrubs upon any public rights-of-way within the village, or remove undesirable species of trees therefrom. Such planting or removal shall be deemed to be a public improvement. The cost of it may be paid, in whole or in part, by levying and collecting special assessments upon property especially benefited thereby, in accordance with the provisions in the Charter governing special assessments. 
(Ord. No. 59, § 8, 7-27-1965)
Sec. 42-39. - List of acceptable trees and shrubs. 
    The village council shall prescribe the acceptable variety of trees and shrubs to be planted in public rights-of-way and parks. A list of such trees and shrubs shall be available for inspection at the office of the village clerk. 
(Ord. No. 59, § 9, 7-27-1965)
Sec. 42-40. - Planting strips. 
    No tree shall be planted in planting strips between the curb and sidewalk less than three feet from the sidewalk. Trees on private property adjacent to the sidewalk should be planted not less than three feet therefrom. No tree shall be planted in planting strips where the distance between the back of the curb and the sidewalk is less than six feet in width. No tree shall be planted nearer to the intersection of any two or more streets than 30 feet from the point of intersection of the two right-of-way lines. 
(Ord. No. 59, § 10, 7-27-1965)
Sec. 42-41. - Dead or diseased trees. 
    All dead trees and trees afflicted with any fatal or communicable disease located on either public or private property shall be removed and destroyed by the superintendent of public works upon the approval of the village council. The cost of such removal and destruction may be paid, in whole or in part, by levying and collecting special amounts upon the owners of the property from which the trees are removed. The village council may remove living trees located on public rights-of-way after giving abutting property owners 30 days' prior written notice of intent to remove the trees. In the event of an objection from the abutting property owners, the trees shall not be removed until after a public hearing has been held by the village council to consider the removal. Living trees may also be removed from public rights-of-way when the owner of the property in front of which such trees are situated shall, in writing, request the removal of such trees. 
(Ord. No. 59, § 11, 7-27-1965)
Sec. 42-42. - Landowners petitioning village for planting or removal. 
    Persons owning a majority of the lineal footage of the property fronting on the line of any street in the immediate blocks in which planting of new trees or removal of existing trees is desired, may petition the village council to plant or remove trees or shrubs along such street. Where an owner of property requests or has petitioned for the removal of trees, the superintendent of public works is authorized at his discretion to require as a condition precedent to granting approval for such removal that such property owner make the removal in accordance with regulations established by the village council, to assume all or any part of the cost of removing such trees, and also to further require that such trees be replaced at some other location in the immediate vicinity by planting other trees of a type permitted under this article. 
(Ord. No. 59, § 12, 7-27-1965)
Sec. 42-43. - Interfering facilities; abatement. 
    All persons having under their care, custody, or control facilities which may interfere with the trimming or removal of any tree subject to this article shall, after notice thereof by the village council, promptly abate such interference in such a manner as shall permit the trimming or removal of any tree by the superintendent of public works and his crew. 
(Ord. No. 59, § 13, 7-27-1965)
Sec. 42-44. - Public utility permits. 
    The village council shall, upon this article becoming effective, and upon request of any interested public utility, issue an annual permit, and shall annually thereafter renew such permit, granting permission to such public utility to chemically control and trim and keep trimmed all trees and shrubs intruding into the air spaces over, or growing within the area of the streets, alleys, parks, rights-of-way and public places of the village in such a manner as shall keep the overhead lines and equipment and the public health and safety. Such chemical control and trimming shall be done in accordance with approved practices and under the general direction of the superintendent of public works. Such permit, as provided for in this section, shall require reasonable prior notice to the village before any work is commenced under such permit; provided, however, that in the event of an emergency requiring immediate maintenance work on the overhead lines of such public utility, prior notice of commencing work under such permit shall not be required. The term "emergency," as used in this section, shall be defined to mean the occurrence or happening of any event which could not be expected or prevented by the exercise of reasonable care and foresight and which endangers or may endanger the overhead lines of the public utilities and the public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 59, § 14, 7-27-1965)
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 40. 
Chapter 44 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 34; traffic and vehicles, ch. 38.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 44-1-44-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 44-31. - Designation of stands. 
    The village council shall have the right to designate, by resolution, stands to be used exclusively by taxicabs or other motorized vehicles used for the transportation of persons for hire. 
(Ord. No. 40, § 8, 6-28-1949)
Secs. 44-32-44-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 44-51. - Required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of operating taxicabs, or other motorized vehicles used for the transportation of persons for hire within the limits of the village, without first having obtained a license therefor in the manner provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 40, § 1, 6-28-1949)
Sec. 44-52. - Application. 
    Each person desiring to obtain a license to engage in the business of operating taxicabs or other motorized vehicles, used for the transportation of persons for hire, shall make written application therefor to the village clerk in the form and manner prescribed by such clerk. 
(Ord. No. 40, § 2, 6-28-1949)
Sec. 44-53. - Contents of application. 
    The application for license required in this division shall contain the following items, together with such additional information as the village clerk may require: 
(1)	The full name, residence address and business address of the applicant.
(2)	A statement as to the financial responsibility of the applicant, or in lieu thereof, a sufficient showing that such applicant has adequate insurance for the protection of passengers to be transported against any damages caused to such passengers for which the applicant may be liable. 
(Ord. No. 40, § 3, 6-28-1949)
Sec. 44-54. - Bond. 
    An application for a license under the provisions of this article shall be accompanied by a bond to the village, approved as to form and surety by the village clerk in the penal sum as adopted by resolution of the village council from time to time, with sufficient surety, or sufficient collateral security, conditioned for the due observance during the time of the license of any and all ordinances which are now in force or may be adopted hereafter by the council or trustees of the village. 
(Ord. No. 40, § 4, 6-28-1949)
Sec. 44-55. - Fees. 
    The fee for each license issued under this article shall be as adopted by resolution of the village council from time to time, payable on July 1 of each year to the village clerk, or at such time a license is granted under the provisions of this article, and on July 1 of each succeeding year thereafter. Such fees, deposited by the clerk, shall be credited by the village treasurer to the contingent fund of the village. Each license issued shall be in such form as the village council shall by its resolution prescribe, and a duplicate of each license issued shall be kept on file in the office of the village clerk. 
(Ord. No. 40, § 5, 6-28-1949)
Sec. 44-56. - Revocation. 
    The village council shall have the right to revoke any license issued under the provisions of this article upon proper cause being shown involving the health, morals and welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 40, § 6, 6-28-1949)
Sec. 44-57. - Age of operator. 
    No person shall drive or operate any taxicab or other vehicle covered by this article unless such person is over the age of 25 years and is legally qualified as an operator of a motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 40, § 7, 6-28-1949)
Chapter 46 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance pertaining to rezoning saved from repeal, § 1-13(15); buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; community development, ch. 10; environment, ch. 16; land divisions and subdivisions, ch. 18; planning, ch. 28; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 34; telecommunications, ch. 36; vegetation, ch. 42.
State Law reference- Authority to regulate land use, MCL 125.581 et seq.; municipal planning, MCL 125.31 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Title of chapter. 
    This chapter is enacted under Public Act No. 207 of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq.), as amended, and governs the incorporated portions of the village; regulates and restricts the location and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence and for public and semipublic or other specified uses; regulates and limits the height and bulk of buildings, and other structures; accommodates energy conservation; regulates and determines the size of yards, courts and open spaces; regulates and limits the density of population; and for such purposes divides the village into districts and establishes the boundaries thereof; provides for changes in the regulations, restrictions and boundaries of such districts; defines certain terms used in this chapter; provides for enforcement; establishes a board of appeals; and imposes penalties for the violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, Title)
Sec. 46-2. - Preamble. 
    This chapter is established pursuant to the authority conferred by the public acts of the state, and in such case is made and provided and exists for the purpose of promoting and protecting the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the village, by protecting and conserving the character and social and economic stability of the residential, commercial, industrial and other use areas; by securing the most appropriate use of land; preventing overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population; providing adequate light, air and reasonable access; and facilitating adequate and economical provision of transportation, water, sewers, schools, recreation and other public requirements, and by other means, all in accordance with a comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, Preamble)
Sec. 46-3. - Construction of language. 
    The following rules of construction apply to the text of this chapter: 
(1)	The particular shall control the general.
(2)	In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this chapter and any caption or illustration, the text shall control. 
(3)	The term "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The term "may" is permissive.
(4)	Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(5)	A "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof.
(6)	The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," or "occupied for." 
(7)	The term "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, and an incorporated association, or any other similar entity. 
(8)	Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or," or "either ... or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
a.	The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
b.	The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
c.	The term "either ... or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
(9)	Terms not defined in this section shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them.
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 200)
Sec. 46-4. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory use and accessory mean a use which is clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with, and, unless otherwise specified, located on the same zoning lot as the principal use to which it is related. When the term "accessory" is used in this text, it shall have the same meaning as accessory use. An accessory use includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)	Residential accommodations for servants and/or caretakers.
(2)	Swimming pools for the use of the occupants of a residence or their guests.
(3)	Domestic or agricultural storage in a barn, shed, toolroom or similar accessory building or other structure. 
(4)	A newsstand primarily for the convenience of the occupants of a building which is located wholly within such building and has no exterior signs or displays. 
(5)	Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock in connection with a business or industrial use, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable district regulations. 
(6)	Storage of goods used in or produced by industrial uses or related activities, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable district regulations. 
(7)	Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, subject to the accessory off-street parking regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located. 
(8)	Uses clearly incidental to a main use such as, but not limited to, offices of an industrial or commercial complex located on the site of the commercial or industrial complex. 
(9)	Accessory off-street loading, subject to the off-street loading regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located. 
(10)	Accessory signs, subject to the sign regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located. 
    Adult regulated use shall include the following: 
(1)	Adult entertainment business means one or a combination of more than one of the following types of businesses: adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion theater, adult personal service business, adult novelty business, adult nightclub. 
(2)	Adult book orsupply store means an establishment having as a principle activity the sale of books, magazines, newspapers, video tapes, video discs and motion picture films which are characterized by their emphasis on portrayals of human genitals and pubic regions or acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy. 
(3)	Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons having as a principal activity displaying motion pictures characterized by their emphasis on portrayals of human genitals and pubic regions or acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy for observation by patrons therein. 
(4)	Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building having as a principal activity the presenting of material characterized by emphasis of portrayals of human genitals and pubic regions or acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy for observation by patrons therein in individual viewing booths. 
(5)	Adult novelty business means a business which has a principal activity the sale of devices of simulated human genitals or devices designed for sexual stimulation. 
(6)	Adult personal service business means a business which has as a principle activity a person of one sex, while nude or partially nude, providing personal services for a person of the other sex on an individual basis in a closed room. It includes, but it is not limited to, the following activities and services; massage parlors, exotic rubs, modeling studios, body painting studios, wrestling studios, individual theatrical performances. It does not include activities performed by persons pursuant to, and in accordance with, licenses issued to such persons by the State of Michigan. 
(7)	Adult night club means a business with the principal activity of providing entertainment by nude or partially nude performers. 
(8)	Partially nude means having any or all of the following bodily parts exposed: buttocks, genitals, pubic area or female breasts. 
    Alley means any dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access to abutting property, and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Alterations means any change, addition or modification in construction or type of occupancy, or in the structural members of a building, such as walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, the consummated act of which may be referred to in this chapter as "altered" or "reconstructed." 
    Apartments means a suite of rooms or a room in a multiple-family building arranged and intended for a place of residence of a single-family or a group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit. 
    Auto repair means the following services: general repair; engine rebuilding; rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles; collision service, such as body, frame or fender straightening and repair; overall painting and undercoating of automobiles; incidental sale of engine fuels or lubricants. 
    Basement means that portion of a building which is partly or wholly below grade but so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the ceiling. A basement shall not be counted as a story. 
    Bed and breakfast means an accessory use that is subordinate to a one-family dwelling unit in which transient guests are provided sleeping room and board for payment. 
    Block means the property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) or between the nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, lake, river or live stream; or between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of development, or corporate boundary lines of the village. 
    Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof supported by columns or walls, and intended for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
    Building envelope means the area defined by lines drawn parallel to the front, rear, and side area lines, at a distance designated by the setback requirements of the zoning district and within which the main building must be located. 
    Building height means the vertical distance measured from the established grade to the highest point of the roof surface for flat roofs; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the average height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 

Basement and Story 


Building Height 


Building Line 
    Club means an organization of persons for special purposes or for the promulgation of sports, arts, sciences, literature, politics, or the like, but not operated for profit. 
    Condominium lot means all areas bounded by the front yard area line, the rear yard area line and the side yard area lines. 
    Convalescent or nursing home means a structure with sleeping rooms where persons are housed or lodged and are furnished with meals, nursing and medical care. 
    Development means the construction of a new building or other structure on a zoning lot, the relocation of an existing building on another zoning lot, or the use of open land for a new use. 
    District means a portion of the incorporated area of the village within which certain regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Drive-in means a business establishment so developed that its retail or service character is dependent on providing a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while in the motor vehicle rather than within a building or structure, including customer communication facilities for banks or other uses. (See also definition of Restaurant, drive-in). 
    Dwelling, multiple-family, means a building, or a portion thereof, designed exclusively for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other. 
    Dwelling, one-family, means a building designed exclusively for and occupied exclusively by one family. 
    Dwelling, two-family, means a building designed exclusively for occupancy by two families living independently of each other. 
    Dwelling unit means a building, or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by one family for residential purposes and having cooking facilities. 
    Erected means built, constructed, altered, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on the premises which are required for construction, excavation, fill, drainage, and the like, shall be considered a part of erection. 
    Essential services means the erections, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments of underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, steam, fuel or water transmission or distribution system, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar equipment in connection herewith, but not including buildings which are necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or municipal departments for the general health, safety or welfare. 
    Excavation means any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and ground care. 
    Exception means a designated modification to the standards required by this chapter only after review of an application by the board of appeals or planning commission, such review being necessary because the provisions of this chapter covering conditions precedent or subsequent are not precise enough to all applications without interpretation, and such review and exception is provided for by this chapter. An exception does not require "undue hardship" in order to be allowable. 
    Family means a single individual or a number of individuals domiciled together whose relationship is of a continuing, nontransient, domestic character and who are cooking and living together as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit. This shall not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, coterie, organization, or group of students or other individuals whose relationship is of a transitory or seasonal nature or for anticipated limited duration of school terms or other similar determinable period. 
    Farm means the carrying on of any agricultural activity or the raising of livestock or small animals as a source of income. 
    Floor area, residential, means for the purpose of computing the minimum allowable floor area in a residential dwelling unit, the sum of the horizontal areas of each story of the building shall be measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two dwellings. The floor area measurement is exclusive of areas of basements, unfinished attics, attached garages, breezeways and enclosed and unenclosed porches. 
    Floor area, usable (for the purposes of computing parking), means that area used for or intended to be used for the sale of merchandise or services, or for use to serve patrons, clients or customers. Such floor area which is used or intended to be used principally for the storage or processing of merchandise, hallways or for utilities or sanitary facilities shall be excluded from this computation of usable floor area. Measurement of usable floor area shall be the sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls. 

Floor Area 
    Gasoline service station means a place for the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuels or lubricants directly to users of motor vehicles, together with the sale of minor accessories and incidental services for motor vehicles, but not including auto repair. 
    General commons area means all areas outside of the condominium lots. 
    Grade means the ground elevation established for the purpose of regulating the number of stories and the height of buildings. The building grade shall be the level of the ground adjacent to the walls of the building if the finished grade is level. If the ground is not entirely level, the grade shall be determined by averaging the elevation of the ground for each face of the building. 
    Home occupation means an occupation or profession customarily carried on by an occupant of a dwelling unit as a secondary use which is clearly incidental to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes. 
    Hotel means a building, or part of a building, with a common entrance in which the dwelling units or rooming units are used primarily for transient occupancy, and in which one or more of the following services are offered: maid service, furnishing of linen, telephone, secretarial or desk service and bellboy service. A hotel may include a restaurant or cocktail lounge, public banquet halls, ballrooms or meeting rooms. 
    Junkyard means an open area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. A junkyard includes automobile wrecking yards and any area of more than 200 square feet for storage, keeping or abandonment of junk but does not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings. 
    Kennel, commercial, means any lot or premises on which three or more dogs, cats or other household pets are either permanently or temporarily boarded. A kennel shall also include any lot or premises where household pets are bred or sold. 
    Loading space means an off-street space on the same lot with a building, or group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials. 
    Lot means a parcel of land occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a main building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for the principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such yards and open spaces as are required under the provision of this chapter. A lot may or may not be specifically designated as such on public records. 

Interior, Through and Corner Lots 
    Lot area means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot where the interior angle of two adjacent sides at the intersection of two streets is less than 135 degrees. A lot abutting upon a curbed street shall be considered a corner lot for the purposes of this chapter if the arc is of less radius than 150 feet and the tangents to the curve, at the two points where the lot lines meet the curve or the straight street line extended, form an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. (See Interior, Through, and Corner lots diagram.) 
    Lot coverage means the part or percent of the lot occupied by a building including accessory buildings. 
    Lot depth means the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured along the median between the side lot lines. 
    Lot, interior, means any lot other than a corner lot. (See Interior, Through, and Corner lots diagram.) 
    Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot as defined as follows: 
(1)	Front lot line. In the case of an interior lot, the line separating such lot from the street. In the case of a corner lot or through lot, the line separating such lot from that street which is designated as the front street in the plat and the request for a zoning compliance permit. 
(2)	Rear lot line. That lot line opposite the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten feet long lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot. 
(3)	Side lot line. Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line. 
    Lot of record means a parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a document or map on file with the county register of deeds or in common use by municipal or county officials, and which actually exists as so shown, or any part of such parcel held in a record ownership separate from that of the remainder thereof. 
    Lot, through, means any interior lot having frontage on two more or less parallel streets as distinguished from a corner lot. In the case of a row of double frontage lots, all yards of such lots adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and front yard setbacks shall be provided as required. (See Interior, Through, and Corner lots diagram.) 
    Lot width means the horizontal straight line distance between the side lot lines, measured between the two points where the required minimum front yard setback line intersects the side lot lines. 
    Lot, zoning, means a single tract of land located within a single block which, at the time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit under single ownership or control. A zoning lot shall satisfy this chapter with respect to area, size, dimensions and frontage as required in the district in which the zoning lot is located. A zoning lot, therefore, may not coincide with a lot of record as filed with the county register of deeds, but may include one or more lots of record. 
    Main building means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot upon which it is situated. 
    Master deed means the condominium document recording the condominium project to which are attached as exhibits and incorporated by reference the bylaws for the project and the plan for the project. 
    Master plan means the comprehensive community plan including graphic and written proposals indicating the general location for streets, parks, schools, public buildings, and all physical development of the village, and any unit or part of such plan, and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof. Such plan may or may not be adopted by the planning commission and/or the village council. 
    Mezzanine means an intermediate floor in any story occupying not to exceed one-third of the floor area of such story. 
    Mobile home means a manufactured dwelling unit, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained in the structure. The term "mobile home" does not include a recreational vehicle. 
    Mobile home park means a parcel or tract of land under the control of a person upon which three or more mobile homes are located on a continual, nonrecreational basis and which is offered to the public for that purpose, regardless of whether a charge is made therefor, together with any building, structure, enclosure, street, equipment or facility, used or intended for use, incident to the occupancy of a mobile home and which is not intended for use as a temporary trailer park. 
    Motel means a series of attached, semidetached or detached rental units containing a bedroom, bathroom and closet space. Units shall provide for overnight lodging and are offered to the public for compensation and shall cater primarily to the public traveling by motor vehicle. 
    Nonconforming building means a building or portion thereof lawfully existing at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to the provisions of the chapter in the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming use means a use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Nuisance factors means an offensive, annoying, unpleasant or obnoxious thing or practice, a cause or source of annoyance, especially a continuing or repeating invasion of any physical characteristics of activity or use across a property line which can be perceived by or affects a human being, or the generation of an excessive or concentrated movement of people or things, such as, but not limited to, noise, dust, smoke, odor, glare, fumes, flashes, vibration, shock waves, heat, electronic or atomic radiation, objectionable effluent, noise of congregation of people (particularly at night), passenger traffic, and invasion of nonabutting street frontage by traffic. 
    Nursery, plant materials, means a space, building or structure, or combination thereof, for the storage of live trees, shrubs or plants offered for retail sale on the premises including products used for gardening or landscaping. The definition of nursery within the meaning of this chapter does not include any space, building or structure used for the sale of fruits, vegetables or Christmas trees. 
    Off-street parking lot means a facility providing vehicular parking spaces along with adequate drives and aisles for maneuvering so as to provide access for entrance and exit for the parking of more than three vehicles. 
    Open front store means a business establishment so developed that service to the patron may be extended beyond the walls of the structure not requiring the patron to enter the structure. The term "open front store" shall not include automobile repair stations or gasoline service stations. 
    Parking space means an area of definite length and width. Such area shall be exclusive of drives, aisles or entrances giving access thereto, and shall be fully accessible for the parking of permitted vehicles. 
    Principal use means the main use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose for which the premises exist. 
    Public utility means a person, firm or corporation, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal, state or municipal regulations to the public: gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication, telegraph, and transportation of water. 
    Restaurant, carryout, means an establishment for the selling of cooked foods or beverages which are served in disposable containers or wrappers for consumption off the premises. 
    Restaurant, drive-in/fast food, means an establishment at which patrons are served from a counter or a drive-in window, or where employees serve patrons in motor vehicles for consumption of food within the motor vehicle on the premises. 
    Room means, for the purpose of determining lot area requirements and density in a multiple-family district, a room, dining room or bedroom, equal to at least 80 square feet in area. A room shall not include the area in a kitchen, sanitary facilities, utility provisions, corridors, hallways and storage. 
    Setback means the distance required to obtain minimum front, side or rear yard open space provision of this chapter. 
    Sign means the use of any words, numerals, figures, devices, designs or trademarks by which anything is made known such as are used to show an individual, firm, profession, or business, and are visible to the general public. 
    Sign, accessory, means a sign pertaining to the principal use of the premises. 
    Sign, nonaccessory, means a sign which is not pertaining to the principal use of the premises. 
    Special land use means a use that may be permitted after review and approval by the planning commission upon a finding that the standards applicable to such uses have been met. Uses permitted subject to special approval shall be considered special land uses. 
    Story means that part of a building, except a mezzanine, included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the next floor, or if there is no floor above, then the ceiling next above. A basement shall not be counted as a story. 
    Street means a dedicated public right-of-way, other than an alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground. 
    Use means the principal purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which land or a building is or may be occupied. 
    Variance means a modification of the literal provisions of this chapter granted when strict enforcement of this chapter would cause undue hardship owing to circumstances unique to the individual property on which the variance is granted. The crucial points of variance are undue hardship and unique circumstances applying to the property. A variance is not justified unless both elements are present in the case. 
    Wall, obscuring, means a structure of definite height and location to serve as an obscuring screen in carrying out the requirements of this chapter. 
    Yard area lines means, in reference to site condominium developments, lines considered equal to lot lines. 
    Yards means the open spaces on the same lot with a main building unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this chapter, and further defined as follows: 
(1)	Front yard. An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest point of the main building. 
(2)	Rear yard. An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest point of the main building. 
(3)	Side yard. An open space between a main building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point on the side lot line to the nearest point of the main building. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 201; Ord. No. 130, § 1, 1-26-1993; Ord. No. 159, § 1, 7-25-2005)
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Site Condominium Terminology 


Basic Structural Terms 


Yards 
Secs. 46-5-46-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-41. - Enforcement generally. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the zoning administrator or by such deputies of his department as the zoning administrator may delegate to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1900)
Sec. 46-42. - Duties of the zoning administrator. 
(a)	The zoning administrator shall have the power to grant zoning compliance permits, to make inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for the zoning administrator to approve any plans or issue any permits for any excavation or construction until he has inspected such plans in detail and found them to conform with this chapter. 
(b)	Under no circumstances is the zoning administrator permitted to make changes to this chapter, nor to vary the terms of this chapter in carrying out his duties as zoning administrator. 
(c)	The zoning administrator shall not refuse to issue a permit when conditions imposed by the chapter are complied with by the applicant despite violations of contracts, such as covenants or private agreements which may occur upon the granting of such permit. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1901)
Sec. 46-43. - Plot plan. 
    Applications for zoning compliance permits shall be so accompanied by plans and specifications, including a plot plan, as required by the zoning administrator, which may include the following: 
(1)	The actual shape, location and dimensions of the lot.
(2)	The shape, size and location of all buildings or other structures to be erected, altered or moved and of any building or other structures already on the lot. 
(3)	The existing and intended use of the lot and of all such structures upon it, including, in residential areas, the number of dwelling units the building is intended to accommodate. 
(4)	Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1902)
Sec. 46-44. - Permits. 
    The following shall apply in the issuance of any permit: 
(1)	Compliance with chapter required. No zoning compliance permit shall be issued for the erection, alteration or use of any building or structure, or part thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all provisions of this chapter. 
(2)	For new use of land. No land heretofore vacant shall hereafter be used or an existing use of land be hereafter changed to a use of a different class or type unless a zoning compliance permit is first obtained for the new or different use. 
(3)	For new use of buildings. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be changed to or occupied by a use of a different class or type unless a zoning compliance permit is first obtained for the new or different use. 
(4)	Required. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be hereafter erected, altered, moved or repaired unless a zoning compliance permit and a building permit (issued by the county) shall have been first issued for such work. The terms "altered" and "repaired" shall include any changes in structural parts, stairways, type of construction, type, class or kind of occupancy, light or ventilation, means of egress and ingress, or other changes affecting or regulated by the village except for minor repairs or changes not involving any of such features. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1903)
Sec. 46-45. - Zoning compliance permit. 
    No land, building or part thereof shall be occupied by or for any use unless and until a zoning compliance permit shall have been issued for such use. The following shall apply in the issuance of any permit: 
(1)	Compliance with chapter required. No zoning compliance permits shall be issued for any building, structure or part thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)	Required. No building or structure, or parts thereof, which is hereafter erected, or altered, shall be occupied or used or the same caused to be done, unless and until a zoning compliance permit of occupancy shall have been issued for such building or structure. 
(3)	For existing buildings. Zoning compliance permits shall be issued for existing buildings, structures, or parts thereof, or existing uses of land if, after inspection, it is found that such buildings, structures, or parts thereof, or such use of land, are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)	Record. A record of all permits issued shall be kept on file in the office of the zoning administrator, and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the property involved. 
(5)	For dwelling accessory buildings. Buildings or structures accessory to dwellings shall not require separate zoning compliance permits but may be included in the zoning compliance permit for the dwelling when shown on the plot plan and when completed at the same time as such dwellings. 
(6)	Application. 
a.	Application for zoning compliance permits shall be made in writing to the zoning administrator on forms furnished by the village, and such permits shall be issued within ten days after receipt of such application if it is found that the building or structure, or part thereof, or the use of land is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
b.	In those instances where special approval by the planning commission or board of appeals is required or where site plan review by the planning commission is required, permits shall be issued or rejected within ten days after action by the planning commission or board of appeals. 
c.	If such permit is rejected, the applicant therefor shall be notified of such rejection and cause thereof within such ten-day period. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1904)
Sec. 46-46. - Final inspection. 
    The holder of every zoning compliance permit for the construction, erection, alteration, repair or moving of any building structure or part thereof shall notify the zoning administrator immediately upon the completion of the work authorized by such permit, for a final inspection. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1905)
Sec. 46-47. - Fees. 
    Fees for inspection and the issuance of permits or certificates or copies thereof required or issued under the provisions of this chapter may be collected by the zoning administrator in advance of issuance. The amount of such fees shall be established by resolution of the village council and shall cover the cost of inspection and supervision resulting from enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1906)
Sec. 46-48. - Notice of public hearing. 
    For uses making reference to this division, and in all applications for special approval or special land uses, notice of the public hearing before the planning commission shall be given as follows: 
(1)	One notice of the public hearing shall be published in newspaper of general circulation in the village not less than five and not more than 15 days before such hearing. 
(2)	One notice of the public hearing shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid or by personal delivery to the owners of the property for which the hearing is conducted, to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question, and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet of the boundary of such property. Notice shall be given not less than five and not more than 15 days before such hearing. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification. Notification need not be given to more than one occupant of the structure, except that if a structure contains more than one dwelling unit or special area owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, one occupant of each unit or special area shall receive notice. In the case of a single structure containing more than four dwelling units or other distinct special areas owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure who shall be requested to post a notice at the primary entrance to the structure. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1907)
Sec. 46-49. - Zoning commission. 
    The village planning commission is designated as the commission specified in section 4 of Public Act No. 207 of 1921 (MCL 125.584), and shall perform the zoning duties of such commission as provided in the statute in connection with the amendment of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, art. XXI)
Sec. 46-50. - Changes and amendments. 
    The village council may, from time to time, on recommendation from the planning commission or on petition, amend, supplement or change the district boundaries or the regulations in this chapter, or subsequently established in this chapter pursuant to the authority and procedure established in Public Act No. 207 of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq.), as amended. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, art. XXII)
State Law reference- Enactment of ordinances, MCL 125.584. 
Sec. 46-51. - Amendment of prior ordinances. 
    The zoning ordinance, adopted by the village, known as Ordinance No. 71 is hereby amended. This amendment of such ordinance and its amendments does not affect or impair any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued, or acquired or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time enforced, prosecuted or inflicted. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, art. XXIII)
Sec. 46-52. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience or general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way to impair or interfere with any existing provision of law or ordinance other than Ordinance No. 71 described in section 46-51, or with any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to the law relating to the use of buildings or premises; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than is required by existing ordinance or by rules, regulations or permits, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, art. XXIV)
Sec. 46-53. - Vested right. 
    Nothing in this chapter should be interpreted or construed to give rise to any permanent vested rights in the continuation of any particular use, district, zoning classification or any permissible activities therein; and, they are declared to be subject to subsequent amendment, change or modification as may be necessary to the preservation or protection of public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, art. XXV)
Sec. 46-54. - Violations. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The zoning administrator shall commence action on behalf of the village when an alleged violation has occurred. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 2600)
Sec. 46-55. - Public nuisance per se. 
    Any building or structure which is erected, altered or converted, or any use of premises or land which is begun or changed subsequent to the time of passage of this chapter and in violation of any of the provisions thereof is declared to be a public nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 2601)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.587. 
Sec. 46-56. - Separate offenses. 
    The owner of any building, structure or premises, or part thereof, where any condition in violation of this chapter shall exist or shall be created, and who has assisted knowingly in the commission of such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 2602)
Sec. 46-57. - Rights and remedies are cumulative. 
    The rights and remedies provided in sections 46-54-46-56 are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 2604)
Secs. 46-58-46-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF APPEALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2.
State Law reference- Board of appeals, MCL 125.585.

Sec. 46-81. - Creation and membership. 
(a)	Members. There is established a zoning board of appeals, which shall perform its duties and exercise its powers as provided in section 5 of Public Act No. 207 of 1921 (MCL 125.585), as amended, and in such a way that the objectives of this chapter shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The board shall consist of not less than five members, appointed by the village council, each to be appointed for a term of three years, respectively, so as nearly as may be possible to provide for the appointment of an equal number each year, depending on the number of members; thereafter, each member to hold office for the full three-year term. Any vacancies on the board shall be filled by appointment by the council for the remainder of the unexpired term. The zoning board of appeals shall annually elect its own chair, vice-chair and secretary. The compensation of the appointed members of the zoning board of appeals may be fixed by the village council. 
(b)	Alternate members. The council may appoint no more than two alternate members of the zoning board of appeals who shall serve as a member of the board upon the call of the chair where a regular member is absent from or unable to attend two or more consecutive meetings of the board or for a period of 30 consecutive days. An alternate member may also be called to serve in the place of a regular member for the purpose of reaching a decision on a case in which the regular member has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest. The alternate member having been appointed shall serve in the case until a final decision has been made. The alternate member shall have the same voting rights in cases he hears as a regular member of the board of appeals. Appointments of alternate members for the first year shall be for a period of one and two years, respectively; thereafter, each alternate member to hold office for the full three-year term. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 2000)
Sec. 46-82. - Meetings. 
    Meetings of the board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chair and at such other times as the board may determine or specify in its rules of procedure. Four members of the board shall constitute a quorum necessary to take action. All hearings conducted by such board shall be open to the public. The board of appeals shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a record of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact and shall file a record of its proceedings in the office of the village clerk, and shall be a public record. The concurring vote of the majority of the members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning administrator, or planning commission, or to decide in favor of an applicant a matter upon which the board is required to pass under this chapter, or to affect a variation in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 2001)
Sec. 46-83. - Appeal. 
(a)	An appeal may be taken to the board of appeals by any person, firm or corporation, or by any officer, department, board or bureau affected by a decision of the zoning administrator or planning commission. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days of the decision or action of the zoning administrator, or planning commission, by filing with the board of appeals a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit to the board all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken, and such appeal shall be heard at the next regularly scheduled board of appeals meeting, or within 20 days of the filing of the notice of appeals, whichever occurs first. 
(b)	The board shall give due notice of the time and place of the hearing thereof to the applicant, the zoning administrator, and other parties as provided in section 46-88 and shall render a decision on the appeal without unreasonable delay. Any person may appear and testify at the hearing, either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney. The decision of such board should not become final until the expiration of five days from the entry of such order unless the board shall find the immediate effect of such order is necessary for the preservation of the property or personal rights and shall so certify on the record. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 2002)
Sec. 46-84. - Stay. 
    An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the zoning administrator certifies to the board of appeals after notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of appeals or by the circuit court, on application, on notice of the zoning administrator and on due cause shown. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 2003)
Sec. 46-85. - Fees. 
    The village council may from time to time prescribe and amend, by resolution, a reasonable schedule of fees to be charged to applicants for appeals to the zoning board of appeals. At the time the notice for appeal is filed, such fee shall be paid to the secretary of the board of appeals, which the secretary shall forthwith pay over to the village treasurer to the credit of the general revenue fund of the village. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 2004)
Sec. 46-86. - Jurisdiction. 
    The zoning board of appeals shall not have the power to alter or change the zoning district classification of any property, not to make any change in the terms of this chapter nor to permit any use in a district in which it is not permitted. The board does have power to act on those matters where this chapter provides for an administrative review, interpretation, exception or special approval permit and to authorize a variance as defined in this section and state laws. Such powers include the following: 
(1)	Administrative review. 
a.	To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order, requirement, permit, decision or refusal made by the zoning administrator or planning commission in carrying out or enforcing any provisions of this chapter except in regard to special land uses and special approval uses. 
b.	Determine the location of zoning district boundaries as shown on the zoning districts map where street layout on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on such map, based upon interpretation of the provisions of this chapter in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the village master plan. 
(2)	Variance. To authorize, upon an appeal, a variance from the strict application of the provisions of this chapter where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape or area of a specific piece of property at the time of enactment of this chapter or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional conditions of such property, the strict application of the regulations enacted would result in peculiar or exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional undue hardship upon the owner of such property provided such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter. In granting a variance, the board may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed uses as it may deem reasonable in furtherance of the purpose of this chapter. In granting a variance, the board shall state the grounds upon which it justifies the granting of a variance. 
(3)	Exceptions and special approvals. To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, requests for exceptions or other decisions on which this chapter specifically authorizes the board to pass. Any exception or decision shall be subject to such conditions as the board may require to preserve and promote the character of the district in question and otherwise promote the purpose of this chapter, including the following: 
a.	Permit the erection and use of buildings or use of premises for public utility purposes and make exceptions therefor to the height and bulk district requirements established in this chapter which such board considers necessary for the public convenience or welfare. 
b.	Permit the modification of the automobile parking space or loading space requirements where, in the particular instance, such modification will not be inconsistent with the purpose and intent of such requirements. 
(4)	Temporary uses or structures. 
a.	Permit temporary buildings and uses for periods not to exceed two years in undeveloped sections of the village and for periods not to exceed six months in developed sections. Such uses must be classified as uses permitted in the districts in which located. 
b.	Permit, upon proper application, the following character of temporary use, not otherwise permitted in the district, not to exceed 12 months with the granting of 12-month extensions being permissible: uses which do not require the erection of any capital improvement of a structural nature. The board of appeals, in granting permits for such temporary uses, shall do so under the following conditions: 
1.	The granting of the temporary use shall in no way constitute a change in the basic uses permitted in the district nor on the property wherein the temporary use is permitted. 
2.	The granting of the temporary use shall be granted, in writing, stipulating all conditions as to time, nature of development permitted and arrangements for removing the use at the termination of such temporary permit. 
3.	All setbacks, land coverage, off-street parking, lighting and other requirements to be considered in protecting the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the village shall be made at the discretion of the board of appeals. 
4.	Uses not requiring capital improvements may include recreation developments such as, but not limited to, golf, driving ranges or outdoor archery or uses housed in demountable structures or not requiring foundations, heating systems or sanitary connections. 
5.	The use shall be in harmony with the general character of the district.
(5)	Findings. In consideration of all actions, the board shall, before making any decisions, first determine that the proposed action will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or unreasonably increase the congestion in public streets, or increase the danger of fire or endanger the public safety, or unreasonably diminish or impair established property values within the surrounding area, or in any other respect impair the public health, safety, comfort, morals or welfare of the inhabitants of the village. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 2005)
Sec. 46-87. - Orders. 
    In exercising the powers described in this division, the board of appeals may reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the orders, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the zoning administrator or planning commission from whom the appeal is taken. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 2006)
Sec. 46-88. - Notice of hearing. 
    The board of appeals shall make no determination except in a specific case and after a hearing conducted by such board. The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and give ten days' notice of the appeal to the persons to whom real property within 300 feet of the premises in question is assessed, and to the occupants of one-family and two-family dwellings within 300 feet, the notice to be delivered by mail addressed to the respective owners and tenants at the address given in the last assessment roll. If the tenant's name is not known, the term "occupant" may be used. A proof of service of such mailing shall be filed prior to the commencement of such hearing. The village council may also make the necessary provisions requiring the applicant to pay the costs required relative to such notices. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 2007)
Sec. 46-89. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)	No order of the board of appeals permitting the erection of a building shall be valid for a period longer than one year, unless a building permit for such erection or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. 
(b)	No order of the board permitting the erection of a building shall be valid for a period longer than one year unless such use is established within such period; provided, however, that where such use permitted is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a building, such order shall continue in force and effect if a building permit for such erection or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 2008)
Secs. 46-90-46-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-121. - Districts established. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the village is hereby divided into the following districts: 
(1)	Residential Districts. 
RA-1 one-family residential district 
RA-1B one-family residential district 
RA-2 one-family residential district 
RB two-family residential district 
RC multiple-family residential district 
MH mobile home district 
(2)	Nonresidential Districts. 
OS-1 office service district 
B-1 community business district 
B-2 general business district 
I-1 light industrial district 
I-2 general industrial district 
P-1 vehicular parking district 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 300)
Sec. 46-122. - District boundaries. 
    The boundaries of these districts are established as shown on the zoning districts map, village zoning ordinance, which is on file in the office of the village clerk, and which map with all notations, references and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this chapter as if fully described in this section. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 301)
Sec. 46-123. - District boundaries interpreted. 
    Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the zoning districts map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)	Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(2)	Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
(3)	Boundaries indicated as approximately following village limits shall be construed as following village limits. 
(4)	Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be the midway between the main tracks. 
(5)	Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (1) through (5) of this section shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
(6)	Where physical or natural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning districts map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections (1) through (5) of this section, the board of appeals shall interpret the district boundaries. 
(7)	Insofar as some or all of the various districts may be indicated on the zoning districts map by patterns which, for the sake of map clarity, do not cover public rights-of-way, it is intended that such district boundaries do extend to the center of any public right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 302)
Sec. 46-124. - Zoning of annexed areas. 
    Whenever any area is annexed to the village, one of the following conditions will apply: 
(1)	Land that is zoned previous to annexation shall be classified as being in whichever district of this chapter most closely conforms with the zoning that existed prior to annexation, such classification to be recommended by the planning commission to the village council and the council shall approve such classification by resolution. 
(2)	Land not zoned prior to annexation shall be automatically classified as an RA-1 district until a zoning map for such area has been adopted by the village council. The planning commission shall recommend the appropriate zoning districts for such area within three months after the matter is referred to it by the village council. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 303)
Sec. 46-125. - Zoning of vacated area. 
    Whenever any street, alley or other public way within the village shall be vacated, such street, alley or other public way, or portion thereof, shall automatically be classified in the same zone district as the property to which it attaches. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 304)
Sec. 46-126. - District requirements. 
    All buildings and uses in any district shall be subject to the provisions of division 12 of this article, schedule of regulations, article IV of this chapter, supplementary regulations, and article VI of this chapter, general exceptions. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 305)
Secs. 46-127-46-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RA-1, RA-1B AND RA-2 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 46-151. - Intent. 
    The RA-1, RA-1B and RA-2 one-family residential districts are designed to be the most restrictive of the residential districts. The intent is to provide for an environment of predominantly low-density, one-family detached dwellings along with other residentially related facilities which serve the residents in the RA-1, RA-1B and RA-2 districts. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 400)
Sec. 46-152. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an RA-1, RA-1B and RA-2 one-family residential district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)	One-family detached dwelling units.
a.	One-family detached dwelling units shall:
1.	Be permanently attached to a perimeter foundation.
2.	Have a minimum width of 20 feet on at least two sides within any single, vertical plane. 
3.	Have an overhang or eave as required by the building code of residential dwellings.
4.	Be provided with an exterior building wall configuration which represents an average width-to-depth or depth-to-width ratio which does not exceed three to one. 
b.	Procedures are as follows:
1.	Applications for one-family detached dwelling units shall be submitted to the zoning administrator who may require the applicant to furnish such plans, photographs, elevations or similar documentation necessary to permit a complete review and evaluation. 
2.	Should the zoning administrator find that any dwelling unit does not conform with the standards of this section, he may deny the application or ask for an opinion from the planning commission. The applicant or any affected property owner located within 300 feet of the property in question may appeal the zoning administrator's decision by requesting a public hearing before the zoning board of appeals. Notice of hearing shall be given in accordance with section 46-88, notice of hearing. 
(2)	Farms on those parcels of land separately owned outside the boundaries of either a proprietary or supervisor's plat, having an area of not less than five acres, all subject to the health and sanitation provisions of the village, and provided further that no farms shall be operated as piggeries, or for the disposal of garbage, sewage rubbish, offal or rendering plants, or for the slaughtering of animals except such animals as have been raised on the premises or have been maintained on the premises for at least a period of one year immediately prior thereto and for the use and consumption by persons residing on the premises. 
(3)	Publicly owned and operated libraries, parks, parkways and recreational facilities.
(4)	Cemeteries which lawfully occupied land at the time of adoption of this chapter.
(5)	Public, parochial and other private elementary schools offering courses in general education and not operated for profit. 
(6)	A state-licensed residential facility providing supervision or care, or both, to six or less persons as required to be a permitted residential use by section 36 of Public Act No. 207 of 1921 (MCL 125.583b). 
(7)	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the permitted uses of this section. 
(8)	Garage sales may be permitted as temporary uses, accessory to the principal use of a dwelling, provided that such sales shall not exceed three consecutive days and are limited to three sales annually at a single location. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 401; Ord. No. 143, 9-29-1997)
Sec. 46-153. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in the RA-1, RA-1B and RA-2 districts, subject to the conditions imposed in this section for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission: 
(1)	Churches and other facilities normally incidental thereto subject to the following conditions: Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in division 12 of this article, schedule of regulations, may be allowed, provided that front, side and rear yards are increased above the minimum required yards by one foot for each foot of building height that exceeds the maximum height allowed. 
(2)	Public, parochial and private intermediate and/or secondary schools offering courses in general education, not operated for profit. Vehicular access to the site shall be in accordance with section 46-487. All buildings shall have a setback of at least 40 feet. 
(3)	Public utility and public service buildings and uses (without storage yards).
(4)	Nursery schools, day nurseries and child care centers (not including dormitories) subject to the following: 
a.	The zoning lot shall contain not less than one-half acre.
b.	Building setbacks shall be not less than 30 feet.
c.	The outdoor play space shall have a total minimum area of not less than 4,000 square feet. 
d.	There shall be provided and maintained a minimum area of 150 square feet of outdoor play space for each child cared for. 
e.	All vehicular access to the site shall be in accordance with section 46-487, unless the use is located in a church. 
(5)	Private noncommercial recreational areas, institutional or community recreation centers, and nonprofit swimming pool clubs, all subject to the following conditions: 
a.	The proposed site for any of the uses permitted in this section which would attract persons from, or are intended to serve, areas beyond the immediate neighborhood shall have at least one property line abutting a major or secondary street as designated on the village's thoroughfare plan, and the site shall be so planned as to provide all vehicular access in accordance with section 46-487. 
b.	Front, side and rear yards shall be at least 40 feet wide.
c.	Off-street parking shall be provided so as to accommodate not less than one-half of the member families and/or individual members. The planning commission may modify the off-street parking requirements in those instances wherein it is specifically determined that the users will originate from the immediately adjacent areas, and will, therefore, be pedestrian. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or zoning compliance permit, bylaws of the organization shall be provided in order to establish the membership involved for computing the off-street parking requirements. In those cases wherein the proposed use or organization does not have bylaws or formal membership, the off-street parking requirement shall be determined by the planning commission on the basis of usage. 
d.	Whenever a swimming pool is constructed under this chapter, such pool area shall be subject to the provisions of village swimming pool requirements in article II of chapter 6. 
(6)	Golf courses, which may or may not be operated for profit, subject to the following conditions: 
a.	Development features including the principal and accessory buildings and structures shall be so located and related as to minimize the possibilities of any adverse effects upon adjacent property. All principal or accessory buildings shall be not less than 100 feet from any property line abutting residentially zoned lands; provided, however, that where topographic conditions are such that buildings would be screened from view, the planning commission may modify this requirement. 
b.	Whenever a swimming pool is to be provided, such pool shall be subject to the provisions of village Ordinance No. 66, swimming pool ordinance. 
(7)	Colleges, universities and other such institutions of higher learning, public and private, offering courses in general, technical or religious education and not operated for profit, all subject to the following conditions: 
a.	All vehicular access to such site shall be in accordance with section 46-487. 
b.	No building shall be closer than 80 feet to any property line.
c.	No off-street parking lot shall be closer than 40 feet to any property line. A berm, constructed in accordance with section 46-483, walls and berms, and planted in accordance with section 46-478, plant materials, shall be provided between off-street parking lots and property lines that abut one-family residential districts. 
(8)	Skilled or basic nursing homes or convalescent homes, subject to the following conditions:
a.	Not less than 1,000 square feet of open space for each bed or unit shall be provided on the site. The 1,000 square feet of area shall provide for landscape setting, off-street parking, service drives, loading space, yard requirements and accessory uses, but shall not include the area covered by main or accessory buildings. 
b.	No building shall be closer than 70 feet to any abutting single-family residential zoning lot. In no instance, however, shall any building be located closer than 25 feet to any property line. 
c.	Buildings shall not exceed one story in height.
(9)	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the permitted uses in this section. 
(10)	Private pools shall be permitted as an accessory use within the rear yard only, subject further to the provisions of village Ordinance No. 66, swimming pool ordinance. 
(11)	Home occupation, subject to the following:
a.	Such home occupation shall not exceed 200 square feet or 20 percent of the floor area of the residential structure as defined in this chapter, whichever is greater. 
b.	There shall be no alteration in the residential character or function of the premises in connection herewith; nor shall any garage or accessory building be used in connection herewith. 
c.	There shall be no exterior display, other than one nonilluminated nameplate, which is not more than two square feet in area which may be attached to the building. 
d.	No more than one assistant or employee shall be employed in connection with the home occupation, provided that family members shall not be counted as employed. 
e.	There shall be no equipment or machinery used in connection with the home occupation which is discernable beyond the property line because of noise, odor, glare or vibration. 
f.	Home occupations, not meeting the criteria of this subsection (11), may be permitted, subject to the review and approval of the board of appeals, when such use is not in conflict with the residential character of the area and subject to conditions they may impose. The board may apply conditions such as limiting time of operation or requiring screening that will assist in maintaining the residential character. 
(12)	Bed and breakfast, subject to the following conditions:
a.	Not more than 30 percent of the total floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used for bed and breakfast sleeping rooms; provided, however, that the number of sleeping rooms shall not exceed three. 
b.	There shall be no separate cooking facilities for bed and breakfast occupants.
c.	A sign not to exceed two square feet in area may be provided. Such sign may be located in the setback area. 
d.	One off-street parking space shall be provided for each leasable bedroom in addition to the two residential spaces. 
(13)	Funeral homes, subject to the following:
a.	The zoning lot shall contain not less than one acre.
b.	The zoning lot shall have a front lot line with no less than 100 feet of width along Main Street. 
c.	All buildings shall have a minimum setback of 30 feet.
d.	If there is a common side lot with a residential use, then a landscaped greenbelt of not less than ten feet will be required. 
e.	Parking is permitted within a front yard, provided that a landscaped greenbelt of not less than ten feet is maintained between the parking and the front lot line. 
f.	All vehicular access to the site shall be in accordance with section 46-487, access to a major or secondary street. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 402; Ord. No. 130, § 2, 1-26-1993)
Sec. 46-154. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See division 12 of this article, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, the maximum density permitted, and providing minimum yard setback requirements for the RA-1, RA-1B, and RA-2 districts. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 403)
Secs. 46-155-46-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RB TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 46-181. - Intent. 
    The RB two-family residential districts are designed to afford a transition of use in existing housing areas by permitting new construction or conversion of existing structures between adjacent residential and commercial, office, thoroughfares or other uses which would affect residential character. This RB district also recognizes the existence of older residential areas of the village where larger houses have been or can be converted from single-family to two-family residences in order to extend the economic life of these structures and allow the owners to justify the expenditures for repairs and modernization. This RB district also allows the construction of new two-family residences where slightly greater densities are permitted. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 500)
Sec. 46-182. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an RB two-family residential district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)	All uses permitted and as regulated in the one-family residential districts. The standards of division 12 of this article, schedule of regulations, applicable to the RA-2 one-family residential district, shall apply as minimum standards when one-family detached dwellings are erected. 
(2)	Two-family dwellings, subject to the conditions of section 46-152(1)a and (1)b. 
(3)	A state-licensed residential facility providing supervision or care, or both, to six or less persons as required to be a permitted residential use by section 36 of Public Act No. 207 of 1921 (MCL 125.583b). 
(4)	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the permitted uses in this section. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 501)
Sec. 46-183. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See division 12 of this article, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, the maximum density permitted, and providing minimum yard setback requirements for the RB district. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 502)
Secs. 46-184-46-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RC MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 46-201. - Intent. 
    The RC multiple-family residential districts are designed to provide sites for multiple-family dwelling structures and related uses which will generally serve as zones of transition between the nonresidential districts and lower density single-family districts. The RC multiple-family district is further provided to serve the limited needs for the apartment type of unit in an otherwise medium density, single-family community. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 600)
Sec. 46-202. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an RC multiple-family residential district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)	All uses permitted and as regulated in the RB two-family residential district; provided, however, that the area and bulk requirements of the RC district shall apply to all permitted uses other than one-family dwellings. 
(2)	Multiple-family dwellings, subject to the conditions of section 46-152(1)a and (1)b. 
(3)	A state-licensed residential facility providing supervision or care, or both, to six or less persons as required to be a residential use by section 36 of Public Act No. 207 of 1921 (MCL 125.583b). 
(4)	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the permitted uses of this section. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 601)
Sec. 46-203. - Required conditions. 
(a)	In the case of multiple dwelling developments in the RC district, all site plans shall be submitted to the planning commission for its review and approval prior to issuance of a building permit. 
(b)	Approval shall be contingent upon a finding that:
(1)	The site plan shows that a proper relationship exists between local streets and any proposed service roads, driveways and parking areas to encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety. 
(2)	All the development features, including the principal buildings and any accessory buildings or uses, open spaces, service roads, driveways and parking areas, are located so as to minimize the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent property, such as, but not limited to, channeling excessive traffic onto local residential streets, lack of adequate screening or buffering of parking or service areas, or building groupings and circulation routes located so as not to interfere with police or fire equipment access. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 602)
Sec. 46-204. - Uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in the RC district, subject to the conditions imposed in this section for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission: 
(1)	General hospitals, with no maximum height restrictions, when the following conditions are met: 
a.	All such hospitals shall be developed only on sites consisting of at least six acres in area. 
b.	All vehicular access to the site shall be in accordance with section 46-487. 
c.	The minimum distance of any main or accessory building from bounding lot lines or streets shall be at least 100 feet for front, rear and side yards for all two-story structures. For every story above two, the minimum yard distance shall be increased by at least 20 feet. 
(2)	Private offices for doctors or dentists, or similar professions provided that all vehicular access to the site is in accordance with section 46-487. 
(3)	Housing for the elderly when the following conditions are met:
a.	All dwellings shall consist of at least 350 square feet per unit (not including kitchen and sanitary facilities). 
b.	Total coverage of all buildings, including dwelling units and related service buildings, shall not exceed 25 percent of the total site exclusive of any dedicated public right-of-way. 
(4)	Convalescent homes or orphanages when the following conditions are met:
a.	There shall be provided on the site not less than 1,000 square feet of open space for each bed in the home. The 1,000 square feet of land area may include landscape setting, off-street parking, service drives, loading space, yard requirement and accessory uses, but shall not include the area covered by main or accessory buildings. 
b.	No building shall be closer than 25 feet to any property line.
(5)	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the permitted uses of this section. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 603)
Sec. 46-205. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See division 12 of this article, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, maximum density permitted, and providing minimum yard setback requirements for the RC district. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 604)
Secs. 46-206-46-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - MH MOBILE HOME DISTRICTS 

Sec. 46-231. - Intent. 
    The MH mobile home districts are designed to provide for the appropriate location of and requirements for mobile home parks. Mobile home parks possess characteristics of site development, use and density which are unique. Such characteristics are more intensive than those of one-family residential districts and, therefore, mobile home parks are treated as a distinct zoning district in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 800)
Sec. 46-232. - Principal uses permitted. 
(a)	In an MH mobile home district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for the following specified use, unless otherwise provided in this chapter and further subject to the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission: Mobile home parks. 
(b)	Mobile home parks may include the following:
(1)	Mobile homes.
(2)	One management building exclusively provided for the conducting of business operations of the mobile home park in which located. 
(3)	Utility building for laundry facilities and auxiliary storage space for tenants or management of the mobile home park. 
(4)	Community building for the accessory use of tenants of the mobile home park in which located. 
(5)	Recreation facilities such as, but not limited to, swimming pools, field and court games and sports, and passive recreation areas. 
(6)	The sale of mobile homes, provided that:
a.	Such sale is clearly accessory to the occupancy of individual lots within the mobile home park. 
b.	Such sale is not made by a person or business engaged in the sale of mobile homes as a commercial operation. Mobile homes located on lots within the mobile home park to be used and occupied on that site may be sold by a licensed dealer or broker. This shall not prohibit the sale of a mobile home owned and occupied by a resident of the mobile home development, provided that the development permits the sale. 
(7)	Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to any principal use permitted.
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 801)
Sec. 46-233. - Procedures. 
(a)	Application. 
(1)	An application for approval of a mobile home park shall require submission of a preliminary site plan to the planning commission for review and approval. 
(2)	The date of receipt of the preliminary plan shall be not less than 15 days prior to the regular meeting of the planning commission. 
(b)	Preliminary site plan. 
(1)	Preliminary site plans and specifications of the proposed mobile home park shall be submitted in accordance with section 46-485. 
(2)	The preliminary plan shall be submitted to the county road commission, county health department and the county drain commission where required by section 11 of Public Act No. 96 of 1987 (MCL 125.2311). 
(3)	The planning commission shall either approve, modify or disapprove the site plan within 60 days of the date of receipt of the preliminary plan. 
(4)	The preliminary site plan shall be approved by the planning commission prior to submission of a final site plan. If the planning commission does not approve the preliminary plan, it shall indicate the reasons for such denial in the minutes of the planning commission meeting. The applicant shall have the right to appeal such decision of the planning commission to the village council, provided that it is done so in writing within seven days of the planning commission meeting at which the denial took place. 
(c)	Final site plan. For purposes of recordkeeping, three copies of drawings of the proposed mobile home park, approved by the state for construction, shall be submitted to the village by the applicant. Building permits are not required by this section. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 802)
Sec. 46-234. - Area, height and bulk requirements. 
(a)	All mobile home sites shall have a site area of not less than 5,000 square feet, except that if parks provide common open space for use by the residents, site areas may be reduced by 20 percent, provided that the common open space shall be at least equal to the total area by which any sites have been reduced. 
(b)	No mobile home, community building or service building shall be located closer than ten feet to any mobile home park perimeter lot line or 50 feet to any existing or proposed major or secondary thoroughfare right-of-way line. 
(c)	Accessory buildings servicing the mobile home park shall not exceed 25 feet in height. Mobile homes shall not exceed 14 feet in height. 
(d)	A mobile home park shall provide an open area of at least 25,000 square feet. For mobile home parks containing more than 50 sites, the minimum area shall be increased by 200 square feet for each site over 50. Open space resulting from site reductions permitted in subsection (a) of this section may be applied to this open space requirement. Land designated for recreational use shall be so located and designed to facilitate access and usability and shall be shaped so that its length is no greater than three times its width. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 803)
Sec. 46-235. - Required conditions. 
(a)	Uses permitted for mobile home parks in section 46-232 shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)	Mobile home parks shall not be permitted on parcels of less than ten acres in area.
(2)	Vehicular access to a mobile home park shall be directly from a major or secondary street as shown on the village's thoroughfare plan. If a mobile home park does not directly abut such thoroughfare, vehicular access shall be by means of a public right-of-way of not less than 60 feet in width. Access shall not be permitted through one-family residential districts unless property bordering such access is publicly owned or is already developed for a permitted use other than one-family residential. 
(3)	Storm drainage facilities shall be provided so as to protect residents of the mobile home park as well as adjacent property owners. Facilities shall be of a capacity which will ensure adequate drainage and prevent the accumulation of stagnant pools of water in or adjacent to the park. Storm drainage facilities shall meet the requirements of the state department of public health and the applicable requirements of the village. 
(4)	All utility lines shall be underground.
(5)	All off-site connections to utilities (water, sanitary and storm sewer) shall be made in accordance with applicable village codes and ordinances. 
(6)	All mobile homes shall be anchored by means of an anchoring system approved by the state construction code commission. 
(7)	Where an off-street parking lot is abutting or adjacent to a residential district, an obscuring wall or landscaped berm, as specified in section 46-483, walls and berms, shall be provided. 
(8)	Outdoor signs shall be permitted and regulated as provided in section 46-479, signs, for the RC multiple-family residential districts. 
(b)	The regulations and standards as provided for and promulgated under Public Act No. 96 of 1987 (MCL 125.2301 et seq.), are adopted and shall apply to and control in all mobile home parks, unless exceeded by the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 804; Ord. No. 130, § 3, 1-26-1993)
Secs. 46-236-46-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - OS-1 OFFICE SERVICE DISTRICTS 

Sec. 46-261. - Intent. 
    The OS-1 office service districts are designed to accommodate uses such as offices, banks and personal services which can serve as transitional areas between residential and commercial districts and to provide a transition between major streets and residential districts. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 900; Ord. No. 130, § 4, 1-26-1993)
Sec. 46-262. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an OS-1 office service district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)	Office buildings for any of the following occupations: executive, administrative, professional, accounting, writing, clerical, stenographic, drafting and sales. 
(2)	Medical and dental offices, including clinics.
(3)	Facilities for human care such as hospitals, sanitariums, rest and convalescent homes.
(4)	Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations, and similar uses; drive-in facilities as an accessory use only. 
(5)	Personal service establishment including barbershops, beauty shops and health salons.
(6)	Off-street parking lots.
(7)	Churches.
(8)	Rehabilitation centers.
(9)	Other uses similar to the uses of this section.
(10)	Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the permitted uses of this section.
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 901)
Sec. 46-263. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in the OS-1 district, subject to the conditions imposed in this section for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission: 
(1)	An accessory use customarily related to a principal use authorized by this section, such as, but not limited to, pharmacy or apothecary shops, stores, limited to corrective garments or bandages, or optical service may be permitted. 
(2)	Mortuary establishments when adequate assembly area is provided off-street for vehicles to be used in funeral processions, provided further that such assembly area shall be in addition to any required off-street parking area. A caretaker's residence may be provided within the main building of mortuary establishments. 
(3)	Publicly owned buildings, telephone exchange buildings and public utility offices, but not including storage yards, transformer stations, substations or gas regulator stations. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 902)
Sec. 46-264. - Required conditions. 
    The following conditions are required in the OS-1 district: 
(1)	No interior display shall be visible from the exterior of the building.
(2)	The outdoor storage of goods or material shall be prohibited.
(3)	Warehousing or indoor storage of goods or materials beyond that normally incident to the permitted uses of this division shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 903)
Sec. 46-265. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See division 12 of this article, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements for the OS-1 district. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 904)
Secs. 46-266-46-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - B-1 COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICTS 

Sec. 46-291. - Intent. 
    The B-1 community business districts, as established in this division, are designed to meet the day-to-day convenience and comparison shopping and service needs of persons residing in adjacent residential areas. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1000)
Sec. 46-292. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a B-1 community business district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)	Generally recognized retail businesses which supply commodities on the premises such as, but not limited to, groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods or other foods, drugs, dry goods, clothing and notions or hardware. 
(2)	Personal service establishments which perform services on the premises such as, but not limited to, repair shops (watches, radio, television, shoe, etc.), tailor shops, beauty parlors or barbershops, photographic studios, and self-service laundries and dry cleaners. 
(3)	Laundry, dry cleaning establishments, or pickup stations, dealing directly with the consumer. Central dry cleaning plants serving more than one retail outlet shall be prohibited. 
(4)	Business establishments which perform services on the premises such as, but not limited to, banks, loan companies, insurance offices and real estate offices. 
(5)	Professional services including the following: offices of doctors, dentists, osteopaths, and similar or allied professions; clinics. 
(6)	Business schools, colleges, dance schools or private schools operated for profit.
(7)	Private clubs, fraternal organizations and lodge halls.
(8)	Restaurants or other places serving food or beverage, except those having the character of a drive-in or carryout. 
(9)	Hotels or motels.
(10)	Theaters, assembly halls, concert halls or similar places of public assembly when conducted within enclosed buildings. 
(11)	Mortuaries subject to the conditions of section 46-263. 
(12)	Post office and similar governmental office buildings.
(13)	Off-street parking lots.
(14)	Rehabilitation centers.
(15)	Other uses similar to the uses of this section.
(16)	Residential occupancy shall be permitted in buildings which are two stories or more in height, provided that: 
a.	Dwellings shall be permitted only on floors above the ground floor.
b.	Dwelling units shall meet all applicable building, housing, fire and safety codes of the village. 
(17)	Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the permitted uses of this section.
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1001)
Sec. 46-293. - Required conditions. 
    Required conditions in the B-1 district are as follows: 
(1)	All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with customers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on premises where produced. 
(2)	All business, servicing, or processing, except for off-street parking or loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1002)
Sec. 46-294. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in the B-1 district, subject to the conditions imposed in this section for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission: 
(1)	Gasoline service station for the sale of gasoline, oil and minor accessories only, and where no repair work is done, other than incidental service, but not including steam cleaning or undercoating, vehicle body repair, painting, tire recapping, engine rebuilding, auto dismantling, upholstering, auto glass work and such other activities of which the external effects could adversely extend beyond the property line. 
a.	The curb cuts for access to a service station shall not be permitted at such locations that will tend to create traffic hazards in the streets immediately adjacent thereto. Entrances shall be no less than 25 feet from a street intersection (measured from the road right-of-way) or from adjacent residential districts. 
b.	The minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet and so arranged that ample space is available for motor vehicles which are required to wait. Gasoline service stations which are intended solely for the sale of gasoline, oil and minor accessories and having no facilities for repair or servicing of automobiles (including lubricating facilities) may be permitted on lots of 10,000 square feet, subject to all other provisions required in this section. 
c.	Off-street loading and unloading space shall be provided in the ratio of at least ten square feet per front of building but may be located in any required yard notwithstanding section 46-477. 
(2)	Publicly owned buildings, public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electric transformer stations and substations, gas regulator stations with service yards but without storage yards, and water and sewage pumping stations. 
(3)	Residential occupancy of first (ground) floor: The first (ground) floor of a building may be used for residential, one family occupancy, providing the following conditions are met: 
a.	Each first floor dwelling unit shall have a separate, non-public entrance/exit into a non-public hallway with access onto the frontage street. 
b.	Exterior design and facade materials of the new or redeveloped residential building shall complement or be comparable to the facade plan of surrounding residential/commercial structures. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1003; Ord. No. 164, § 1, 11-27-2006)
Sec. 46-295. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See division 12 of this article, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements for the B-1 district. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1004)


Driveways for Gasoline Service Stations 
Secs. 46-296-46-320. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - B-2 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS 

Sec. 46-321. - Intent. 
    The B-2 general business districts are designed to provide sites for more diversified business types which would often be incompatible with the pedestrian movement in the B-1 community business district. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1100)
Sec. 46-322. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a B-2 general business district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)	Any use permitted in B-1 districts as principal uses permitted and uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
(2)	Farm equipment and machinery sales.
(3)	Dancehall or catering hall when completely enclosed in a building.
(4)	Auto wash when completely enclosed in a building.
(5)	Tire, battery and accessory sales.
(6)	Bus passenger stations.
(7)	Retail sales of plant materials, lawn furniture, playground equipment and other house or garden supplies. 
(8)	Laundry and dry cleaning establishments performing their operation on the site.
(9)	Lawn mower sales or service.
(10)	New and used car salesroom, showroom or office.
(11)	Carryout restaurant.
(12)	Publicly owned buildings, telephone exchange buildings and public utility offices, but not including storage yards, transformer stations, substations or gas regulator stations. 
(13)	Other uses similar to the uses of this section.
(14)	Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the permitted uses of this section.
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1101)
Sec. 46-323. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in the B-2 district, subject to the conditions imposed in this section for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission: 
(1)	Outdoor sales space for exclusive sale of new or secondhand automobiles, mobile homes, or rental of trailers, or automobiles, all subject to the following: 
a.	The lot or area shall be provided with a permanent, durable and dustless surface and shall be graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulated within the area. 
b.	Access to the outdoor sales area shall be at least 60 feet from the intersection of any two streets. 
c.	No major repair or major refinishing shall be done on the lot.
d.	All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts.
(2)	Business in the character of a drive-in, (including restaurants) drive-through or open front store, subject to the following conditions: 
a.	A setback of at least 60 feet from the right-of-way line of any existing or proposed street must be maintained. 
b.	Access points shall be located at least 60 feet from the intersection of any two streets.
c.	All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts.
d.	A five-foot high completely obscuring wall shall be provided when abutting or adjacent districts are zoned for any R district, MH, OS-1, B-1 or B-2 district. Such wall shall meet the requirements of article IV of this chapter, supplementary regulations. 
(3)	Veterinary hospitals or clinics, provided that all activities are conducted within a totally enclosed main building and provided further that all buildings are set back at least 200 feet from abutting residential districts on the same side of the street. 
(4)	Bowling alley, billiard hall, indoor archery range, indoor tennis courts, indoor skating rink, or similar forms of indoor commercial recreation when located at least 100 feet from any front, rear or side yard of any residential lot in an adjacent residential district. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1102)
Sec. 46-324. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See division 12 of this article, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements for the B-2 district. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1103)
Secs. 46-325-46-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 46-351. - Intent. 
    The I-1 light industrial districts are designed so as to primarily accommodate wholesale activities, warehouses and industrial operations of which the external, physical effects are restricted to the area of the district and in no manner affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding districts. The I-1 district is so structured as to permit, along with any specified uses, the manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, assembly or treatment of finished or semifinished products from previously prepared material. It is further intended that the processing of raw material for shipment in bulk form, to be used in an industrial operation at another location, not be permitted. The general goals of this I-1 use district include, among others, the following specific purposes: 
(1)	To provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations, to meet the needs of the village's expected future economy for all types of manufacturing and related uses. 
(2)	To protect abutting residential districts by separating them from manufacturing activities, and by prohibiting the use of such industrial areas for new residential development. 
(3)	To promote manufacturing development which is free from danger of fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation, and other hazards, and from offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odor and other objectionable influences. 
(4)	To protect the most desirable use of land in accordance with a well-considered plan. To protect the character and established pattern of adjacent development, and in each area to conserve the value of land and buildings and other structures, and to protect the village's tax revenue. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1200)
Sec. 46-352. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an I-1 light industrial district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)	Any use charged with the principal function of basic research, design and pilot or experimental product development when conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
(2)	Any of the uses in this subsection (2) when the manufacturing, compounding or processing is conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building. That portion of the land used for open storage facilities for materials or equipment used in the manufacturing, compounding or processing shall be totally obscured by a wall on those sides abutting RA, RB, RC, OS-1, B-1 and B-2 districts, and on any front yard abutting a public thoroughfare except as otherwise provided in section 46-483. In I-1 districts, the extent of such a wall may be determined by the planning commission on the basis of usage. Such a wall shall not be less than four feet, six inches, in height and may, depending upon land usage, be required to be eight feet in height and shall be subject further to the requirements of article IV of this chapter, supplementary regulations. A chainlink fence, with intense evergreen shrub planting, shall be considered an obscuring wall. The height shall be determined in the same manner as the wall height as set forth in this section. 
a.	Warehousing and wholesale establishments, and trucking facilities.
b.	The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, or treatment of such products as, but not limited to, bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, toiletries, food products, hardware and cutlery, tool, die, gauge and machine shops. 
c.	The manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles or merchandise from previously prepared materials: bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, elastomers, feathers, felt, fibre, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, rubber, precious or semiprecious metals or stones, sheetmetal, shell, textiles, tobacco, wax, wire, wood and yarns. 
d.	The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by electricity or gas. 
e.	The manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties and metal or rubber stamps, or other molded rubber products. 
f.	The manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, radios and phonographs. 
g.	Laboratories: experimental, film or testing.
h.	The manufacture and repair of electric or neon signs, light sheetmetal products, including heating and ventilating equipment, cornices, eaves and the like. 
i.	Central dry cleaning plants or laundries, provided that such plants shall not deal directly with the consumer at retail. 
j.	All public utilities, including buildings, necessary structures, storage yards and other related uses. 
(3)	Warehouse, storage and transfer and electric and gas service buildings and yards; public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electrical transformer stations and substations, and gas regulator stations; water supply and sewage disposal plants; water and gas tank holders; railroad transfer and storage tracts; railroad rights-of-way; and freight terminals. 
(4)	Storage facilities for building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber, storage of contractor's equipment and supplies, provided that such is enclosed within a building or within an obscuring wall or fence on those sides abutting all residential, office or business districts, and on any yard abutting a public thoroughfare. In any I-1 district, the extent of such fence or wall may be determined by the planning commission on the basis of usage. Such fence or wall shall not be less than six feet in height and may, depending on land usage, be required to be eight feet in height. A chainlink type fence with heavy evergreen shrubbery inside of such fence shall be considered to be an obscuring fence. 
(5)	Municipal uses such as water treatment plants and reservoirs, sewage treatment plants, and all other municipal buildings and uses, including outdoor storage. 
(6)	Commercial kennels.
(7)	Greenhouses.
(8)	Trade or industrial schools.
(9)	Freestanding nonaccessory signs.
(10)	Indoor tennis or racquet court facilities, indoor ice or roller skating arenas, and other similar uses which require large structures such as are normally found in industrial districts. 
(11)	Other uses of a similar and no more objectionable character to the uses of this section.
(12)	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the permitted uses of this section. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1201)
Sec. 46-353. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in the I-1 District, subject to the conditions imposed in this section for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission: 
(1)	Auto engine and body repair, and undercoating shops when completely enclosed.
(2)	Retail uses which have an industrial character in terms of either their outdoor storage requirements or activities (such as, but not limited to, lumberyard, building materials outlet, upholsterer, cabinet maker, outdoor sales of boats, mobile homes, automobile garages or agricultural implements). 
(3)	Outdoor storage of trucks, recreation vehicles, boats or automobiles, subject to the following conditions: 
a.	Any abutting residential district shall be screened by a six-foot to eight-foot high wall or berm as provided in section 46-483. 
b.	Any vehicles having engines, such as refrigeration units, that will be operated overnight or between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall not be located within 300 feet of any residential district. 
(4)	Uses not expressly permitted by village ordinances are prohibited. Uses for enterprises or purposes that are contrary to federal, state or local laws or ordinances are prohibited. Waivers are prohibited unless it is reviewed and findings submitted by the village planning commission and approved by the village council. 
(5)	Other uses of a similar character to the uses of this section.
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1202; Ord. No. 159, § 2, 7-25-2005; Motion No. 2010.09.27-09) 
Sec. 46-354. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See division 12 of this article, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements for the I-1 district. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1203)
Secs. 46-355-46-380. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 46-381. - Intent. 
    The I-2 general industrial districts are designed primarily for manufacturing, assembling and fabrication activities including large scale or specialized industrial operations of which the external physical effects will be felt to some degree by surrounding districts. The I-2 district is so structured as to permit the manufacturing, processing and compounding of semifinished or finished products from raw materials as well as from previously prepared material. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1300)
Sec. 46-382. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an I-2 general industrial district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)	Any principal use first permitted in an I-1 district.
(2)	Heating and electric power generating plants.
(3)	Any of the following production or manufacturing uses (not including storage of finished products), provided that they are located not less than 800 feet distant from any residential district and not less than 300 feet distant from any other district: 
a.	Incineration of garbage or refuse when conducted within an approved and enclosed incinerator plant. 
b.	Blast furnace, steel furnace, blooming or rolling mill.
c.	Manufacture of corrosive acid or alkali, cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris.
d.	Petroleum or other inflammable liquids, production, refining or storage.
e.	Smelting of copper, iron or zinc ore.
(4)	Lumber and planing mills when completely enclosed and when located in the interior of the district so that no property line shall form the exterior boundary of the I-1 district. 
(5)	Metal plating, buffing and polishing, subject to appropriate measures to control the type of process to prevent noxious results and/or nuisances. 
(6)	Any other use which shall be determined by the planning commission, to be of the same general character as the permitted uses in this section. In granting special approval for such use, the planning commission may impose setback or performance standards so as to ensure public health, safety and general welfare. 
(7)	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the permitted uses of this section. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1301)
Sec. 46-383. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See division 12 of this article, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements for the I-2 district. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1302)
Secs. 46-384-46-400. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - P-1 VEHICULAR PARKING DISTRICTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Stopping, stranding and parking, § 38-71 et seq.

Sec. 46-401. - Intent. 
    The P-1 vehicular parking districts are intended to permit the establishment of areas to be used solely for off-street parking of private passenger vehicles as a use incidental to a principal use. This P-1 district will generally be provided by petition or request to serve a use district which has developed without adequate off-street parking facilities. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1400)
Sec. 46-402. - Principal uses permitted. 
    Premises in such P-1 districts shall be used only for an off-street vehicular parking area and shall be developed and maintained subject to such regulations as are provided in this division. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1401)
Sec. 46-403. - Required conditions. 
    Required conditions in the P-1 district are as follows: 
(1)	The parking area shall be accessory to and for use in connection with one or more businesses, or industrial establishments, located in adjoining business or industrial districts, or in connection with one or more existing professional or institutional office buildings or institutions. 
(2)	Such parking lots shall be contiguous to an RC or nonresidential district. Parking areas may be approved when adjacent to such districts, or on the end of a block where such areas front on a street which is perpendicular to that street servicing the district. There may be a private driveway or public street or public alley between such P-1 district and such other districts listed in this section. 
(3)	Parking area shall be used solely for parking of private passenger vehicles for periods of less than one day. 
(4)	No commercial repair work or service of any kind, or sale or display thereof, shall be conducted in such parking area. 
(5)	No signs of any kind, other than signs designating entrances, exits and conditions of use, shall be maintained on such parking area. 
(6)	No buildings other than those for shelter or attendants shall be erected upon the premises and they shall not exceed 15 feet in height. 
(7)	Applications for P-1 district rezoning shall be made by submitting a dimensional layout of the area requested showing the intended parking plans in accordance with sections 46-476 and 46-485. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1402)
Sec. 46-404. - Minimum distances and setbacks. 
(a)	Side and rear yards. Where the P-1 district is contiguous to the side or rear lot lines of premises within a residentially zoned district, the required wall shall be located along such lot line. 
(b)	Front yards. Where the P-1 district has a common boundary with a residential district and the districts have frontage on the same street, a setback from the street shall be required which is equal in depth to the required front yard setback of the adjacent residential district, or 25 feet, whichever is greater. The required wall shall be located on this minimum setback line unless, under unusual circumstances, the planning commission finds that no good purpose would be served. The land between such setback and street right-of-way line shall be kept free from refuse and debris and shall be planted with shrubs, trees or lawn and shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1403)
Sec. 46-405. - Parking; space layout; standards; construction and maintenance. 
    P-1 vehicular parking districts shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of article IV of this chapter, supplementary regulations. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1404)
Secs. 46-406-46-430. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS 

Sec. 46-431. - Schedule limiting height, bulk, density and area by zoning district. 
Minimum Zoning Lot Size Per UnitMinimum Height of StructuresMinimum Yard Setback (Per Lot In Feet)Minimum Floor Area Per UnitMaximum Percent of Lot Area Covered (By All Buildings)Zoning DistrictArea In Square FeetWidth In FeetIn StoriesIn FeetFrontEach SideRearSquare FeetRA-1 one-family residential12,000(a)80(a)225 35(b) 10(b,c)35(b) 1,20035 percentRA-1B one-family residential12,000(a)80(a)225 35(b)10(b,c)35(b)1,00035 percentRA-2 one-family residential8,500(a)60(a)225 25(b) 6(b,c)35(b)85035 percentRB two-family residential4,00040225 25(b) 10(b,c)35(b)65030 percentRC multiple-family residential(d)(d)225 25 (e) 25(e,l) 25(e) 1BR-500
2BR-700
3BR-900
BR-110030 percentOS-1 office service3020(f)15(l) 20(h)B-1 community business30(f)(g,l)20(h)B-2 general business4030(f)(g,l)20(h)I-1 light industrial3050(j)20(i,k,l)40(h,k,l)I-2 general industrial40100(j)30(i,k,l)50(h,k,l) 
Notes to Schedule of Regulations: 
(a)	See section 46-432, averaged lot size, section 46-433, subdivision open space plan, section 46-434, zero lot line option, and section 46-435, site condominium option, regarding flexibility allowances. 
(b)	For all uses permitted other than one-family residential, the setback shall equal the height of the main building or the setback required in division 2 of article III of this chapter or section 46-431, whichever is greater. 
(c)	In the case of a rear yard abutting a side yard, the side yard setback abutting a street shall not be less than the minimum front yard setback of the district in which located and all regulations applicable to a front yard shall apply. 
(d)	The areas used for computing density shall be the total site area exclusive of any dedicated public right-of-way of roads located on the perimeter of the site. All units shall have at least one living room and one bedroom, except that not more than ten percent of the units may be of an efficiency apartment type. For the purpose of computing the permitted number of dwelling units per acre, the following lot area assignments shall control: 
Unit TypeLot Area/UnitEfficiency1,200 square feet1 bedroom2,400 square feet2 bedroom3,600 square feet3 bedroom4,800 square feet4 bedroom6,000 square feet 
Plans presented showing one or two bedroom units and including a den, library or other extra room shall count such extra room as a bedroom for the purpose of computing density. 
(e)	Where more than one building occupies a single zoning lot, the following building relationships shall be maintained: 
Building RelationshipsOverall
Distance
Between
BuildingsFront to front50 feetFront to side45 feetFront to rear60 feetRear to rear60 feetRear to side45 feetSide to side20 feetCorner to corner15 feet 
(e)	The front and rear of the multiple-family building shall be considered to be the distance along the longest dimension of said building. The builder may designate the front and rear of the structures. The depth of any yard shall be increased by one foot for each ten feet or part thereof, by which the length of any main building exceeds 40 feet in overall dimension along the adjoining lot line. No building shall exceed 180 feet in length. The depth of any court shall not be greater than three times the width. 
(f)	Off-street parking shall be permitted to occupy a portion of the required front yard provided that there shall be maintained a minimum unobstructed and landscaped setback of ten feet between the nearest point of the off-street parking area, exclusive of access driveways, and the nearest street right-of-way. 
(g)	No side yards are required along the interior side lot lines of the district, except as otherwise specified in the building code, provided that if walls of structures facing such interior side lot lines contain windows, or other openings, side yards of not less than ten feet shall be provided. On a corner lot which has a common lot line with a residential district, there shall be provided a setback of 20 feet on the side or residential street. Where a lot borders on a residential district or a street, there shall be provided a setback of not less than ten feet on the side bordering the residential district or street. 
(h)	See section 46-477, off-street loading and unloading. 
(i)	Off-street parking shall be permitted in a required side yard setback.
(j)	Off-street parking for visitors, over and above the number of spaces required under section 46-475, may be permitted within the required front yard, provided that such off-street parking is not located within 20 feet of the front lot line and provided that the number of such spaces does not equal more than ten percent of the total number of spaces required. 
(k)	No building shall be located closer than 50 feet or the height of the building, whichever is the greater to the outer perimeter (property line) of such district when such property line abuts any residential district. 
(l)	All storage shall be in the rear yard and shall be completely screened with an obscuring wall or fence, not less than six feet high, or with a chainlink type fence and a greenbelt planting so as to obscure all view from any adjacent residential, office or business district or from a public street. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1500; Ord. No. 130, § 5, 1-26-1993; Ord. No. 154, § 1, 2-24-2003)


Side Yards Abutting a Street 
Sec. 46-432. - Averaged lot size. 
    The intent of this section is to permit the subdivider or developer to vary lot sizes and lot widths so as to average the minimum size of lot per unit as required in this division for each one-family residential district. If this option is selected, the following conditions shall be met: 
(1)	In meeting the average minimum lot size, the subdivision shall be so designed as not to create lots having an area or width greater than ten percent below that area or width required in this division and shall not create an attendant increase in the number of lots. 
(2)	Each final plat submitted as part of a preliminary plat shall average the minimum required for the district in which it is located. 
(3)	All computations showing lot area and the average resulting through this technique shall be indicated on the print of the preliminary plat. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1501)
Sec. 46-433. - Subdivision open space plan. 
(a)	The intent of the subdivision open space plan is to promote the following objectives:
(1)	Provide a more desirable living environment by preserving the natural character of open fields, stands of trees, brooks, hills and similar natural assets. 
(2)	Encourage a more creative approach in the development of residential areas.
(3)	Bypass natural obstacles on the site resulting in a reduction of development costs and to encourage a more efficient, aesthetic and desirable use of open area. 
(4)	Encourage the provision of open space within reasonable distance to all lot development of the subdivision and to further encourage the development of recreational facilities. 
(b)	Modifications to the standards as outlined in this division may be made in the one-family residential districts when the following conditions are met: 
(1)	The lot area in all one-family residential districts, which are served by a public sanitary sewer system, may be reduced up to 20 percent. In the RA-2 district, this reduction may be accomplished in part by reducing lot widths up to six feet. In the RA-1 districts, this reduction may be accomplished in part by reducing lot widths up to ten feet. These lot area reductions shall be permitted, provided that the dwelling unit density shall be not greater than if the land area to be subdivided were developed in the minimum square foot lot areas as required for each one-family district under this division. All calculations shall be predicated upon the one-family districts having the following gross densities (including roads): 
RA-1 equals 2.7 dwelling units per acre 
RA-1B equals 2.7 dwelling units per acre 
RA-2 equals 3.8 dwelling units per acre 
(2)	Rear yards may be reduced to 30 feet when such lots border on land dedicated for park, recreation, and/or open space purposes, provided that the width of such dedicated land shall not be less than 100 feet measured at the point at which it abuts the rear yard of the adjacent lot. 
(3)	Under the provisions of subsection (b)(1) of this section, for each square foot of land gained within a residential subdivision through the reduction of lot size below the minimum requirements as outlined in this division, at least equal amounts of land shall be dedicated to the common use of the lot owners of the subdivision in a manner approved by the village or the land may be dedicated to the village. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1502; Ord. No. 130, § 6, 1-26-1993)
Sec. 46-434. - Zero lot line option. 
    The intent of this section is to permit one-family detached housing to be located on an interior side lot line if compensating space is located within the side yard of an abutting lot and a maintenance easement is provided. This section shall be applicable only to lots meeting the area and width requirements of section 46-431. 
(1)	Any interior side yard may be reduced to zero, provided that the remaining side yard equals 20 feet in the RA-1 or RA-1B district and 12 feet in the RA-2 district. Where a zero side yard setback is used, the abutting property must be held under the same ownership at the time a zoning compliance permit is issued or the owners of the abutting property must record an agreement or deed restriction acceptable to the village council consenting to such zero setback. 
(2)	A separation of ten feet in the RA-1 or RA-1B district and six feet in the RA-2 district shall be provided between structures on abutting lots where a zero side yard is utilized. 
(3)	For the purpose of upkeep and repair of structures located on an interior property line, a maintenance easement shall be recorded between the owner of the property containing such structure and the owner of the property upon which entry must take place in order to perform maintenance activities. Such easement shall be an irrevocable covenant and shall run with the land and be acceptable to the village council. Proof that such easement is recorded shall be submitted to the zoning administrator prior to issuance of a zoning compliance permit. Such easement shall be wide enough to provide the minimum separation required in subsection (2) of this section. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1503)
Sec. 46-435. - Site condominium option. 
(a)	The site condominium option is intended to provide for the division of land as regulated by the condominium act, Public Act No. 59 of 1978 (MCL 559.101 et seq.) rather than the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.). In accordance with section 141 of Public Act No. 59 (MCL 559.241), it is further intended that site condominiums are treated similarly to a subdivision developed under the land division act and that the same standards are applied in their design layout and improvements. If this option is selected, the following stipulations are applicable: 
(1)	This division limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum lot sizes and yard requirements shall be applicable as permitted in each zoning district or as otherwise altered within this section. 
(2)	Any development which utilizes the site condominium option shall conform to the requirements of the village subdivision regulations, article II of chapter 18. 
(3)	Other options as defined and regulated by sections 46-432, 46-433 and 46-434 can be used in conjunction with this section. 
(4)	Setbacks shall be provided for each building envelope equal to the minimum setback requirements of the zoning district and shall be measured as specified as follows: 
a.	Front setbacks shall be measured from the street right-of-way for public or private streets, and from the pavement edge for streets not having a right-of-way. In instances where there is no right-of-way, the setback shall be increased by 15 feet. 
b.	Rear setbacks shall be measured from the rear lot line to the rear building envelope line. 
c.	Side setbacks shall be measured from the side area lot line to the side building envelope line. 
(5)	In the instance in which building plans are available, setbacks will be measured to the actual building rather than to the building envelope. If this alternative is used, building floor plans and elevations must be submitted and a building footprint must be shown on the site plans. The planning commission may request that several different facades be used to provide a variety of building appearances. 
(6)	Plans for the development and landscaping of all commons areas must be submitted in accordance with section 46-478, plant materials. 
(7)	All streets shall be dedicated to the public unless private streets are allowed by the planning commission. In considering the approval of private streets at least, the following criteria will be considered: 
a.	If the site is oddly shaped and the right-of-way required for public streets would create an impractical situation, i.e., double frontage lots, single loaded frontage. 
b.	If the site contains natural features that could be better preserved through the use of private streets. 
c.	The use of private streets would not prevent the interconnection of existing or planned public streets. 
d.	Construction standards for private streets must meet or exceed village standards.
(b)	These criteria are included as guidelines and do not exclude further considerations.
(c)	The means of maintaining all limited and general commons areas shall be specified in the master deed. 
(d)	A copy of the master deed shall be submitted for review and acceptance by the village attorney prior to final plan approval. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1504; Ord. No. 130, § 7, 1-26-1993)
Secs. 46-436-46-470. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 

Sec. 46-471. - Conflicting regulations. 
    Whenever any provision of this chapter imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other law or ordinance, then the provisions of this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other law or ordinance impose more stringent requirements than are imposed or required by this chapter, then the provisions of such ordinance shall govern. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1600)
Sec. 46-472. - Scope of chapter. 
    No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected, constructed or altered and maintained, and no new use or change shall be made or maintained of any building, structure or land, or part thereof, except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1601)
Sec. 46-473. - Nonconforming lots, uses of land, structures, and uses of structures and premises. 
(a)	Intent. It is the intent of this chapter to permit legal nonconforming lots, structures or uses to continue until they are removed but not to encourage their survival. It is recognized that there exists within the districts established by this chapter and subsequent amendments, lots, structures and uses of land and structures which were lawful before this chapter was passed or amended which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future amendments. Such uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this chapter that nonconforming uses shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this chapter by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by addition of other uses of a nature which would not be permitted generally in the district involved. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and upon which actual building construction has been diligently carried on. Actual construction is defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner; except that where demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction provided that work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building involved. 
(b)	Nonconforming lots. In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. This subsection shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district; provided, however, that yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Yard requirement variances may be obtained through approval of the board of appeals. 
(c)	Nonconforming uses of land without buildings. Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this chapter, as enacted or amended, such use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)	No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(2)	No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(3)	If such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than 90 days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land is located. 
(d)	Nonconforming structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived that could not be built under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)	No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity. Such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which does not increase its nonconformity. 
(2)	Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 60 percent of its replacement costs, exclusive of the foundation, it shall be reconstructed only in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)	Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
(e)	Nonconforming uses of structures and land. If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and land in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, that would not be permitted in the district under the terms of this chapter, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)	No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. 
(2)	Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use, and which existed at the time of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
(3)	If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and land in combination, may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or a more restricted classification, provided that the board of appeals, either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the board of appeals may require conditions and safeguards in accord with the purpose and intent of this chapter. Where a nonconforming use of a structure, land, or structure and land in combination is hereafter changed to a more conforming use, it shall not thereafter be changed to a less conforming use. 
(4)	Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. 
(5)	When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and land in combination, is discontinued or ceases to exist for six consecutive months or for 18 months during any three-year period, the structure, or structure and land in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located. Structures occupied by seasonal uses shall be excepted from this subsection. 
(6)	Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. 
(f)	Repairs and maintenance. On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent not exceeding 50 percent of the assessed value of the building, provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this chapter shall not be increased. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. 
(g)	Uses under exception provisions not nonconforming uses. Any use for which a special exception is permitted as provided in this chapter shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall, without further action, be deemed a conforming use in such district. 
(h)	Change of tenancy or ownership. There may be a change of tenancy, ownership or management of any existing nonconforming uses of land, of structures or of structures and land in combination. 
(i)	Acquisition of uses or structures. The village council may acquire, by purchase, condemnation or otherwise, private property or an interest in private property for the removal of nonconforming uses or structures all in accordance with the applicable provisions of Public Act No. 207 of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq.), as amended. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1602)
Sec. 46-474. - Accessory buildings and structures. 
    Accessory buildings or structures shall be subject to the following regulations, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)	Accessory buildings or structures located in any use district shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.	Where an accessory building or structure is structurally attached to a main building, it shall be subject to, and must conform to, all regulations of this chapter applicable to the main building. 
b.	Accessory buildings or structures shall not be erected in any minimum side yard setback nor in any front yard. 
c.	No detached accessory building shall be located closer than ten feet to any main building nor shall it be located closer than three feet to any side or rear lot line. 
d.	A detached accessory building shall not be located within one foot of an alley right-of-way. In no instance shall an accessory building or structure be located within a dedicated easement right-of-way. 
e.	See section 46-475 and section 46-476 regarding accessory off-street parking. 
f.	See section 46-477 regarding accessory off-street loading and unloading. 
g.	See section 46-479 regarding accessory signs. 
h.	Antenna structures for radio or television reception may be permitted as accessory to the principal use subject to the following additional conditions: 
1.	Ground-mounted antenna structures shall be subject to the following conditions:
i.	Antennas made of solid materials shall be effectively screened from view from residential districts or public streets by natural plants, trees or other suitable sight barrier provided that it does not interfere with the reception "window" of the antenna. 
ii.	Temporary or demonstration installations shall be permitted for not more than 14 days.
2.	Roof-mounted antennas shall be subject to the following requirements:
i.	The antenna shall be located on that portion of the roof that is adjacent to the rear yard. 
ii.	An antenna may exceed the height limit of the district by three feet, provided that the portion extending above the height limit does not exceed ten square feet in area. 
3.	Antennas may be located on another portion of the roof or may exceed the height permitted or may be located in a side yard setback upon approval as a special exception by the zoning board of appeals, provided that the applicant submits documentation that such location or height is necessary for reasonable reception. 
(2)	Accessory buildings or structures located in any RA, RB or MH district shall be subject to the following regulations: 
a.	Detached accessory buildings shall not exceed 14 feet in height and shall occupy not more than 25 percent of a rear yard setback nor more than 40 percent of any rear yard in excess of the rear yard setback. Accessory structures located within the rear yard setback shall not exceed 14 feet in height. 
b.	In no instance shall the combined floor area of detached accessory buildings exceed the ground floor area of the main building. 
c.	In order to permit solar energy collecting devices in instances where the percentage of lot coverage limitations would be exceeded, the percentage lot coverage of lots occupied by a residential structure prior to the effective date of this amendment (April 6, 1988) may be increased to the following amounts stated if the purpose is to add solar energy collectors: 
1.	Thirty percent of a rear yard setback.
2.	Fifty percent of any rear yard in excess of a rear yard setback.
3.	Lot coverage of solar devices shall be excluded from computation of accessory floor area to the total ground floor area of the main building. 
d.	When an accessory building or structure is located on a corner lot, the side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot to its rear, such building or structure shall not be located within a setback which is equal to the front yard setback required of the lot to the rear of such corner lot. In no instance shall an accessory building or structure be located within ten feet of a street right-of-way line. 
e.	See section 46-484 regarding accessory residential fences. 
f.	Ground-mounted antenna structures shall not exceed 125 square feet in area.
(3)	Accessory buildings or structures located in any district or portion of a district, other than those included under subsection (2) of this section, shall be subject to the following regulations: 
a.	No detached accessory building in RC, OS-1 or B-1 districts shall exceed 14 feet in height unless adhering to all requirements of a main building. 
b.	On any corner lot or through lot, the setback requirements for main buildings from a street shall be applicable to accessory buildings or structures, unless otherwise provided. 
c.	Structures which support lighting fixtures, other than signs, may be permitted in any yard where off-street parking lots are permitted. 
d.	Dumpsters may be permitted as accessory to any use, other than one-family or two-family residential, provided that the dumpster is located in a rear yard or interior side yard and is clearly accessible to servicing vehicles. 
(4)	Accessory buildings and structures located in any RA, RB or MH district shall include recreational equipment and shall be subject to the following regulations: 
a.	Recreational equipment shall include, but is limited to, the following:
1.	Boats, large size floats and rafts, and boat trailers or similar transport vehicles.
2.	Folding tent trailers, pop-up trailers, and similar types of vehicles that are convertible in nature, mounted on wheels and intended for travel and vacation use. 
3.	Pickup campers, travel trailers, fifth wheelers, pull-behinds and similar vehicles designed primarily to be mounted on a pickup truck or truck chassis, and intended for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation use. 
4.	Utility trailers or similar vehicles which are used to transport motorcycles, snowmobiles, go-carts, stock cars, or similar recreational vehicles. 
5.	Motorized homes or similar vehicles which are used as portable dwellings and are designed and constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle. 
6.	Motorized off-road vehicles, including but not limited to motorcycles, snowmobiles, go-carts and stock cars, which are not licensed for general operation on public roadways. 
b.	The storage of recreational equipment shall not be permitted on any public street or public right-of-way. 
c.	Recreational equipment shall only be parked or stored within the confines of the rear yard and shall further respect any requirements related to distances from principal structures, lot lines and easements. 
d.	Recreational equipment may be temporarily parked, for purposes of loading, unloading and travel preparation, in any front yard setback area for a period not to exceed 14 continuous days. A new 14-day period does not commence until the recreational equipment has been absent from the front yard setback area for a period of at least 48 consecutive hours. 
e.	Recreational equipment may be parked or stored in that part of the side yard that is not a part of the required front yard setback, provided the recreational equipment is no closer than three feet to any principal structure and provided that such recreational equipment is adequately screened from view of adjacent property or public roadways. 
f.	No person shall permanently occupy, reside or live in any recreational equipment parked or stored upon any property within the village. However, recreational equipment may be used for temporary occupancy purposes for a period not to exceed 14 consecutive days. A new 14-day period does not commence until the recreational equipment has been unoccupied for a period of at least seven consecutive days. 
g.	No owner of recreational equipment, nor any property owner where the recreational equipment is parked or stored shall permit any recreational equipment to hook, attach or connect to sanitary facility service leads or connections, whether such connection is permanent or temporary. 
h.	Recreational equipment that is parked or stored within the village shall be kept in good repair and carry license plates and registration. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1603; Ord. No. 148, § 1, 2-6-2002)
Sec. 46-475. - Off-street parking requirements. 
    There shall be provided in all districts except the B-1 community business district, at the time of erection or enlargement of any main building or structure, automobile off-street parking space with adequate access to all spaces. The provision of such spaces may or may not be the responsibility of the village. The number of off-street parking spaces, in conjunction with all land or building uses, shall be provided prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, as prescribed in the following: 
(1)	Off-street parking spaces may be located within a rear yard or within a side yard which is in excess of the minimum side yard setback unless otherwise provided in this chapter. Required off-street parking spaces shall not be permitted within a minimum front yard setback nor within a minimum side yard setback unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(2)	Off-street parking for other than residential use shall be either on the same lot or within 300 feet of the building it is intended to serve, measured from the nearest point of the building to the nearest point of the off-street parking lot. Ownership shall be shown of all lots or parcels intended for use as parking by the applicant. 
(3)	Required residential off-street parking spaces shall consist of a parking strip, parking bay, driveway, garage or combination thereof and shall be located on the premises they are intended to serve, and subject to the provisions of section 46-474, accessory buildings and structures. 
(4)	Minimum required off-street parking spaces shall not be replaced by any other use unless and until equal facilities are provided elsewhere. 
(5)	Off-street parking existing at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, in connection with the operation of an existing building or use, shall not be reduced to an amount less than required in this section for a similar new building or new use. 
(6)	Two or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required off-street parking in which case the required number of parking spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the several individual uses computed separately. 
(7)	In the instance of dual function of off-street parking spaces where operating hours of buildings do not overlap, the board of appeals may grant an exception. 
(8)	The storage of merchandise, motor vehicles for sale, trucks, or the repair of vehicles is prohibited. 
(9)	For those uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be in accord with a use which the planning commission considers is similar in type. 
(10)	When units or measurements determining the number of required parking spaces result in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half shall be disregarded and fractions over one-half shall require one parking space. 
(11)	For the purpose of computing the number of parking spaces required, the definition of the term "usable floor area" in section 46-4 shall govern. 
_____ 
(12)	The minimum number of off-street parking spaces by type of use shall be determined in accordance with the following schedule: 
UseNumber of Minimum Parking Spaces Per Unit of Measurea.Residential. (1)ResidentialTwo for each dwelling unit.(2)Housing for the elderlyOne for each two units and one for each employee. Should units revert to general occupancy, then two spaces per unit shall be provided. (3)Mobile home parkTwo for each mobile home site and one for each three mobile homes for visitor parking.b.Institutional. (1)Churches or templesOne for each three seats or six feet of pew in the main unit of worship.(2)HospitalsOne for each one bed.(3)Homes for the aged and convalescent homesOne for each four beds.(4)Elementary and junior high schoolsOne for each one teacher, employee, or administrator, in addition to the requirements of the auditorium. (5)Senior high schoolsOne for each one teacher, employee, or administrator, and one for each ten students, in addition to the requirements of the auditorium. (6)Private clubs or lodge hallsOne for each 100 square feet of usable floor space.(7)Private golf clubs, swimming pool clubs, tennis clubs or other similar usesOne for each two-member families or individuals, plus spaces required for each accessory use such as a restaurant or bar. (8)Golf courses open to the general public, except miniature or "Par 3" coursesSix for each one golf hole andone for each one employee, plus spaces required for each accessory use such as a restaurant or bar. (9)Fraternity or sororityOne for each five permitted active members, or one for each two beds, whichever is greater. (10)Stadium, sports arena or similar place of outdoor assemblyOne for each three seats or six feet of benches.(11)Theaters and auditoriumsOne for each three seats, plus one for each two employees.c.Business and Commercial. (1)Retail stores except as otherwise specified in this sectionOne for each 150 square feet of usable floor space.(2)Auto wash (self-service or coin-operated)Five for each washing stall in addition to the stall itself.(3)Beauty parlor or barbershopThree spaces for each of the first two beauty or barber chairs, and 11/2 spaces for each additional chair. (4)Bowling alleysFive for each one bowling lane, plus parking for accessory uses.(5)Establishment for sale and consumption on the premises of beverages, food or refreshmentsOne for each 75 square feet of usable floor area.(6)Drive-in/fast food restaurantOne for each 50 square feet of usable floor area.(7)Carryout restaurantOne for each 25 square feet of usable floor area.(8)Furniture and appliance, household equipment, repair shops, showroom of a plumber, decorator, electrician, or similar trade, shoe repair, and other similar uses One for each 800 square feet of usable floor area. (For that floor area used in processing, one additional space shall be provided for each two persons employed therein.) (9)Laundromats and coin-operated dry cleanersOne for each two washing and/or drycleaning machines.(10)Mortuary establishmentsOne for each 50 square feet of usable floor space.(11)Motel, hotel or other commercial lodging establishmentsOne for each one occupancy unit, plus one for each one employee.(12)Gasoline service stationsThree spaces for each lubrication stall, rack, pit or similar service area and one-half space for each gasoline pump (nozzle). No spaces are required for "self-service" pumps. Additional parking shall be provided for any accessory retail use as required for such use. (13)Self-service gasoline stationsOne space, plus one space for each employee in the largest working shift; but not less than three spaces in any instance. Additional parking shall be provided for any accessory retail use as required for such use. (14)Billiard hall or pool hall, coin-operated amusement device arcadeOne space for each 50 square feet of usable floor area.(15)Dancehalls, catering hall, exhibition halls or assembly halls without fixed seatsOne space for each 45 square feet of usable floor area.(16)Indoor ice skating or roller skating rinksOne space for each three seats or six feet of benches, or one for each 50 square feet of skating area, whichever is greater. (17)Indoor tennis facilitiesSeven spaces for each tennis court, plus spaces required for each permitted accessory use. (18)Motor vehicle sales and service establishmentsOne space for each 200 square feet of usable floor space of salesroom and one space for each one auto service stall in the service room. (19)Miniature or "Par 3" golf coursesOne space for each one hole.d.Offices. (1)BanksOne space for each 150 square feet of usable floor area.(2)Business offices or professional offices, except as indicated in the following item (3) One space for each 210 square feet of usable floor area for the first 15,000 square feet, plus two additional spaces. (3)Professional offices of doctors, dentists and similar professionsOne space for each 100 square feet of usable floor area for the first 5,000 square feet of usable floor area. One space for each 115 square feet of usable floor area in excess of 5,000 square feet. e.Industrial. (1)Industrial or researchFive spaces, plus one space for every 11/2 employees in the largest work shift or five spaces, plus one space for each 500 square feet of usable floor area, whichever is greater. (2)Warehouses and wholesale establishments and related accessory officesFive spaces, plus one space for every one employee in the largest work shift, or five spaces plus one space for every 1,700 square feet of usable floor area, whichever is greater.  
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1604)
Cross reference- Stopping, standing and parking, § 38-71 et seq. 
_____
Sec. 46-476. - Off-street parking; space layout, standards, construction and maintenance. 
    Whenever the off-street parking requirements in section 46-475 require the building of an off-street parking facility, or where P-1 vehicular parking districts (division 11 of article III of this chapter) are provided, such off-street parking lots shall be laid out, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards and regulations: 
(1)	No parking lot shall be constructed unless and until a permit therefor is issued by the zoning administrator. Applications for a permit shall be submitted to the village administrator and shall be accompanied with two sets of site plans for the development and construction of the parking lot showing that the provisions of this section will be fully complied with. 
_____ 
(2)	Plans for the layout of off-street parking facilities shall be in accord with the following minimum requirements: 
Parking PatternManeuvering Lane WidthParking Space WidthParking Space LengthTotal Width of One Tier of Spaces, Plus Maneuvering LaneTotal Width of Two Tiers of Spaces, Plus Maneuvering Lane0 (parallel parking)12 feet8 feet23 feet20 feet28 feet30 to 5312 feet8 feet, 6 inches20 feet32 feet52 feet54 to 7415 feet8 feet, 6 inches20 feet36 feet, 6 inches58 feet75 to 9020 feet9 feet20 feet40 feet60 feet 
_____ 
(3)	All spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of maneuvering lanes. Backing directly onto a street shall be prohibited. 
(4)	Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot and to all parking spaces shall be provided for all vehicles by means of clearly limited and defined drives. 
(5)	Ingress and egress to a parking lot lying in an area zoned for other than single-family residential use shall not be across land zoned for single-family residential use. 
(6)	Maneuvering lanes serving angle parking shall permit only one-way traffic movement; lanes serving the 90-degree pattern may permit two-way movement. 
(7)	Each entrance to and exit from any off-street parking lot located in an area zoned for other than single-family residential use shall be at least 20 feet distant from adjacent property located in any one-family residential district. 


Parking Layouts 
(8)	The off-street parking area shall be provided with screening as required by section 46-483, walls and berms. 
(9)	Off-street parking lots, including parking spaces and maneuvering lanes required under this section, shall be provided with a durable and dustless surfacing in accordance with specifications approved by the village manager. 
(10)	Off-street parking lots shall be drained so as to dispose of all surface water accumulated in the parking area in such a way as to preclude drainage of water onto adjacent property or toward buildings. 
(11)	All lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall be installed in accordance with section 46-480, exterior lighting. 
(12)	In all cases where a wall extends to an alley which is a means of ingress and egress to an off-street parking lot, it shall be permissible to end the wall not more than ten feet from such alley line in order to permit a wider means of access to the parking lot. 
(13)	The planning commission, upon application by the property owner of the off-street parking area, may modify the yard or wall requirements where, in unusual circumstances, no good purpose would be served by compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1605)
Sec. 46-477. - Off-street loading and unloading. 
    On the same premises with every building or structure, or part thereof, involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles or materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, loading and unloading in order to avoid undue interference with the public use of dedicated rights-of-way. Such space shall be provided as follows: 
(1)	OS districts. Within any OS district, off-street loading space shall be provided as follows: 
a.	For office buildings of less than 100,000 square feet in gross floor area, at least one loading space, separate from off-street parking, shall be provided and may be located in any yard. Loading space shall have a dimension of at least nine feet by 20 feet. 
b.	For office buildings of 100,000 space feet in gross floor area or more, at least one loading space with a dimension of at least ten feet by 50 feet, or 500 square feet in area, with a clearance of at least 14 feet in height, in the rear or interior side yard only. 
(2)	B districts. Within any B district, off-street loading space shall be provided in the rear yard only and in the ratio of at least ten feet square feet per front foot of building. In exceptional instances, such space may be permitted in an interior side yard with approval of the zoning administrator or of the planning commission, provided that such location is necessitated by the site conditions and provided that the area is screened from view from any public street. 
(3)	I districts. Within an industrial district, off-street loading space shall be provided as follows: 
a.	All spaces shall be laid out in the dimension of at least ten feet by 50 feet, or 500 square feet in area, with a clearance of at least 14 feet in height. 
b.	Loading dock approaches shall be surfaced with asphaltic or concrete paving so as to provide a permanent, durable and dustless surface. 
c.	All spaces in I districts shall be provided in the following ratio of spaces to floor area: 
Gross Floor Area (in square feet)Loading and Unloading Space Required0-1,400None1,401-20,000One space20,001-100,000One space plus one space for each 20,000 square feet in excess of 20,001 square feet.100,001 and overFive spaces plus one space for each 40,000 square feet in excess of 100,001 square feet.  
d.	All spaces shall be provided off-street in the rear yard or interior side yard and shall in no instance be permitted in a front yard. In those instances where exterior side yards abut an industrial district across a public street, loading and unloading may take place in such exterior side yard when the setback is equal to at least 50 feet. 
(4)	Access. Access to the loading-unloading area shall be designed in such a manner as to allow trucks to enter and leave the loading area without having to back from or onto the public street. 
(5)	Alleys. Where a public alley exists or is provided at the rear of buildings, the loading requirements may be computed from the center of such alley. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1606)
Cross reference- Stopping, standing and parking, § 38-71 et seq. 
Sec. 46-478. - Plant materials. 
    Whenever in this chapter a greenbelt or planting is required, it shall be planted within six months from the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy and shall thereafter be reasonably maintained with permanent plant materials to provide a screen to abutting properties subject further to the requirements of the village ordinance, Ordinance No. 59. Suitable materials, equal in characteristics to the plant materials listed, shall be provided. 
_____
SUGGESTED PLANT MATERIALS 
Minimum SizeEvergreen Trees:Fir
Spruce
Douglas FirPine
Hemlock5 feet in heightNarrow Evergreen Trees:Red Cedar
ArborvitaeJunipers5 feet in heightLarge Deciduous Trees:Oaks
Hard Maples
Beech
LindensAsh
Ginkgo (male only)
Honey locust (seedless
and thornless varieties)
Birch21/2 inches in diameter,
1 foot above the groundSmall Deciduous Trees:Flowering Dogwood
Hawthorn
Redbud
Magnolia
Mountain AshHornbeam
Russian Olive
Flowering Crabapple
(disease resistant
varieties)2 inches in diameter,
1 foot above the groundLarge Shrubs:Deciduous:Honeysuckle
Lilac
Border Privet
Sumac
Buckthorn
Pyracantha
Flowering QuinceBarberry
Forsythia
Cotoneaster
(Peking, Spreading)
Sargent Crabapple
Dogwood (Red Osier,
Grey)30 inches in heightEvergreen:Irish Yew
Hicks Yew
Mugo PinePfitzer Juniper
Savin Juniper30 inches in heightSmall Shrubs:Deciduous:Compact Burning Bush
Regal Privet
Fragrant SumacJapanese Quince
Cotoneaster
(Cranberry, Rockspray)
Potentilla24-inches diameter spreadEvergreen:Spreading Yews
(Dense, Brown's
Ware, etc.)
Low Spreading Junipers
(Andora, Hughes,
Tamarack, etc.)Dwarf Mugo Pine
Big Leaf Wintercreeper24-inches diameter spread 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1607)
_____
Sec. 46-479. - Signs. 
(a)	Intent. The village finds that signs and other visual outdoor advertising tends to promote commerce and are related to the health, safety, and or general welfare of the residents of the village, and that the preservation of the existing character of the community requires regulation of signs and of other visual outdoor advertising. The village finds that failure to regulate the size, location, and construction of signs and other outdoor advertising may have an adverse effect upon the promotion of business and commerce in the village, may lead to poor identification of businesses, may have an adverse effect upon the existing aesthetic character of the village, and may cause deterioration of business and residential areas of the community. Therefore, the purpose of this section and subsections is to permit and regulate such signs and visual outdoor advertising of all types in all zoning districts. The regulation of outdoor signs is intended to enhance the physical appearance of the village, to preserve scenic and natural beauty and to create a climate that is attractive to business. It is further intended by the provisions of this chapter to improve traffic safety by avoiding sign distractions and the canceling out effect of conflicting overlapping signs. 
(b)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory sign means a sign, located on the premises which pertains to the principal use of the premises. 
    Awning and canopy sign mean a type of building sign that is painted, printed or otherwise attached directly to the surface of an awning. 
    Banner sign means a sign of fabric or similar nonrigid material with no enclosing framework, attached at all edges to a building or other structure. 
    Business center means any group of two or more commercial establishments having not less than 100 feet of frontage on a major street and which are under one common ownership or management, have a common arrangement for the maintenance of the grounds and are connected by party walls, partitions, covered canopies or other structural members to form one continuous structure; or share a common parking area. 
    Exterior building entrance means only those available for use by customers or patrons and does not include service or employee entrances. 
    Festoon sign means a sign where incandescent lightbulbs, banners or pennants or other such features are hung or strung overhead and are not an integral physical part of the buildings or structure they are intended to serve. 
    Flashing, animated or moving sign means a sign that intermittently reflects lights from either an artificial source or from the sun or sign which has movement of any illumination such as intermittent, flashing, scintillating or varying intensity or a sign that has any visible portion in motion, either constantly or at intervals, which motion may be caused by either artificial or natural sources. 
    Ground sign means a sign not attached to any building and supported by uprights or braces or some object on the ground and is a type of freestanding sign. 
    Height (for signs) means the distance from the ground to the highest point of the sign, including the sign frame. 
    Inflatable sign means a sign that is either expanded to its full dimension or supported by gases contained within the sign or sign parts at a pressure greater than atmospheric pressure. 
    Mural means a sign, that is a design and/or artwork that is painted, drawn, or attached in any form on the exterior building wall of a structure that does not promote a business, product, service or activity. 
    Nameplate means an accessory sign stating the name or street number of a person, firm, building or institution of a certain permitted use. 
    Nonaccessory sign means a sign which does not pertain to the principal use of the premises. 
    Painted wall sign means a sign painted directly on any exterior building wall or door surface, exclusive of window and door glass areas on any outside wall or roof or on glass of any building. 
    Political sign means a sign relating to the election of a person to public office or relating to a political party or relating to a matter to be voted upon at an election called by a public body. 
    Portable sign means a sign and sign structure which is designed to facilitate the movement of the sign from one zoning lot to another. The sign may or may not have wheels, changeable lettering and/or hitches for towing. 
    Projecting sign means a sign attached to a building or other structure and extending in whole or in part more than 12 inches beyond the surface of the portion of the building line or extending over public property. 
    Real estate development sign means a sign placed on the premises of a subdivision or other real estate development to indicate a proposed start or to inform relative to availability. 
    Real estate sign means a sign placed upon a property advertising that particular property for sale, rent or lease. 
    Sidewalk sign means a temporary freestanding sign, typically with an "A" or "T" frame. 
    Sign means the use of any words, numerals, figures, devices, designs or trademarks by which anything is made known such as to show an individual firm, profession, business, product or message and which are visible to the general public. 
    Sign area means the entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem or any figure of similar character, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display, excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is placed. Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign. 
    Snipe sign means a sign which is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued or otherwise attached to trees, poles, stakes, fences or to other objects and the advertising matter appearing thereon is not applicable to the present use of the premises upon which such sign is located. 
    Temporary sign means a sign not permanently anchored or secured to a structure or the ground. 
    Vehicle business sign means a vehicle upon which a sign is painted or attached and is parked or placed upon the owner's premises primarily for advertising purposes. 
    Wall sign means a sign erected or fastened to the wall of a building with the exposed face of the sign in a plane approximately parallel to the plane of such wall and not extending more than 12 inches beyond the surface of the portion of the building wall on which erected or fastened. For the purposes of this chapter, a sign affixed to a marquee, canopy, awning, or mansard roof projection from a facade shall be considered a wall sign and shall not project more than 12 inches beyond the projecting face of the structure. 
(c)	General provisions. The following conditions shall apply to all signs erected or located in any use district: 
(1)	Except for signs erected by the village, Elkland Township, the county, village public schools, or state or federal governments, no sign shall be located in, project into, or overhang a public right-of-way or dedicated public easement. Signs illegally located within a public right-of-way may be immediately removed by the zoning administrator without notice. 
(2)	Signs mounted on a building shall not project beyond or overhang the wall by more than 12 inches. Canopies and awnings located on the front and rear facades of buildings are excluded from this subsection. 
(3)	Signs shall not project above the cornice, wall facade, parapet or eave of the building to which it is affixed. Roof signs are not permitted. 
(4)	Signs shall be permitted in any required yard and for the purposes of determining required height and required setbacks, signs shall be exempt from other provisions of this chapter and the standards provided in this section shall apply. 
(5)	No sign shall be erected which simulates or imitates in size, color, lettering, or design any traffic sign or signal or other word, phrase, symbol or character in such a manner that, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, may interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic. 
(6)	Except for signs displaying stock market index information, time, or temperature, no illumination will be intermittent, oscillating or flashing. 
(7)	Accessory signs shall be permitted in any use district, subject to the requirements of this chapter. 
(8)	Nonaccessory signs shall be permitted only in the I-1 and I-2 industrial districts, subject to the requirements of this chapter. 
(9)	Wall signs may be placed upon the face of marquees, awnings or canopies. When canopies include a mansard roof, signs are permitted on the roof of the canopy, parallel to the face of the building, but in no instance projecting beyond the face of the mansard roof. 
(10)	All signs are subject to section 46-482, corner clearance. 
(11)	All signs shall be constructed in conformance with the following:
a.	The construction, support, and location of any sign shall in no way constitute a hazard to the safety of the public or to adjacent property, the provisions of this section notwithstanding. 
b.	Illuminated signs shall conform in all respects to the electrical codes of the county building codes. 
c.	All signs are subject to section 46-480, exterior lighting. 
d.	Signs using glass shall be constructed and located so as to pose no safety hazard if broken. 
e.	Signs and all necessary supports shall be constructed to withstand a horizontal force of 30 pounds per square foot applied to the sign display area. The manufacturer of any sign must provide documentation verifying that this requirement will be met prior to issuance of a permit. 
(12)	Temporary portable business advertising signs are intended for the promotion of a particular product, grand opening, announcement of service, management, or event, including signs used by churches, service clubs, and civic organizations for the promotion of charitable purposes and events. Temporary portable signs shall have a minimum setback of ten feet from any future street or road right-of-way line. They may be illuminated provided such lights are not flashing or intermittent and are not placed or designed such that they can be confused with traffic safety devices or highway signs. No portable sign shall be located in such a manner as to interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow or visibility. Temporary portable business advertising signs, not to exceed 32 square feet in surface display area per face, or 64 square feet if double faced, other than those specifically provided for, are allowed in any district with approval and issuance of a permit by the zoning administrator. Temporary portable signs may be allowed for up to four times, for no more than a total of 80 days, in any one calendar year. For the purposes of this section, a shopping center or other collective grouping of buildings shall have the same rights as an individual use. 
(d)	General exceptions. The following signs shall not require a permit: 
(1)	Temporary, accessory, real estate signs in residential districts, provided that such signs shall not exceed six square feet in area per sign face nor exceed 42 inches in height. Such signs shall be located on the property to be rented, leased or sold, and placed at least 15 feet from any road right-of-way or property line. Any such sign shall be removed within seven days after the consummation of the lease or sale transaction. 
(2)	Temporary, accessory, real estate signs in nonresidential districts, provided that such signs shall not exceed 15 square feet in area per sign face, nor exceed ten feet in height, and, if they are freestanding, such signs shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the nearest edge of existing pavement of adjacent streets. Any such sign shall be removed within seven days after the consummation of the lease or sale transaction. 
(3)	Temporary, off-premises real estate signs for the purpose of direction shall be permitted in any district provided that such sign shall not exceed six square feet in area per sign face. Such signs may be located off-premises between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. and only for two consecutive days and for two days each week. Such sign shall not have a height exceeding 42 inches. Permission to locate the subject sign shall be obtained from the owner or occupant of property on which the sign is located. Failure to comply with this condition shall be cause for immediate removal of such sign. 
(4)	Temporary seasonal decorations.
(5)	Signs erected by the village, Elkland Township, the county, village public schools, or state or federal governments, for any of the following: 
a.	Street identification, or general traffic control.
b.	Legal notices, identification, or informational signs.
c.	Signs or markers obtained from a state or federal agency identifying buildings or sites as having been designated as a centennial farm, historic landmark, a state historical site or as a site listed in the National Register of Historic Places. 
d.	Signs to identify public buildings or uses or to establish hours of activity or conditions of use. 
e.	Community event signs.
(6)	One accessory nonilluminated nameplate sign not exceeding one square foot in area shall be permitted in any district. 
(7)	Two on-premises, and one off-premises nonilluminated temporary ground sign pertaining to a garage sale, estate sale, or similar type of sale may be permitted in any residential district. Such signs shall not exceed four square feet in area, nor a height of 30 inches. No such sign shall be posted earlier than 24 hours prior to the sale. All signs shall display the dates of the sale and shall be removed within 24 hours after the sale. 
(8)	Accessory on-site directional signs, each with an area of not more than four square feet and a height of no more than three feet. 
(9)	Political signs not exceeding six square feet in area per sign face and not exceeding 42 inches in height, provided that such signs are removed within ten days after the election for which they were erected. No such sign shall be displayed on public land. All political signs shall have a minimum setback of 25 feet from the nearest edge of existing pavement of adjacent streets. 
(10)	Flags, not more than three per zoning lot and not more than four feet by six feet in dimension. 
(11)	Signs for essential services denoting utility lines, hazards and precautions.
(12)	Memorial signs which are either cut into the face of a masonry surface or constructed of bronze or other noncombustible material when located flat on the face of a building. 
(13)	Exterior banners and pennants are intended for the promotion of business and as such shall be for the purpose of advertising special events, product promotion, and changes in service. These signs do not require a permit; provided, however, that such business advertising signs shall be subject to the following criteria: 
a.	Banners and pennants shall be maintained in a neat and orderly fashion in recognition that they are intended as an enhancement for the promotion of the business community. 
b.	Banners will be changed with regularity and in keeping with the statement of subsection (d)(13)a of this section. 
c.	Banners shall not exceed ten percent of the total square foot area of a building facade.
d.	Banners and pennants shall not be located closer than ten feet from the future road or street right-of-way. No banner or pennant shall be located in such a manner as to interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow or visibility. 
e.	Banners and pennants shall only be allowed in the RC, OS-1, B-1, B-2, I-1 and I-2 zoning districts. 
(e)	Administration and enforcement. 
(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, reerect, alter or relocate any sign unless a permit shall have been first obtained from the zoning administrator, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(2)	Application for sign permits shall be made to the zoning administrator upon forms supplied by the village. 
(3)	The zoning administrator will review the sign for conformance to village standards and has the authority to approve or deny all sign applications in all zoning districts. In all instances, the zoning administrator may require review and approval by the planning commission. 
(4)	Applicants have the right to appeal any decision of the zoning administrator or planning commission to the zoning board of appeals in conformance with division 2, article II of this chapter, board of appeals. 
(5)	A fee schedule shall be set by the village council which shall be collected with each application for a sign permit, unless otherwise waived by the village council. 
(6)	All signs shall be inspected at original installation. Should any sign be found unsafe, insecure, improperly constructed or not in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, the erector and/or owner shall be required to make the sign safe, secure and otherwise in compliance with the requirements of this chapter within 30 days' notice. All signs for which a permit is required and all supports therefor shall be kept in compliance with the plans and specifications filed and approved for issuance of the sign permit and shall be kept and maintained in a safe condition. 
(7)	Signs determined to be unsafe and an immediate hazard to health or safety shall be removed or repaired at the owner's expense within 24 hours of notification by the village. If the sign is not removed or the violations corrected within the allotted time period, the sign shall be deemed a public nuisance and the zoning administrator may take such action as is necessary to have the sign removed. 
(f)	Signs in the RA-1, RA-1B, RA-2, RB, RC and MH districts. In the RA-1 RA-1B, RA-2, RB, RC and MH districts, signs shall be permitted subject to the following: 
(1)	One ground sign identifying a subdivision or multiple-family housing development subject to the following: 
a.	A maximum area of 32 square feet. 
b.	A maximum height of six feet.
c.	A minimum setback of ten feet from the future road right-of-way (as shown in the village master plan) of any existing road and a setback of ten feet from the right-of-way of any existing or approved road. 
d.	Such signs are to be maintained by the developer until all lots are sold and development is complete, at which time it will be deeded to the village for future care. 
(2)	One temporary sign for a new residential development, advertising the sale or lease of lots, buildings or units within such development subject to the following: 
a.	A maximum area of 32 square feet. 
b.	A maximum height of six feet.
c.	A minimum setback of 20 feet from the future right-of-way (as shown in the village master plan) of any existing road and a setback of ten feet from the right-of-way of any existing or approved road. 
d.	Such signs shall be allowed on a temporary basis for a period not to exceed two years. However, the planning commission shall have authority to grant authorization to continue such signs for a reasonable period thereafter, upon a showing that a substantial number of lots, buildings or units remain vacant. 
(3)	Nonresidential uses permitted in the district such as offices, hospitals, churches and schools shall be allowed the following signs: 
a.	One sign subject to the following:
1.	A maximum area of 18 square feet.
2.	A maximum height of six feet.
3.	A minimum setback of 20 feet from any future road right-of-way.
b.	One nonilluminated wall sign not to exceed 50 square feet and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building. 
(4)	Accessory buildings in the RC and MH districts, such as rental and/or management offices, may be permitted one identification sign subject to the following: 
a.	A maximum area of six square feet.
b.	Ground signs are limited to a height of four feet.
c.	Wall signs are limited to a height of ten feet.
d.	A minimum setback of 20 feet from any future road right-of-way.
(5)	Accessory signs may be permitted in the RC district for hospitals and clinics, such as directional signs for emergency and medical services, parking, and other such purposes. 
(6)	Home occupations and bed and breakfast establishments shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter as stated in section 46-153, principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
(g)	OS-1 districts. In the OS-1 districts, signs shall be permitted subject to the following: 
(1)	One nameplate sign for each exterior building entrance shall be permitted. Such sign shall not exceed six square feet in area. 
(2)	One ground sign for each zoning lot, subject to the following:
a.	A maximum area of 18 square feet.
b.	A maximum height of six feet.
c.	A minimum setback of ten feet from any future road right-of-way.
d.	A minimum setback of 100 feet to any adjacent residential district.
(3)	For each use occupying a building, one wall sign, each with a maximum of 18 square feet, shall be permitted. 
(h)	B-1 districts. In the B-1 districts, signs shall be permitted subject to the following: 
(1)	One nameplate sign for each exterior building entrance shall be permitted. Such sign shall not exceed four square feet in area. 
(2)	Wall signs shall be permitted subject to the following:
a.	For each zoning lot, one wall sign shall be permitted on each building facade that fronts on an adjacent street. Such signs shall be limited in area to 100 square feet. 
b.	For each zoning lot, one wall sign shall be permitted on each building facade that fronts on an adjacent alley. Such signs shall not exceed 15 square feet in area. 
c.	The total area of all wall signs on any one facade shall be limited to an area no greater than ten percent of the area of that facade. 
(3)	One ground sign shall be permitted for each zoning lot subject to the following:
a.	Ground signs shall not be more than 20 feet in height and shall have a minimum setback of ten feet from any future right-of-way line. Such signs may be multifaced but shall not exceed 32 square feet in surface display area per face. 
b.	A minimum setback of 100 feet to any adjacent residential district.
(4)	Gasoline service stations are permitted the following signs, in addition to those permitted in this subsection (h): 
a.	Directional signs on the face of the building over doorways necessary for customer convenience such as "restrooms," "lubrication," "bay 1," or words of similar import. 
b.	Signs may be displayed on the gasoline pumps.
(i)	B-2 districts. In the B-2 districts, signs shall be permitted subject to the following: 
(1)	One ground sign shall be permitted for each zoning lot subject to the following:
a.	Additional ground signs may be permitted when the following conditions exist:
1.	Two signs may be permitted on a corner lot that has at least 200 feet of frontage on each of two thoroughfares, provided that only one sign is oriented toward each thoroughfare. 
2.	Two signs may be permitted where the zoning lot, not a corner lot, has frontage on two major thoroughfares and has vehicular access via both such thoroughfares, provided that only one sign is oriented toward each thoroughfare. 
3.	For each lot having a frontage of 300 feet or more, one additional sign shall be permitted, provided that such signs are at least 200 feet apart. 
b.	Ground signs shall not be more than 30 feet in height and shall have a minimum setback of ten feet from any future right-of-way line. Such signs may be multifaced but shall not exceed 32 square feet in surface display area per face. 
c.	A minimum setback of 100 feet to any adjacent residential district.
(2)	A business center shall be permitted one freestanding sign, subject to the following:
a.	A maximum height of 30 feet.
b.	A minimum setback of ten feet to any future road right-of-way.
c.	The area of such sign shall not exceed one square foot for each linear foot separating the building from the front street right-of-way line, plus one square foot for each linear foot between the sign and the front street right-of-way line. However, in no instance shall a sign have an area greater than 100 square feet per sign face. 
d.	A minimum setback of 100 feet to any adjacent residential district.
e.	No such sign shall be closer to a rear or side lot line than a distance equal to its height. 
(3)	Each use shall be permitted one wall sign on each building facade with road frontage. Such signs shall be limited to an area equal to not more than ten percent of the area of the wall of the establishment upon which the sign is placed. 
(4)	Gasoline service stations are permitted the following signs, in addition to those permitted in subsection (i)(1) and (i)(2) of this section: 
a.	Directional signs on the face of the building over doorways necessary for customer convenience such as "restrooms," "lubrication," "bay 1," or words of similar import. 
b.	Signs may be displayed on the gasoline pumps.
(5)	Restaurants with drive-through windows shall be permitted one menu board ground sign in addition to those permitted in subsections (i)(1) and (i)(2) of this section. Such sign shall be located in a rear yard or interior side yard and shall not exceed a height of six feet, nor an area of 36 square feet. 
(j)	I-1 and I-2 districts. In the I-1 and I-2 districts, signs shall be permitted subject to the following: 
(1)	One ground sign identifying an industrial subdivision subject to the following:
a.	A maximum area of 100 square feet.
b.	A maximum height of ten feet.
c.	A minimum setback of ten feet from the future road right-of-way (as shown in the village master plan) of any existing road and a setback of ten feet from the right-of-way of any existing or approved road. 
d.	Such signs are to be maintained by the developer until all lots are sold and development is complete, at which time it will be deeded to the village for future care. 
(2)	One ground sign shall be permitted for each zoning lot subject to the following:
a.	Additional ground signs may be permitted when the following conditions exist:
1.	Two signs may be permitted on a corner lot that has at least 200 feet of frontage on each of two thoroughfares, provided that only one sign is oriented toward each thoroughfare. 
2.	Two such signs may be permitted where the zoning lot, not a corner lot, has frontage on two major thoroughfares and has vehicular access via both such thoroughfares, provided that only one sign is oriented toward each thoroughfare. 
3.	For each lot having a frontage of 300 feet or more, one additional sign shall be permitted, provided that such signs are at least 200 feet apart. 
b.	Ground signs shall be subject to the following:
1.	A maximum area of 50 square feet per sign face.
2.	A maximum height of ten feet.
3.	A minimum setback of ten feet from any future road right-of-way.
(3)	Each use shall be permitted one wall sign on each building facade with road frontage. Such signs shall be limited to an area equal to not more than five percent of the area of the wall of the establishment upon which the sign is placed. 
(4)	Nonaccessory signs are permitted in the I-1 and I-2 districts subject to the following:
a.	A maximum height of ten feet.
b.	A maximum area of 100 square feet.
c.	A minimum setback of 25 feet from any property line or street right-of-way.
d.	Nonaccessory signs shall be permitted but shall be spaced no closer than 1,000 feet between signs on the same side of the street right-of-way. 
e.	The height and area of nonaccessory signs may be increased beyond the standards identified in subsections (j)(4)a and (j)(4)b of this section when the following conditions are met: 
1.	The sign area may be increased by two square feet for every one foot of setback added beyond the minimum setback from any future road right-of-way, but in no instance shall be greater than 300 square feet. 
2.	The sign height may be increased by one foot for every five feet of setback added beyond the minimum setback but in no instance shall exceed 20 feet. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1608; Ord. of 3-23-1998; Ord. No. 158, § 1, 6-27-2005)
Sec. 46-480. - Exterior lighting. 
(a)	All outdoor lighting in all use districts used to light the general area of a specific site shall be shielded to reduce glare and shall be so arranged as to reflect light away from all adjacent residential districts or adjacent residences. 
(b)	All outdoor lighting in all use districts shall be directed toward and confined to the ground areas of lawns or parking lots. 
(c)	All lighting in nonresidential districts used for the external illumination of buildings, so as to feature such buildings, shall be placed and shielded so as not to interfere with the vision of persons on adjacent highways or adjacent property. 
(d)	Illumination of signs shall be directed or shaded downward so as not to interfere with the vision of persons on the adjacent highways or adjacent property. 
(e)	All illumination of signs and any other outdoor feature shall not be of a flashing, moving or intermittent type. Artificial light shall be maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when in use. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1609)
Sec. 46-481. - Residential entranceway. 
    In all residential districts, so-called entranceway structures including, but not limited to, walls, columns and gates marking entrances to single-family subdivisions or multiple housing projects may be permitted and may be located in a required yard, except as provided in section 46-482, corner clearance, provided that such entranceway structures shall comply to all codes of the village and shall be approved by the zoning administrator and a permit issued. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1610)
Sec. 46-482. - Corner clearance. 
    No fence, wall, shrubbery, sign or other obstruction to vision above a height of two feet from the established street grades shall be permitted within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any street right-of-way lines by a straight line drawn between such right-of-way lines at a distance along each line of 25 feet from their point of intersection. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1611)
Sec. 46-483. - Walls and berms. 
    For those use districts and uses listed as follows, there shall be provided and maintained on those sides abutting or adjacent to a residential district an obscuring wall or landscaped berm as required: 
(1)	In those instances where the border between districts or uses requiring a wall or berm is a major or secondary street, a greenbelt may be substituted for the wall or berm adjacent to the street, planted in accordance with section 46-478, plant materials. 
_____ 
(2)	The height of the wall or berm shall be measured from the surface of the parking area or land on the nonresidential side of the wall or berm, required as follows, except as otherwise provided in subsection 12 of this section: 
UseMinimum Requirements(a)P-1 vehicular parking district4 feet, 6 inches high(b)Off-street parking area
(other than P-1 districts)4 feet, 6 inches high(c)OS-1, B-1 and B-2 districts4 feet, 6 inches high(d)I-1 and I-2 districts:Berms shall be landscaped in accordance with section 46-478, plant materials 6-foot high wall(e)I-1 and I-2 districts, open storage areas, loading or unloading areas, service areas6-foot to 8-foot high wall, berm or obscuring fence(f)Auto wash, drive-in restaurant6 feet high(g)Hospital ambulance delivery areas6 feet high(h)Utility buildings, stations or substations6 feet high 
_____ 
(3)	Required walls shall be located along the lot line except where underground utilities interfere and except in instances where this chapter required conformance with front yard setback lines in abutting residential districts. 
(4)	Required walls may, upon approval of the planning commission and after public hearing as provided in section 46-48, be located on the opposite side of an alley right-of-way from a nonresidential zone that abuts a residential zone when mutually agreeable to affected property owners. The continuity of the required wall on a given block will be a major consideration. 
(5)	Berms shall be a landscaped earth mound, the same height as required for a wall with a maximum slope of three to one (three foot horizontal to one foot vertical). All berms shall have a nearly flat, horizontal area at their highest point, at least two feet in width. 
(6)	Berm slopes shall be protected from erosion by sodding or seeding. If slopes are seeded, they shall be protected, until the seed germinates and a permanent lawn is established, by a straw mulch, hydromulching or netting specifically designed to control erosion. The berm area shall be kept free from refuse and debris and shall be planted with shrubs, trees or lawn and shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition. 
(7)	A planting plan and grading plan shall be prepared for the berm and shall be reviewed by the planning commission. Plant materials within the berm area shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of greenbelt and plant material as set forth in section 46-478. 
(8)	Such walls or berms shall have no openings for vehicular traffic or other purposes, except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except such openings as may be approved by the chief of police and the zoning administrator. 
(9)	All walls required in this section shall be constructed to specifications approved by the zoning administrator to be durable, weather resistant, rustproof and easily maintained; and wood or wood products shall be specifically excluded. 
(10)	Masonry walls may be constructed with openings which do not in any square section (height and width) exceed 20 percent of the surface. Where walls are so pierced, the openings shall be so spaced as to maintain the obscuring character required, and shall not reduce the minimum height requirement. The arrangement of the openings shall be reviewed and approved by the zoning administrator. 
(11)	The requirement for an obscuring wall between off-street parking areas, outdoor storage areas, and any abutting residential district shall not be required when such areas are located more than 200 feet distant from such abutting residential district. 
(12)	The planning commission may waive or modify the requirements of this section where cause can be shown that no good purpose would be served, provided that in no instance shall a required wall be permitted to be less than four feet, six inches in height, except where section 46-482 applies. 
a.	In consideration of request to waive wall requirements between nonresidential and residential districts, the planning commission shall determine whether or not the residential district is an area in transition that will become nonresidential in the future. 
b.	In such cases, the planning commission may temporarily waive wall requirements for an initial period not to exceed 12 months. Granting of subsequent waivers shall be permitted, provided that the planning commission shall make a determination, as described in this section, for each subsequent waiver prior to the granting of such waiver. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1611; Ord. No. 130, § 8, 1-26-1993)
Sec. 46-484. - Fences (residential). 
    Fences are permitted, or required, subject to the following: 
(1)	Fences on all lots of record in all residential districts which enclose property and/or are within a required side or rear yard shall not exceed six feet in height, measured from the surface of the ground, and shall not extend toward the front of the lot nearer than the front of the house or the required minimum front yard, or whichever is greater. 
(2)	Recorded lots having a lot area in excess of two acres and a frontage of at least 200 feet, and acreage or parcels not included within the boundaries of a recorded plat, in all residential districts, are excluded from the regulations of this section. 
(3)	Fences on lots of record shall not contain barbed wire, electric current or charge of electricity. 
(4)	Fences which enclose public or institutional parks, playgrounds, or public landscaped areas, situated within an area developed with recorded lots shall not exceed eight feet in height, measured from the surface of the ground, and shall not obstruct vision to an extent greater than 25 percent of their total area. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1613)
Sec. 46-485. - Site plan review. 
(a)	The purpose of site plan review with the planning commission is to determine compliance with the provisions of this zoning ordinance, to promote the orderly development of the village, to prevent the depreciation of land value because of uses or structures which do not give proper attention to siting or area protection, and to provide consultation and cooperation between applicants and the planning commission so that applicants may accomplish their objectives in the utilization of their land in conformity with the provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
(b)	A site plan shall be submitted to the planning commission for approval for any use requiring off-street parking, except one-family residential dwellings. 
(c)	An application for site plan review shall be made by filing the application form, required information, and the required fee, including any fees to be deposited in an escrow account, with the zoning administrator. Once deemed complete, the zoning administrator shall forward the application and fee to the clerk. Such fees are necessary to pay for professional services related to site plan review, engineering reviews, and staffing planning commission meetings. The application fee and any additional fees to be deposited in an escrow account to pay for professional planning and engineering services shall be set by resolution of the Cass City Village Council. 
(d)	The following information shall be included on the site plan:
(1)	Applicant and/or owner's names, addresses and telephone numbers.
(2)	Professional seal of architect, engineer, surveyor, landscape architect, or planner, and their name and address, phone number and e-mail if available. 
(3)	Scale, north arrow, date of plan preparation, and date of each revision. Sheet size shall be at least 24"x 36" with plan view drawn to a scale of no greater than 1"= 50' for property less than three acres or no greater than 1"= 100' for property three or more acres. 
(4)	Vicinity/locational map drawn at a scale of 1"= 2,000' with north point indicated.
(5)	Location of existing and proposed lot lines, including dimensions, gross and net acreage figures, and zoning classification of the site. 
(6)	Adjacent land uses, property owners, zoning and location of adjacent buildings or structures, property lines, rights-of-way, abutting streets, drives, curb cuts, and access easement, and parking within 100 feet of subject property. 
(7)	Location and dimensions of existing and proposed buildings/structures; including intended uses, floor area, number of floors, width, length, height, number and type of dwelling units (where applicable), and setback distances. 
(8)	Existing natural and man-made features to be retained and/or removed.
(9)	Location of existing and proposed water bodies, watercourses, including county and village drains, man-made surface drainage ways, floodplains and wetlands. 
(10)	The location of all existing and proposed access drives, street intersections, driveway locations, sidewalks, bike paths, curbing, and other walkways associated with the site, including general alignment, right-of-way, surface type, width and centerline. 
(11)	Location, number and size of parking spaces, including width and method of surfacing, dimensions of spaces and aisles, acceleration, deceleration and passing lanes and approaches. 
(12)	Proposed phasing of project.
(13)	The location of all accessory structures, including light poles, flagpoles, storage sheds, transformers, dumpsters, including method of screening. 
(14)	Detailed signage and lighting plans, including locations and illumination patterns, for both existing and proposed parking lots and structures. 
(15)	A landscape plan indicating the location, type and quantity of plant materials both existing and proposed. The location and description of all existing berms, fencing, walls, and other screening provisions. 
(16)	Location of outdoor storage/display areas including a description of the items to be located outdoors, as well as the location and description of required screening. 
(17)	Loading and unloading areas for commercial and industrial developments.
(18)	Storage and containment areas, if the use of hazardous substances is involved.
(19)	Location and size of all existing and proposed utility services above and below ground, to include water, electric, gas, phone, cable, stormwater, storm sewer, catch basins, and fire hydrants. 
(20)	Location and width of any easements (utility and otherwise) on the site.
(21)	Designation of fire lanes.
(22)	Any other pertinent physical features.
(23)	Existing topography with a maximum contour interval of two feet. Topography on the site and beyond the site for a distance of 100 feet in all directions should be indicated. Grading plan, showing finished contours at a maximum interval of two feet, correlated with existing contours so as to clearly indicate required cutting, filling, grading, and the direction of drainage. Any other items as deemed necessary by the zoning administrator in order to ensure that the proposed development is in compliance with this zoning ordinance and other village ordinances, as well as State and Federal [statutes]. 
(e)	Site plan review procedure.
(1)	Once the application and fee are forwarded to the clerk by the zoning administrator, the zoning administrator shall preliminarily review the submitted site plan for completeness. In the event that the site plan is not considered complete, the applicant shall be informed that the site plan needs to be updated and complete prior to review with the planning commission. 
(2)	At the next regularly scheduled meeting, planning commission shall review the site plan for conformance to the standards and requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(3)	Following its review of the proposed site plan, the planning commission shall take one of the following actions: 
a.	Approve the site plan if it is found to satisfy the requirements of this zoning ordinance.
b.	Place conditions on the site plan approval to ensure that it satisfies the requirements of this zoning ordinance. 
c.	Deny the site plan if it is found that the proposed site plan fails to satisfy the requirements of this zoning ordinance. In the event of denial, the applicant shall be informed of the decision in writing, with the reasons for denial contained in the letter. 
(4)	The planning commission shall generally render its decision within 30 days from the date the application was received by the zoning administrator. The 30 day time period may be extended by the mutual consent between the applicant and the planning commission. 
(f)	The planning commission shall review the site plan for compliance with the requirements of this zoning ordinance and conformity to the following general standards: 
(1)	All elements of the site plan shall be harmoniously and efficiently organized in relation to topography, the size and type of the lot, the character of adjoining property and the size and type of buildings. The site shall be developed so as not to impede the normal and orderly development or improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted in this zoning ordinance. 
(2)	The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar as practical, by minimizing tree and soil removal and by topographic modifications, which result in maximum harmony with adjacent areas. 
(3)	All stormwater shall be given to proper site drainage such that the controlled release of stormwaters will not adversely affect neighboring properties. 
(4)	The site plan shall provide for reasonable visual and sound privacy for all dwelling units located on the site. Fences, walks, barriers and landscaping shall be used, as appropriate, for the protection and enhancement of property and for the privacy of its occupants. 
(5)	All buildings or groups of buildings shall be so arranged as to permit emergency access by some practical means to all sides. 
(6)	Every structure or dwelling unit shall have access to a public street, walkway or other area dedicated to common use. 
(7)	All loading and unloading areas and outside storage areas, including areas for the storage of trash, which face or are visible from residential districts or public thoroughfares, shall be screened by a vertical screen consisting of structural or plant materials no less than six feet in height. 
(8)	Exterior lighting shall be arranged so that it is deflected away from adjacent properties and so that it does not impede the vision of traffic along adjacent streets. 
(9)	With respect to vehicular and pedestrian circulation, including walkways, interior drives and parking, special attention shall be given to the location and number of access points, general interior circulation, the separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and the arrangement of parking areas that are safe and convenient and that do not, insofar as practicable, detract from the design of the proposed buildings and structures and the neighboring properties. 
(10)	All streets shall be built in accordance with the requirements of the village.
Site plans shall conform to all applicable requirements of state and federal statutes, and approval may be conditioned on the applicant receiving necessary state and federal permits before final site plan approval or an occupancy permit is granted. 
(g)	A site plan approved under this section shall be valid for a period of one year. If construction has not commenced within this time period, the site plan shall become null and void. Upon a written request from the applicant, the planning commission may grant one extension of the site plan for a period not to exceed 60 days. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1614; Ord. No. 169, 8-30-2010) 
State Law reference- Site plan inclusions, 125.584d. 
Sec. 46-486. - Frontage on a public street. 
    No lot shall be used for any purpose permitted by this chapter unless such lot abuts a public street or unless otherwise provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1615)
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 34. 
Sec. 46-487. - Access to a major or secondary street. 
    For uses making references to this section, vehicular access shall be provided only to a major or secondary street as designated on the village's thoroughfare plan. Access driveways may be permitted to other than a major or secondary street where the following conditions are met: 
(1)	Such access is provided to a street where the property directly across the street from such driveway and all property abutting such street between the driveway and major or secondary street is zoned for multiple-family use or nonresidential uses. 
(2)	Such access is provided to a street where the property directly across the street is developed with permanent uses other than one-family residences or is an area which, in the opinion of the planning commission, will be used for other than single-family purposes in the future. 
(3)	This exception shall apply only if the planning commission finds that there are special circumstances which indicate that there will be a substantial improvement in traffic safety by reducing the number of driveways to a major or secondary street. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1616; Ord. No. 130, § 9, 1-26-1993)
Secs. 46-488-46-520. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SPECIAL LAND USES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Special land uses, MCL 125.584a, 125.584c.

Sec. 46-521. - Generally. 
    The special land uses may be permitted after review and approval by the planning commission. Such uses may be permitted after public hearing and under such conditions as are imposed after finding that the use is not injurious to the district and environs; is not contrary to the spirit and purpose of this chapter; is not incompatible with already existing uses in the area; would not interfere with the orderly development of the area; and would not be detrimental to the safety or convenience of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, art. XVII)
Sec. 46-522. - Uses permitted with special approval. 
    The following uses may be permitted subject to the applicable required conditions and after notice of public hearing in accordance with section 46-48, notice of public hearing. A site plan shall be submitted in accordance with section 46-485, site plan review. 
(1)	Outdoor theaters. Because outdoor theaters possess the unique characteristics of being used only after dark and since they develop a concentration of vehicular traffic in terms of ingress and egress from their parking area, they shall be permitted in I-2 districts only. Outdoor theaters shall further be subject to the following conditions: 
a.	The proposed internal design shall receive approval from the zoning administrator and the village manager as to adequacy of drainage, lighting and other technical aspects. 
b.	All vehicular access to the site shall be in accordance with section 46-487. 
c.	All vehicles, waiting or standing to enter the facility, shall be provided off-street waiting space. No vehicle shall be permitted to wait or stand within a dedicated right-of-way. 
d.	The area shall be so laid out as to prevent the movie screen from being viewed from residential areas or adjacent major or secondary streets. All lighting used to illuminate the area shall be so installed as to be confined within, and directed onto, the premises of the outdoor theater site. 
(2)	Commercial television and radio towers and public utility microwaves, and public utility TV transmitting towers. Radio and television towers, public utility microwaves and public utility TV transmitting towers, and their attendant facilities, shall be permitted in I-1 and I-2 districts, provided that such uses shall be permitted in I-1 and I-2 districts as follows: 
a.	Such towers shall be located centrally on a continuous parcel of land. To meet area requirements as noted in subsection (2)c of this section, land need not be under single ownership. However, the applicant must have development rights for all land in question and, except for the construction of a tower and related facilities, all such land shall remain undeveloped. 
b.	Except as noted in subsection (2)c of this section, the distance of the tower from any property line shall be no less than the height of the tower. 
c.	In the following instances, the planning commission can allow the distance of a tower from any property line to be reduced: 
1.	Such reduction can result in a setback equal to no less than 30 percent of the height of the tower. 
2.	The applicant must certify that the tower is engineered to fall wholly within the parcel in the event of any structural failure. 
(3)	Utility lines and towers. Overhead or underground lines and necessary poles and towers to be erected to service primarily those areas beyond the village shall receive the review and approval of the planning commission. Such review by the commission shall consider abutting property and uses as they relate to easements, rights-of-way, overhead lines, poles and towers and, further, shall consider injurious effects on property abutting or adjacent thereto and on the orderly appearance of the village. 
(4)	Specialized medical facilities. Facilities providing specialized medical services, such as, but not limited to, dialysis, clinical oncology, radiation therapy, radiography, magnetic resonance imaging, physical therapy, and rehabilitation, shall be permitted in RA-1, RA-2 and RB districts, subject to the following conditions: 
a.	Services shall be provided on an outpatient basis. Overnight stay for patients shall not be permitted. 
b.	The site shall have direct vehicular access to a state trunkline as shown on the village's Act 51 map. 
c.	The site plan shall conform to all applicable requirements of this chapter and of the district in which it is located. However, the planning commission may impose standards different than those specifically stated in division 12, article III of this chapter, schedule of regulations, to ensure that impacts from the proposed use do not negatively affect adjacent uses. This may include, but is not limited to, standards for setbacks, screening, landscape or building height. 
d.	Off-street vehicle parking shall be provided as required for a professional doctor's office. 
e.	Exterior building design and materials shall be architecturally compatible with surrounding and adjacent residential dwellings. To assist the planning commission in making this determination, the following shall be provided: 
1.	The applicant shall submit rendered elevation drawings of all building facades which shall be a true representation of the colors and building materials of the proposed structure. 
2.	The zoning administrator shall provide a written review of the plan from a design standpoint to the planning commission. The zoning administrator may seek the advice of design professionals on this matter. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1700; Ord. No. 130, § 10, 1-26-1993; Ord. of 3-23-1998)
Secs. 46-523-46-550. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - GENERAL EXCEPTIONS 

Sec. 46-551. - Area, height and use exceptions. 
    The regulations in this chapter shall be subject to the interpretations and exceptions of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1800)
Sec. 46-552. - Essential services. 
    Essential services serving the village shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and other ordinances of the village. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1801)
Sec. 46-553. - Voting place. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not be so construed as to interfere with the temporary use of any property as a voting place in connection with a municipal or other public election. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1802)
Sec. 46-554. - Height limit. 
    The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to farm buildings, chimneys, church spires, flagpoles, public monuments or wireless transmission towers; provided, however, that the planning commission may specify a height limit for any such structure when such structure requires authorization as a special use. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1803)
Sec. 46-555. - Lot area. 
    Any lot existing and of record on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may be used for any principal use, other than conditional uses for which special lot area requirements are specified in this chapter, permitted in the district in which such lot is located whether or not such lot complies with the lot area and width requirements of this chapter. Such use may be made, provided that all requirements other than lot area and width prescribed in this chapter are complied with, and provided that not more than one dwelling unit shall occupy any lot except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter for required lot area for each dwelling unit. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1804)
Sec. 46-556. - Lots adjoining alleys. 
    In calculating the area of a lot that adjoins an alley for the purpose of applying lot area requirements of this chapter, one-half the width of such alley abutting the lot shall be considered as part of such lot. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1805)
Sec. 46-557. - Yard regulations. 
    When yard regulations cannot reasonably be complied with, or where their application cannot be determined on lots of peculiar shape, topography or due to architectural or site arrangement, such regulations may be modified or determined by the board of appeals. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1806)
Sec. 46-558. - Porches. 
    An open, unenclosed and uncovered porch or paved terrace may project into a front yard for a distance not exceeding ten feet, but this shall not be interpreted to include or permit fixed canopies. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1807)
Sec. 46-559. - Projections into yards. 
    Architectural features attached to a building, not including vertical projections or signs, may extend or project into a required side yard not more than two inches for each one foot of width of such side yard; and may extend or project into a required front yard or rear yard not more than three feet. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1808)
Sec. 46-560. - Access through yards. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, access drives may be placed in the required front or side yards so as to provide access to rear yards or accessory or attached structures. These drives shall not be considered as structural violations in front and side yards. Further, any walk, terrace or other pavement servicing a like function, and not in excess of nine inches above the grade upon which placed, shall, for the purpose of this chapter, not be considered to be a structure and shall be permitted in any required yard. 
(Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 1809)
APPENDIX A - FRANCHISES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance establishing franchises or granting special rights to certain persons saved from repeal, § 1-13(6); community development, ch. 10; environment, ch. 16; planning, ch. 28; franchising, § 36-51 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - SOUTHEASTERN MICHIGAN GAS COMPANY[2] 
    An ordinance granting a franchise to Southeastern Michigan Gas Company to construct, operate, and maintain in the public streets, highways, alleys and other public places in the Village of Cass City, Tuscola County, Michigan, all needful and proper gas pipes, mains, conductors, service pipes and other apparatus requisite for the manufacture, transmission and distribution of gas for public and private use and to conduct a local business therein. 
    The Village of Cass City Ordains: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note-Printed herein is Ordinance No. 133, as adopted by the village council on September 28, 1993. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.

Section 1. - Grant of franchise. 
    Permission is hereby granted to Southeastern Michigan Gas Company, a Michigan corporation, and to its successors and assigns, to construct, operate and maintain in the public streets, highways, alleys and other public places in the Village of Cass City, Tuscola County, Michigan, all needful and proper gas pipes, mains, conductors, service pipes and other apparatus and facilities requisite for the manufacture, transmission and distribution of gas for all purposes to the Village of Cass City, and the inhabitants thereof, and for conducting gas elsewhere to supply neighboring cities, villages and other territories supplied with gas by said grantee, subject, however, to all conditions and restrictions hereinafter contained. 
Section 2. - Conditions. 
    The conditions of the foregoing grant are as follows: 
a)	The grantee shall do no injury to any street, highway, alley or other public place, or to any shade tree, or in any manner disturb or interfere with any water transmission and distribution lines or with any public or private sewer now or hereafter laid or constructed by any authorized person or corporation. 
b)	All construction work done under this grant shall be under the supervision of the designated representative of the grantee and shall be subject to inspection and approval by the designated representative of the Village of Cass City as to location within the right-of-way. The grantee shall pay [the] cost of such inspection and approval. 
c)	The grantee, before entering upon any street, alley, easements for public utility purposes or other public place to install pipes, mains, or other apparatus, shall notify the Village of Cass City or its designated representative of the proposed construction and shall, if the Village of Cass City so requires, file with the Village of Cass City a sufficient plan or map and shall obtain the representative's approval thereof before beginning construction. 
d)	No street, alley, highway or public place shall be allowed to remain obstructed or encumbered by the construction work of said grantee for a longer period than shall be reasonably necessary to execute said work, and the grantee shall, at all times, conform to all applicable ordinances and regulations of the Village of Cass City now or hereafter in force. 
e)	The grantee shall indemnify, hold the Village of Cass City harmless and defend it against any claim, action or demand that may be asserted against the Village of Cass City by reason of wrongdoing or negligence of the grantee in the construction or maintenance of its gas mains, pipes or other apparatus, or any claim or actionable consequence resulting from this nonexclusive grant of franchise. 
Section 3. - Rules, regulations and rates. 
    The rules and regulations applicable to the service, the quality of the gas furnished, and the rates charged therefor by the grantee herein, its successors and assigns, shall be as fixed from time to time by the Michigan Public Service Commission or other such state authority as shall have jurisdiction of the subject matter, reserving, however, the right of the Village of Cass City to object thereto. 
Section 4. - Regulation of streets, alleys and public places. 
    Nothing in this grant shall be construed to alienate the title of the public in and to any street, highway, alley or public place, or any portion thereof. Neither shall anything herein be construed in any manner as a surrender by the Village of Cass City of its legislative power with respect to the subject matter hereof, or with respect to any other matter whatsoever; nor as in any manner limiting the right of said village to regulate the use of any street, avenue, highway or public place within its jurisdiction. 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 34. 
Section 5. - Assignment of franchise. 
    The grantee shall not assign this franchise to any person, firm or corporation without the prior approval of the Cass City village council and unless the assignee is, in the opinion of the management of Southeastern Michigan Gas Company, financially able to carry out the grantee's obligations under this franchise and is authorized by the Michigan Public Service Commission, or such other state authority as shall then have jurisdiction of the subject matter so to do. 
Section 6. - Term. 
    The franchise granted shall remain in effect for a period of 30 years. 
Section 7. - Effective date. 
    This ordinance shall take effect upon the filing of [the] grantee's written acceptance with the Village of Cass City clerk and its confirmation by a three-fifths majority vote of the electors of the Village of Cass City voting thereon. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This is a numerical listing of the ordinances of the village used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in the table. 
Ordinance
Number DateSection Section
this Code26 4-27-19011, 234-31 3, 434-33, 34-34 40 6-28-19491-744-51-44-57 844-31 51 6-24-195816-111-16-113 52 7- 8-19581-528-31-28-35 6-1228-37-28-43 Ord. of10-31-196134-32 59 7-27-19651-1442-31-42-44 61 5-31-19661-322-202 62 5-31-1966122-91 66 6-25-19681-36-31-6-33 4-86-33-6-37 69 2- 4-19691-538-91-38-95 68 2-11-19691-338-32-38-34 4(a), 4(b)38-37, 38-38 4(c), 4(d)38-35, 38-36 4(e)38-39538-31 7211-25-1969120-1 75 4-25-1972122-121 222-31 22-123, 22-124 22-127 22-161 322-122 422-164 522-33 622-125 722-165 7812-26-1972138-33 79 3-27-19731-540-51-40-55 81 5-15-1973art. I14-1 art. II-14-2-14-6 art. VIart. VIII-14-7-14-10 art. XIart. XV14-11 82 9-24-1974126-2 226-1 91 3-28-19781(a)22-162 1(b)22-61 1(c)22-31 1(d)22-124 1(e)22-161 1(f)22-126 1(g)22-163 1(h)22-32 98 6- 5-19791-1732-1-32-17 100 5-27-1980122-165 101 5-27-19801, 216-72, 16-73 316-71 4-616-74-16-76 10312-29-1980art. I-8-1-8-3 art. III10712- 1-198140-1 108 3-30-1982art. I-40-101-40-103 art. IIIart. IV40-104 art. V-40-105-40-111 art. XI110 7-27-19821-64-31-4-36 111 7-27-198240-1 113 4-26-19832, 338-2 11710-30-19841-1130-31-30-41 11812-18-19841.1-1.340-131-40-133 2.1-2.840-134-40-141 3-640-142-40-145 840-146 119 3-26-1985138-71 120 4-30-19851-622-203 12212-30-19851, 22-31 124 9-29-19861-32-81-2-83 5-72-84-2-86 125 3-30-1987art. I, § 1.01-36-51-36-53 art. I, § 1.03art. II36-54 art. III, §§ 3.01, 3.0236-55 art. III, § 3.03,36-56, 36-57 art. III, § 3.04art. IV-36-58-36-63 art. IXOrd. of 3-28-1988Title46-1 Preamble46-2 200, 20146-3, 46-4 300-30546-121-46-126 400-40346-151-46-154 500-50246-181-46-183 600-60446-201-46-205 800-80446-231-46-235 900-90446-261-46-265 1000-100446-291-46-295 1100-110346-321-46-324 1200-120346-351-46-354 1300-130246-381-46-383 1400-140446-401-46-405 1500-150446-431-46-435 1600-161146-471-46-482 161146-483 1613-161646-484-46-487 art. XVII46-521 170046-522 1800-180946-551-46-560 1900-190746-41-46-48 2000-200846-81-46-89 art. XXI-46-49-46-53 art. XXV2600-260246-54-46-56 260446-57 127 9-26-19891, 224-31, 24-32 128 9-26-19891, 22-181 129 6-30-19921-810-31-10-38 Exhibit A10-39 130 1-26-1993146-4 246-153 346-235 446-261 546-431 646-433 746-435 846-483 946-487 1046-522 131 1-26-1993art. I18-31 art. II18-32 art. III, § 300-18-61-18-63 art. III, § 302art. IV, § 400,18-81, 18-82 art. IV, § 401art. V(intro)18-101 art. V, § 500-18-102-18-106 art. V, § 504art. VI(intro)18-131 art. VI, § 600-18-132-18-134 art. VI, § 602art. VII-18-33-18-35 art. IXart. XIII18-36 132 8-31-19932, 336-82, 36-83 5-1336-85-36-93 16, 17 36-96, 36-97 134 9-28-1993136-81 236-84 3, 436-94, 36-95 13512-21-19931(b)22-128 1(i)22-166 1(j)22-201 1(k)22-166 1(l)22-93 222-129 13612-21-19931-522-92 137 6-17-1996138-96 139 6-30-19972-620-31-20-35 140 6-30-1997230-42 44-37 616-77 141 6-30-19971-422-251-22-254 142 9-29-19971-416-31-16-34 143 9-29-199746-152 Ord. of12-22-199740-1 Ord. of 3-23-199846-479 46-522 145 1-25-19991-32-111-2-113 146 1-25-19991-32-131-2-133 Ord. of 8-30-199910-40 Ord. of12-20-1999I38-2 147 3-27-2000I, II12-1 Ord. of 3-27-200028-32 Ord. of12-18-200040-1 40-108 148 2- 6-2002146-474 149 6-24-200240-1 340-109 15010-28-20021, 2, 438-1 15110-28-20021     Rscd38-31-38-39  (1)-(7)     Added38-31-38-37 152 1-29-20031(4)38-34 153 2-24-2003Adopting Ord.
pg. xi154 2-24-2003146-431 (notes (e), (f)) 155 3-17-20031-22     Added36-101-36-122 156 6-30-20031, 2, 438-2(a) 158 6-27-2005146-479 159 7-25-2005146-4 246-353 160 7-25-20051, 2     Added6-1 161 7-25-20051     Added6-2162 9-26-2005116-71 16411-27-20061     Added49-294(3)165 1-29-200740-137 1661, 2     Added6-1 167 7-30-2007I-VII     Added22-301-22-308 168  4-26-2010III     Added6-61 IV     Added6-62 V     Added6-63 VI     Added6-64 169  8-30-201046-485 2010.09.27-09(Motion)  9-27-2010146-353(4) 171 10-29-20121     Added22-202.1-22-202.7 175  2-23-201540-102(d) 2015.8.31-07(Motion)  8-31-20156-51  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Michigan Compiled Laws. 
MCLSection 
this Code8.3 et seq.1-2 10.31 et seq.Ch. 8 14.301 et seq.Ch. 26 15.231 et seq.Ch. 2 Ch. 2, Art. II 15.231-15.24636-105(c) 36-118(a) 15.261 et seq.Ch. 2 Ch. 2, Art. II 15.341 et seq.Ch. 2, Art. II,
Ch. 2, Art. III 24.201-24.32838-2 28.251 et seq.Ch. 20 28.601 et seq.Ch. 20 20-1 29.417 et seq.Ch. 30 30.401 et seq.Ch. 8 8-1 31.101 et seq.Ch. 8 35.441 et seq.Ch. 26 61.1 et seq.Ch. 2 62.12-111 2-131 62.1 et seq.Ch. 2, Art. III 62.22-81 63.1Ch. 12 63.312-1 64.5 et seq.Ch. 2, Art. III,
Div. 3 64.9 et seq.Ch. 2, Art. III,
Div. 4 64.212-31 65.1 et seq.Ch. 2, Art. II 65.8Ch. 2, Art. III,
Div. 2 2-81 66.21-17 4-37 16-34 16-77 22-254 30-42 66.3a1-1 67.4Ch. 2, Art. IV,
Div. 2 67.7 et seq.Ch. 34 67.17 et seq.Ch. 34 67.20 et seq.Ch. 34 68.31 et seq.Ch. 32 68.3232-11 68.3332-8 68.3432-13 123.51 et seq.Ch. 24 123.161 et seq.Ch. 40 123.361 et seq.Ch. 30 124.281 et seq.Ch. 40 125.31 et seq.Ch. 28 Ch. 46 125.32 et seq.Ch. 28, Art. II 125.33(4), (6)28-32 125.34-125.4128-33-28-40 125.43-125.4528-41-28-43 125.71 et seq.Ch. 10 125.539 et seq.Ch. 16, Art. II 125.581 et seq.Ch. 28 Ch. 46 46-1 46-50 46-473 125.583b46-152 46-182 46-202 125.58446-49, 46-50 125.584aCh. 46, Art. V 125.584cCh. 46, Art. V 125.585Ch. 46, Art. II,
Div. 2 46-81 125.58746-55 125.601 et seq.Ch. 10 125.651 et seq.Ch. 10 125.901 et seq.Ch. 10 125.981 et seq.Ch. 10 125.1501 et seq.Ch. 6 125.1601 et seq.Ch. 10 125.1651 et seq.Ch. 10 Ch. 10, Art. II 10-31 10-34 125.165410-33 125.2301 et seq.46-235 125.231146-233 131.1 et seq.Ch. 2, Art. IV 141.101 et seq.40-108 141.121Ch. 40 141.421 et seq.Ch. 2, Art. IV 2-84 141.1201 et seq.Ch. 2, Art. IV 168.1 et seq.Ch. 12 211.741 et seq.Ch. 32 32-3 32-6 211.761 et seq.Ch. 32 247.61 et seq.Ch. 16, Art. IV 247.6216-111 247.231 et seq.Ch. 42, Art. II 247.241 et seq.Ch. 42, Art. II 257.1 et seq.Ch. 38 257.1-257.92338-1 257.252 et seq.Ch. 16, Art. III 257.605,
257.606Ch. 38 257.606(1)(a)Ch. 38, Art. III 257.610Ch. 38 287.261 et seq.Ch. 4, Art. II 287.290Ch. 4 287.321 et seq.4-33 324.101 et seq.Ch. 16 324.4301 et seq.Ch. 30 Ch. 40 324.11101 et seq.Ch. 30 324.11501 et seq.Ch. 30 324.14501 et seq.Ch. 30 324.19101 et seq.Ch. 30 324.30101 et seq.18-105 324.3030118-105 324.40101 et seq.Ch. 4 324.52701 et seq.Ch. 42 324.82101 et seq.Ch. 38, Art. II 324.8210738-33 324.82119Ch. 38, Art. II 324.8212038-35 324.82124,
324.82125Ch. 38, Art. II 333.7101 et seq.22-166 333.12521 et seq.Ch. 6, Art. II 333.26201 et seq.Ch. 30 400.271 et seq.Ch. 26 408.681 et seq.Ch. 24 436.1101 et seq.22-165 436.170122-165 436.170322-165 436.191522-165 445.111 et seq.Ch. 26 445.371 et seq.Ch. 26 484.2101 et seq.Ch. 36 36-104 484.225136-105(f),(g) 559.101 et seq.Ch. 18 18-32 46-435 559.24146-435 560.101 et seq.Ch. 18 18-32 46-435 560.108,
560.10918-32 560.111,
560.11218-62 560.112-
560.11918-62 560.12018-62 600.101 et seq.20-31 600.839538-91 600.8701 et seq.Ch. 20, Art. II 20-31 20-35 722.751 et seq.Ch. 22, Art. VIII
Div. 2 750.1 et seq.Ch. 22 750.49 et seq.Ch. 4 750.16722-128 750.167(1)(d)22-31 750.167(1)(e)22-124 750.167(1)(f)22-161 750.167(1)(h)22-126 750.167(1)(i)22-163 750.167(1)(j)22-32 750.16922-125 750.17022-121 750.24022-33 750.301 et seq.22-164 750.377a et seq.22-91 750.44822-162 752.52522-125  
