CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF CADILLAC, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Published in 2008 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
CADILLAC, MICHIGAN 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
William S. Barnett 
Mayor 
____________ 
James Dean 
Mayor Pro-Tem 
____________ 
Arthur Stevens 
Thomas Dyer 
Shari Spoelman 
City Council 
____________ 
Peter D. Stalker 
City Manager 
____________ 
David McCurdy 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Janice Nelson 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Cadillac, Michigan. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the Prior Code, as supplemented, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the Prior Code, as supplemented, and any ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Bill Carroll, Senior Code Attorney, and Deborah Heath, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to the staff of the City of Cadillac for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Cadillac, Michigan. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and indexes. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Cadillac, Michigan. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Cadillac, Michigan. 2008. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2009-02 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF CADILLAC, MICHIGAN, PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN, PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF, PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE, AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
    THE CITY OF CADILLAC ORDAINS: 
    Section 1. Short Title. This Ordinance shall be known as the "Code of Ordinances Adopting Ordinance," and may be so cited. 
    Section 2. Adoption of Code of Ordinances. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Cadillac, Michigan," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 46, each inclusive, is adopted, except wherever reference is made for fees to be changed by Resolution, that shall be amended so that all fees shall be amended by Ordinance and not resolution (and all changes necessary to the Code to carry out this intent shall be made forthwith). 
    Section 3. Repealer. All Ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before April 26, 2009, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 4. Prior Ordinance Not Revived. The repeal provided for in Section 3 hereof shall not be construed to revive any Ordinance, or part thereof, that has been repealed by a subsequent Ordinance that is repealed by this Ordinance. 
    Section 5. Penalty. Whenever in this Code or any Ordinance of the City an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be a misdemeanor or a municipal civil infraction, or whenever in this Code or any Ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be a misdemeanor or municipal civil infraction, the violation of any such provision by any person shall, upon conviction of a misdemeanor, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both, except whenever a specific is otherwise provided. Whenever any such violation shall constitute a municipal civil infraction, a finding of responsibility shall be punished by a civil fine not exceeding $500.00, except whenever a specific penalty is otherwise provided. 
    Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this Section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 6. Code Additions or Amendments. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 7. Later Ordinances. Ordinances adopted after April 26, 2009, that amend or refer to Ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 4.[8.] Effective Date. This Ordinance shall take effect twenty (20) days after its passage. 
    Approved this 6th day of April, 2009. 
/s/   
      Janice E. Nelson, City Clerk   /s/   
      William S. Barnett, Mayor       I, Janice E. Nelson, City Clerk of the City of Cadillac, Michigan, do hereby certify that Ordinance No. 2009-02 was published in the Cadillac News on ____________________. 
/s/   
      Janice E. Nelson, City Clerk 
      Cadillac Municipal Complex 

      200 Lake Street 

      Cadillac, Michigan 49601 

      Telephone No: 

      (231) 775-0181   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/Omitted Supp. No. 5 2010-07  6- 7-2010 Omitted 2010-10  8- 2-2010 Included 2010-11  9-20-2010 Omitted 2010-12 10- 4-2010 Included 2010-13 10- 4-2010 Omitted 2010-14 11- 1-2010 Included Supp. No. 6 2011-01  4-18-2011 Included 2011-02  4-18-2011 Included 2011-05  6-20-2011 Included 2011-06  8-15-2011 Omitted Supp. No. 7 2011-07 10- 3-2011 Omitted 2011-08 10-17-2011 Included 2011-09 12-19-2011 Included 2012-03  5-21-2012 Included 2012-04  5-21-2012 Included 2012-05  5-21-2012 Included 2012-08  6-18-2012 Included Supp. No. 8 2013-02  3- 4-2013 Included 2013-04  6- 3-2013 Omitted 2013-05  6-17-2013 Included 2013-08  9- 3-2013 Included 2013-09  9- 3-2013 Included 2013-10  9-16-2013 Included 2013-12 11- 4-2013 Included 2014-03  2-17-2014 Included 2014-04  3-17-2014 Included Supp. No. 9 2014-07  7-21-2014 Included 2014-08  7-21-2014 Included 2014-09  8-18-2014 Included 2014-11 10-20-2014 Included 2014-12 11-17-2014 Included 2014-13 11-17-2014 Included 2015-02  1-20-2015 Included 2015-04  2- 2-2015 Included 2015-06  4-20-2015 Included 2015-07  4-20-2015 Included 2015-09  6- 1-2015 Included Supp. No. 10 2015-12  8- 3-2015 Included 2015-13  8- 3-2015 Included 2015-14  8- 3-2015 Included 2015-15  8- 3-2015 Included 2015-16 10- 5-2015 Included 2015-17  1- 4-2016 Included 2016-02  3-21-2016 Included 2016-03  3-21-2016 Included 2016-06  5- 2-2016 Included 2016-07  5- 2-2016 Included Supp. No. 11 2016-08  9- 6-2016 Included 2016-09  9- 6-2016 Included 2016-10  9- 6-2016 Included 2016-11  9-19-2016 Included 2016-13 12-19-2016 Included 2017-02  2- 6-2017 Included 2017-03  3-20-2017 Included 2017-04  3-20-2017 Included 2017-05  4-17-2017 Included Supp. No. 12 2018-03  4- 2-2018 Included 2018-04  4- 2-2018 Included 2018-05  4- 2-2018 Included 2018-08  7-16-2018 Included 2018-09  8-20-2018 Included 2018-10  9- 4-2018 Included 2018-11  9-17-2018 Included 2018-14 12-17-2018 Included Special Instruction  1- 2-2019 Included  
PART I - CITY CHARTER[1] 
CADILLAC, MICHIGAN 
PREAMBLE 
    In order to establish a more perfect city government, and to better provide for, promote and maintain the essential interest and welfare of all our people, we, the citizens of this city, under the constitution and laws of the State of Michigan, do ordain and establish this charter for the City of Cadillac. 
FORMAT 
    For convenience, this charter shall be published in booklet form, with the general subjects separated into numbered articles, listed in Table of Contents, and indexed. Subdivisions of each Article shall be serially numbered sections from section 1 in each chapter; and in each case Article numbers shall be followed by the Section number in parenthesis; and section and Articles may be so cited. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed in this part is the Home Rule Charter of the city, which was approved at an election held on November 4, 1975, and made effective on January 1, 1978. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Provisions which are obsolete are indicated by editor's notes. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to frame, adopt and amend charter, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 22; home rule cities act, MCL 117.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - ESTABLISHMENT OF CITY GOVERNMENT 

Sec. 1.1. - [City as municipal corporation.] 
    The municipal corporation now existing and known as the "City of Cadillac" shall remain and continue as a municipal corporation under the same name, and the boundaries of the City existing when this Charter takes effect shall continue in force until changed in accordance with law. 
Sec. 1.2. - [Purpose.] 
    The City shall provide for the public peace, health, and for the safety of persons and property within the City. 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for preservation of public peace, health and safety, MCL 117.3(j). 
ARTICLE 2. - FORM AND POWERS 

Sec. 2.1. - Form of Government. 
    The municipal government provided for in this Charter shall be the "Council-Manager" form of government. 
    This City shall have all powers granted by law. All powers of the City shall be exercised by an elective Council except as otherwise provided in this Charter. 
Sec. 2.5. - Residency. 
    Residency for City employees, not otherwise affected by a collective bargaining agreement, is governed by the City Charter. The current City Charter provision governing residency allows regular full-time employees of the City of Cadillac, with the exception of fire department personnel, to reside within 20 mile radius of the geographic boundaries of the City of Cadillac; provided further that fire department personnel may only reside within the geographic boundary of the City of Cadillac or within the geographic boundary of the surrounding townships of Clam Lake, Cherry Grove, Haring and Selma. 
    Section (2.5) does not affect, amend or exempt the provisions of Section (3.10). 
(Amended by initiative ref. of 11-4-1999) 
Editor's note- MCL 15.602(3) has an exception to the 20-mile radius: "(3) A requirement [20-mile radius requirement] described in subsection (2) does not apply to a person if the person is married and both of the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The person's spouse is employed by another public employer. 
(b)  The person's spouse is subject to a condition of employment or promotion that, if not for this section, would require him or her to reside a distance of less than 20 miles from the nearest boundary of the public employer. 
State Law reference- Residency of public employees, MCL 15.601 et seq. 
ARTICLE 3. - ORGANIZATION OF GOVERNMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for necessary officers, MCL 117.3(a); charter to provide for qualifications and duties of its officers, MCL 117.3(d). 

Sec. 3.1. - City Council. 
    The legislative authority of this city shall be vested in a Council composed of five members, one of whom shall be Mayor. All members shall have equal authority. 
    The Council shall be the governing body of the City and shall exercise all power conferred upon or possessed by the City by adoption of laws, ordinances and resolutions except as limited by this Charter or state law. No individual Council member shall on his own initiative, issue orders to any City employee. 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for election of city council, MCL 117.3(a). 
Sec. 3.2. - Council Meetings. 
    The Council shall meet regularly at the usual meeting place, at least once each month, at a day and hour to be fixed by the rules and procedure of each Council. 
    Special meetings or change of location of regular meetings of the Council may be called by the Mayor, or shall be called at the request of two Council members. Notice shall be in writing or in person and may be delivered to the place of residence or to an address other than the residence if so requested by the Council member. Notice of such meeting shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City in accordance with State Statute, and shall state the primary purpose of the meeting. Business transacted at any special meeting of the Council shall be that of the notice. Any other action shall require an affirmative vote of three members. 
Sec. 3.3. - Quorum; Adjournment of Meetings. 
    A majority of the members of the Council in office at the time shall be a quorum for the transaction of business at all council meetings, but, in the absence of a quorum, a lesser number may adjourn any meeting to a later time or date. In the absence of all members, the Clerk may adjourn any meeting for not longer than one week. 
Sec. 3.4. - Meeting to be Public. 
    All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be open to the public and shall be held within the corporate limits of the City, and citizens shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard under such rules as the Council may prescribe. 
State Law reference- Open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq. 
Sec. 3.5. - Organization and Rule of the Council. 
    The Council shall determine its own organization, rules, order of business, and standards of conduct subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  A journal of the proceedings of each meeting shall be kept by the Clerk in the English Language, and shall be signed by the presiding officer and Clerk of the meeting; 
(b)  Each member of the Council shall vote on all questions unless excused by unanimous consent of the remaining members present. Any member refusing to vote, except when so excused, shall be guilty of misconduct in office; 
(c)  A vote upon all matters before the Council shall be taken by a "Yes" and "No" vote and entered upon the records, except that, where the vote is unanimous, it shall only be necessary to so state. No member of the Council shall vote on any question in which he has a financial interest, other than the common public interest, or conflict of interest, or on any question concerning his own conduct. On all other questions each member who is present shall vote when his name is called, unless excused by the unanimous consent of the remaining members present; 
(d)  The proceedings of the Council or a brief summary thereof, prepared by the Clerk showing the substance of each separate proceedings of the Council shall be made available to the public within ten days. 
Sec. 3.6. - Vacancies. 
    A Council member shall continue to hold office until his successor is elected and qualified. A vacancy shall occur whenever any Council member absences himself from four consecutive regular meetings or twenty-five (25) percent of all meetings in any twelve (12) months period, or commits misconduct in office, or if a Council member shall become a non-resident of the City or of the Ward in which he was nominated. In case of a vacancy, the remaining Council members shall choose, by majority vote and within thirty days after such vacancy occurs, a duly qualified person to fill such vacancy. 
    He shall serve until his successor, elected for the remainder of the term at the next ensuing City wide election, resulting sixty days after such vacancy occurs, has been duly qualified. If three or more such vacancies exist in the Council simultaneously, such vacancies shall be filled for the respective unexpired terms at a special election. 
State Law reference- Filling vacancies, MCL 201.37. 
Sec. 3.7. - Oath of Office. 
    Before entering upon the duties of his office, every elective and appointive officer shall take, subscribe before, and file with the City Clerk, an oath or affirmation that he will support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State of Michigan, this Charter and ordinances of the City, and will faithfully perform the duties of the office. 
State Law reference- Oath of office, Mich. Const. 1963, art. XI, § 1. 
Sec. 3.8. - Compensation for Mayor, Council Members and Appointed Officials. 
(a)  The compensation of the Mayor and Council members shall be determined by ordinance as authorized and limited by law. 
(b)  The Mayor and Council members may upon order of the Council, be reimbursed such necessary expenses as incurred in service in behalf of the city as are authorized and itemized. 
(c)  Compensation of appointed officials shall be within the discretion of the Council. 
State Law reference- Salaries, MCL 117.5(d). 
Sec. 3.9. - Mayor Pro Tem. 
(a)  The Council at its first meeting after the regular city election shall elect one of its members to serve as Mayor Pro Tem for a term to coincide with the Mayor's two year term of office. Such election shall be by written ballot and by majority vote of the members of the Council in office at the time. 
(b)  In the event of absence or disability of both the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem, the Council may designate another of its members to serve as Acting Mayor during such absence or disability. 
(c)  In the absence or disability of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem shall perform the duties of Mayor. In the absence or disability of both, the designated Acting Mayor shall perform such duties. 
Sec. 3.10. - Administrative Officers. 
(a)  The Administration Officers of the City shall be the Manager, Clerk, Treasurer, and Assessor. All Administrative Officers except the Manager shall be appointed by the Council upon recommendation of the Manager. The Council upon recommendation of the Manager, may create, abolish or combine departments not inconsistent with law, and prescribe the functions thereof as it may deem necessary for the proper operation of the City government. No creation for any department shall abolish the office of the City Manager, nor diminish the duties or responsibilities of that office, as set forth in this charter. A person may be appointed to not more than two administrative offices. 
(b)  Full time Administrative Officers shall not hold any other public office or public employment, and shall not be interested in the profits or emoluments of any contract, job, work or service of the City. 
(c)  Full time Administrative Officers need not be a resident of the City, at time of appointment, but shall become a resident within ninety (90) days and maintain residence during their terms of office. 
(d)  All appointments, promotions, and compensation of administrative officers shall be made solely on evidence of merit and fitness. 
Sec. 3.11. - Professional Employees. 
    The City shall employ professional personnel for legal and engineering services on a salary and or fee basis. 
Sec. 3.12. - Removal from Non-Elective Office. 
    Officers or members of boards or commissions, appointed by the Council, shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. 
ARTICLE 4. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 4.1. - Definitions and Interpretations. 
    Except as otherwise specifically defined herein or indicated by the context, words used in this Charter shall have their ordinary dictionary meaning. 
(a)  Legislative Body. All elected members of the Council, and where a three-fourths vote is required by law, four affirmative votes are necessary. 
(b)  The "law" or "general laws of the State" shall denote the Constitution and the Public Acts of the State of Michigan, (Statutes in effect at the time the pertinent provision of the Charter is to be applied or construed.) 
(c)  Unencumbered Appropriation Balance. That part of an appropriation which remains after the purpose for which the appropriation was made is fulfilled. 
Sec. 4.2. - Amendments. 
    This Charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided by statute. Should two or more amendments adopted at the same election have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the largest affirmative vote shall prevail as to those provisions. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to amend Charter, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 22; revision of Charter, MCL 117.18 et seq. 
Sec. 4.3. - Records to be Public. 
    All records of the City shall be public and shall be kept in the City offices except when required for official reasons or for purposes of safe keeping to be elsewhere, and shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times. 
State Law reference- Freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq. 
Sec. 4.4. - Severability of Charter Provisions. 
    Should any portion of this Charter be declared void, illegal or unconstitutional, such finding shall not invalidate the remainder of the Charter. 
Sec. 4.5. - Processes Against the City. 
    All processes against the City shall be directed against the City in the corporate name thereof, and must be served as provided by statute. 
State Law reference- Governmental liability for negligence, MCL 691.1401 et seq. 
Sec. 4.6. - Estoppel. 
    No estoppel may be created against the City. 
Sec. 4.7. - Trusts. 
    The Council may in its discretion, receive and hold any property or funds in trust for any municipal purpose and shall apply the same to the execution of such trust and for no other purposes, except as may be limited by law. 
ARTICLE 5. - LEGISLATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Power of city to adopt ordinances relative to municipal concerns, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 22; charter to provide for adopting, amending and repealing ordinances and publication thereof, MCL 117.3(k). 

Sec. 5.1. - Prior City Legislation. 
(a)  All valid ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city which are not inconsistent with this charter and which are in force and effect on the effective date of this Charter are hereby ratified and shall continue in full force and effect until repealed or amended. 
(b)  Those provisions of any effective valid by-laws, ordinances, resolution, rule or regulation which are inconsistent with this Charter are repealed. 
Sec. 5.2. - Ordinances and Resolutions. 
(a)  All official action of the council shall be by ordinance, resolution, motion or order. Penal provisions shall be established only by ordinance. 
(b)  Each proposed ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form, identified by a short title and contain a preamble stating its purpose. The style of all ordinances shall be: "The City of Cadillac Ordains." 
(c)  Following introduction of any ordinance, the City Clerk shall, within seven (7) days, publish a summary of the proposed ordinance in a local newspaper of general circulation in the City, together with a notice setting the time and place for a public hearing on the proposed ordinance. The public hearing may not be held sooner than five (5) days after the publication. Copies of proposed ordinances shall be available for examination at the office of the City Clerk and copies provided at a reasonable charge. 
Sec. 5.3. - Enactment, Amendment, Repeal and Effective Date of Ordinances. 
    Subject to the exceptions which follow, 
(a)  (1)  Ordinances may be enacted by the affirmative vote of not less than a majority of the entire Council, 
(2)  No ordinance shall be amended or repealed except by an ordinance, and 
(3)  The effective date of all ordinances shall be prescribed therein but the effective date shall not be earlier than twenty days after enactment nor before its publication. 
(b)  An Ordinance which repeals or amends any existing ordinance or part of any ordinance, shall identify, by title and number, the ordinance, sections, or subsections to be repealed or amended and shall clearly identify the matter to be omitted and the new matter to be added. 
(c)  Each ordinance shall be published in a newspaper within seven (7) days after its enactment. 
(d)  All ordinances shall be recorded by the Clerk in a book to be called "The Ordinance Book," and it shall be the duty of the Mayor and Clerk to authenticate such records by their official signatures thereon but the failure to so record and authenticate any such ordinance shall not invalidate it or suspend its operation. 
(e)  Within three (3) years after the effective date of this charter, and at least every ten (10) years thereafter, the Council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all City ordinances and resolutions having the effect of the law. 
(f)  The general codification shall be enacted by ordinance and known as the Cadillac City Code. Copies of the Code shall be furnished to City officers, placed in libraries and public offices for free public reference, and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price to be fixed by the Council. Except as required by law, the enactment of this ordinance need not comply with the requirements of Section (5.3). 
(g)  After publication of the first Cadillac City Code, new ordinances and resolutions shall be printed annually in a form for integration with the code currently in effect. 
Editor's note- The charter requirement of publication prior to operation is superseded by state statute. A city may publish a summary instead; provided that the summary includes the designation of a location in the city where a true copy of the ordinance can be inspected or obtained. See MCL 117.3(k). 
State Law reference- Codification authority, MCL 117.5b. 
Sec. 5.4. - Emergency Ordinances. 
(a)  To meet a public emergency affecting life, health or property, one or more emergency ordinances may be enacted. However, an emergency ordinance may not levy taxes, grant, renew or extend a franchise, or regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its service. 
(b)  An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner required for ordinances generally, except that it shall contain after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists, and describing the emergency in clear, specific terms. 
(c)  An emergency ordinance may be enacted on the date of introduction and given immediate effect by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the council members present at the time of enactment. 
(d)  Every emergency ordinance is automatically repealed on the sixty-first (61st) day after its enactment, unless re-enacted pursuant to Sections (5.2) and (5.3). 
Sec. 5.5. - [Penalty.] 
    Special Requirements provide a lawful penalty for the violation of its provisions. 
Sec. 5.6. - Special Requirements for Council Actions. 
(a)  Action to vacate, discontinue or abolish any highway, street, lane, alley or other public place, or part; or to sell or lease any real estate or interest therein shall be by ordinance. Before final adoption, the Council shall hold a public hearing and shall publish notice once at least twenty (20) days and again ten (10) days prior to the hearing. 
(b)  The following actions shall require the affirmative vote of four or more members of the Council: 
(1)  Vacating, discontinuing, abolishing, or remaining any highway, street, lane alley or other public place or part thereof: 
(2)  Selling of any real estate or interest therein: 
(3)  Authorizing the condemning of private property for public use: 
(4)  Creating or abolishing any office: 
(5)  Appropriating any money: 
(c)  The Council shall not have the power to sell, lease or give any part [park], recreation area, lake frontage, cemetery or any part thereof, other than the sale of grave sites for burial purposes, unless approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon at any special or general election. 
(d)  Any city property used as park or recreation areas shall remain as such unless a change in use is approved by a three-fifths vote of the electors voting thereon at any general or special election. 
ARTICLE 6. - AREAS FOR COUNCIL LEGISLATIVE ACTION 

Sec. 6.1. - Peace, Health, and Safety. 
    The City Council shall provide, by ordinance, for the public peace and health, and for the safety of persons and property. 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for preservation of public peace, health and safety, MCL 117.3(j). 
Sec. 6.2. - Accounting System. 
    The City Council shall provide for an accounting system which shall conform to state law. 
State Law reference- Uniform budgeting and accounting act, MCL 141.421 et seq. 
Sec. 6.3. - Planning Board. 
    The City Council shall establish a Planning Board by ordinance, which shall require a plan for City development, the same being reviewed and revised at least every ten years, in accordance with, and under the authority of, and complying with statutory conditions. 
    The Planning Board shall consist of nine (9) voting members, two (2) members not holding an elective municipal office appointed by the Council from each of the four wards of the City, and the Mayor. The City Manager shall attend all meetings and act as the Clerk of the Board. Member terms and powers of the Planning Board shall be established by ordinance. 
State Law reference- Municipal planning, MCL 125.31 et seq. 
Sec. 6.4. - Zoning. 
    The City Council shall prescribe by ordinance zoning laws for the City. 
State Law reference- Michigan zoning enabling act, MCL 125.3101 et seq.; municipal planning, MCL 125.31 et seq. 
Sec. 6.5. - [Procedures for special assessments.] 
    The City Council shall prescribe procedures for Special Assessments as authorized in Article 12. 
State Law reference- Notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq.; deferment of special assessment for homesteads, MCL 211.761 et seq. 
ARTICLE 7. - DUTIES OF INDIVIDUAL OFFICERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for necessary officers, MCL 117.3(a); charter to provide for qualifications and duties of its officers, MCL 117.3(d). 

Sec. 7.1. - Mayor. 
    For all statutory and ceremonial purposes the Mayor shall be the executive head of the City, he shall have a voice and vote in all proceedings of the City Council equal with that of other members of the Council, but shall have no veto power. He shall be the presiding officer of the Council. 
Sec. 7.2. - City Manager. 
(a)  The City Council shall appoint a City Manager for an indefinite term and shall fix his compensation. The City Manager shall hold office at the pleasure of the City Council. He shall be selected on the basis of training and administrative experience. Upon the resignation or removal of the City Manager, the City Council shall within one-hundred and twenty (120) days appoint a new City Manager. 
(b)  The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the City. He shall be responsible to the City Council for the administration of all city affairs placed in his charge by or under this charter. He shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To appoint and remove department heads, other than the City Attorney, Clerk, Treasurer or Assessor and delegate to the head of a department or office the power to appoint and remove subordinates and employees in such department or office. The City Council shall not direct or request the appointment of any person to, or his removal from, office or employment by the City Manager or any of his subordinates. 
(2)  To supervise the administration of all departments and offices of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter or law. The City Council shall deal with the administrative service solely through the City Manager. 
(3)  To attend all Council meetings: He shall have the right to take part in discussion, but may not vote. 
(4)  To enforce all laws, provisions of this Charter and acts of the Council, subject to enforcement by him or by officers subject to his direction and supervision. 
(5)  To make such reports and recommendations as the Council may require concerning the operations of city departments, or offices under his direction and supervision; and shall make an annual review of the city's fidelity bond and insurance programs, and shall make recommendations to the City Council for prudent coverage for the protection of city funds, properties and liability exposures. 
(6)  The City Manager shall perform such other duties in connection with his office as may be required of him by law, the ordinances of the city, or resolutions of the Council. 
(c)  At least thirty (30) days before the removal of any City Manager [the] City Council shall adopt a resolution stating its intention to remove him, and the reasons therefore. The City Council shall then adopt a resolution for a [the] removal and there shall be no appeal or review. Upon passage of a resolution stating the intention of the City Council to remove the City Manager, and the City Council may suspend him from duty, but his pay shall continue until his removal. The City Manager shall not be removed within ninety (90) days after any regular City Election, unless proceedings for his removal were commenced at least thirty (30) days prior to such election. 
(d)  By letter filed with the City Clerk, the City Manager shall designate, subject to approval of the City Council, a qualified city officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of City Manager during his temporary absence or disability. During such absence or disability, the City Council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the City Manager shall return or his disability shall cease. 
Sec. 7.3. - City Clerk. 
    The Clerk shall be Clerk of the Commission and shall, with the Mayor, sign all ordinances. The Clerk shall keep permanent journal of all Commission proceedings and ordinances. In addition, the City Clerk shall perform all other duties prescribed by law, this Charter, and the Commission. The Clerk may be removed by a majority vote of the entire City Council. 
Sec. 7.4. - City Treasurer. 
    The Treasurer shall have custody of all monies of the City and shall perform all other duties prescribed by law, this Charter or the City Council. The Treasurer may be removed by a majority vote of the entire Council. 
Sec. 7.5. - City Assessor. 
    The City Assessor shall possess all the powers vested in, and shall be charged with all the duties imposed assessing officers by statute, or by ordinance of the City, or by resolution of the Council. The Assessor may be removed by a majority vote of the entire Council. 
Sec. 7.6. - Deputies. 
    Whenever this charter requires the performance of any act by an officer, the act may also be performed by a deputy or by a subordinate under the officer's direction, unless otherwise provided or required by law. 
ARTICLE 8. - NOMINATION AND ELECTIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan election law, MCL 168.1 et seq. 

Sec. 8.1. - Election Procedure. 
    The election of all City officials as provided in this Charter shall be on a non-partisan basis. The general election laws of the state shall apply to and control, as near as may be, all procedures relating to registration, nomination for office and City elections except as such general laws relate to political parties or partisan procedure and except as otherwise provided in this Charter. 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for manner and means of holding elections, MCL 117.3(c); Michigan election law, MCL 168.1 et seq. 
Sec. 8.2. - Qualifications of Electors. 
    Each person residing within the City who has the qualifications of an elector in the State of Michigan, or who will have such qualifications as of the time of the election in which he seeks to vote, shall be entitled to register as an elector of the city. 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for registration of electors, MCL 117.3(c); registration of electors, MCL 168.491 et seq. 
Sec. 8.3. - Regular City Elections. 
    A non-partisan regular city election shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each odd numbered year. 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for time of holding election, MCL 117.3(c). 
Sec. 8.4. - Special Elections. 
    Special City elections shall be held when called by resolution of the Council. Any resolution calling a special election shall set forth the purpose of such election. 
State Law reference- Special primaries and elections, MCL 168.631 et seq. 
Sec. 8.5. - Election Commission. 
(a)  There shall be an election commission, consisting of the City Clerk, who shall be Chairman, City Attorney, City Assessor and two electors of the city, said electors to be appointed by the Council for terms of four years, and who shall not reside in the same ward. The first Election Commission shall be appointed within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this Charter. 
(b)  Duties of Election Commission. 
(1)  It shall establish the ward boundaries as set forth in Section (8.6). 
(2)  It shall appoint the Board of Election inspectors for each precinct for each election and have charge of all activities and duties required of it by law relating to the conduct of all elections in the city. 
(3)  It shall from time to time, as required by law, establish convenient election precincts, and shall establish polling places in each precinct. 
State Law reference- Boards of city election commissioners, MCL 168.25. 
Sec. 8.6. - Wards. 
    The City of Cadillac shall consist of four wards with boundaries of as nearly equal population as is practical. Such ward boundaries are to be established by the election commission within ninety (90) days after the effective date of this Charter. All ward boundaries on streets shall be the center line of such streets. The election commission shall review the ward boundaries after each decennial census and shall adjust the same where necessary to maintain approximate equal population. 
Sec. 8.7. - Elective Officers and Terms of Office. 
(a)  The elective officers of the City shall be a Mayor and four Council members. 
(b)  At each regular city election there shall be elected a Mayor who shall be nominated at large and elected at large. The term of office of Mayor shall be for two (2) years and start at 12:01 o'clock a.m. on the first day of January next following said election. 
(c)  One (1) Council member shall be elected representative of each of the city's four wards and although elected at large, each Council member shall reside in and shall be nominated by the electors of the ward he is to represent. Moving of residence from within the ward he represents, during the term of office will constitute the Council member no longer eligible for the elective position and the position shall be deemed vacant. The term of office of the Council shall be for four years commencing at 12:01 o'clock a.m. on the first day of January following said election. All incumbents shall continue in office until their terms expire under the old Charter. 
Sec. 8.8. - Qualifications for Elective Office. 
    Any registered voter of the City of Cadillac shall be eligible to hold an elective office, consistent with residential requirements of this Charter. 
Sec. 8.9. - Nominations. 
    All candidates for City election shall be nominated by petitions, persons desiring to qualify as candidate for Mayor shall file with the City Clerk a petition signed by registered electors of the city totaling not less than two percent nor more than four percent of the total votes cast for Mayor at the last election. Persons desiring to qualify as a candidate for the Council shall file with the City Clerk a petition signed by registered electors of the ward from which he seeks to be elected totaling no less than one percent nor more than two percent of the total votes cast for Mayor at the last election. Such petitions shall be filed with the Clerk not later than 5:00 o'clock p.m. on the eighth Friday preceding the scheduled city election for which the candidate seeks election. At least one week before and not more than three weeks before the last date for filing nominating petitions, the Clerk shall publish notice to that effect. 
(Amended by ref. of 7-17-2006) 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for nomination of elective officers, MCL 117.3(b); candidates for board offices, MCL 168.646a. 
Sec. 8.10. - Form of Petition. 
    The form of petition shall be substantially like that designated by the Secretary of State for the nomination of non-partisan judicial officers. A supply of official petition forms shall be provided and maintained by the Clerk. 
State Law reference- Nominating petition, MCL 168.544c. 
Sec. 8.11. - Approval of Petition. 
(a)  Nomination petitions may consist of several separately circulated and filed sheets, which together contain the number of valid signatures required for the respective city offices to be filled by the election. Circulators must be approved by the candidate in writing. If filed more than five days before the eighth Friday prior to the city election, the petitions shall be checked by the Clerk and their acceptability or inadequacy reported to the candidate within five days of filing in writing. The candidate may then file supplementary nominating petitions until the final time allowed for filing petitions. 
(b)  Within five days after said final time for filing petitions, the Clerk shall make and announce and write on said petitions his final determinations as to validity and sufficiency thereof. The Clerk shall also at that time determine if the candidate meets the qualifications required by law and this Charter for the office sought and shall file a communication to each candidate accordingly. 
(Amended by ref. of 7-17-2006) 
Sec. 8.12. - Canvas of Votes, Recount. 
    The Canvas of Votes cast at any election and the recount of votes shall be conducted in accordance with State Election Statute. 
State Law reference- Canvass of votes, MCL 168.24a; recounts, MCL 168.24a, 168.861 et seq. 
Sec. 8.13. - Recall. 
    Every elected officer of the City is subject to recall by the qualified electors of the city; such recall and filling of such vacancy caused thereby, shall be conducted according to Statute. 
State Law reference- Permissible that charter provide for recall of its officers, MCL 117.4i(g); recall generally, MCL 168.951 et seq. 
ARTICLE 9. - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Permissible that charter provide for initiative and referendum, MCL 117.4i(g). 

Sec. 9.1. - [Petition procedure.] 
    An ordinance may be initiated by petition to which all signatures shall be obtained within forty-five (45) days after the effective date of the ordinance. A petition for an initiated ordinance, or for a referendum, shall be in this form and be filed in this manner: 
(a)  Form of Petitions. An initiatory or referendum petition shall be addressed to the city council. A petition may, in length, extend to two or more petition papers identical as to content, except for signatures. A referendum petition shall clearly identify by title and number the ordinance or part thereof it proposes to repeal. An initiatory petition shall set forth in full the ordinance it proposes to initiate, and no petition may initiate more than one ordinance. Initiatory or referendum petitions shall have printed or written thereon the name(s) and address(s) of elector(s) of the City who shall be officially regarded as filing such petition. 
(b)  Signatures Required. An initiatory or a referendum petition shall be signed by registered electors of the city not less in number than fifteen (15) percent of the registered electors of the city as of the date of the last regular city election prior to the filing of the petition. 
(c)  Signing and Circulation of Petition. Each signer shall sign his name, and thereafter his Cadillac address and the date of his signing said petition. To each petitioner paper there shall be attached a sworn affidavit executed by the circulator of such paper that each signature of the person it purports to be, and that such circulator believes each signer to be a duly registered elector of the City of Cadillac. Such petition shall be filed with the City Clerk. 
(d)  Canvass of Signatures by Clerk. Upon receipt of any initiatory or referendum petitions, the Clerk shall canvass the signatures of registered electors of the city. Any signatures obtained more than forty-five (45) days before the filing of such petition with the Clerk shall not be counted. The Clerk shall complete said canvass within ten (10) business days from the filing of said petition, and in the event the petition filed is in any respect deficient, the Clerk shall forth with so notify the person filing the same. When a petition with sufficient signatures is filed within the time allowed and is in compliance with the provisions of this charter, the Clerk shall present the petition to the City Council at its next regular meeting. The filing of a referendum petition with required signatures shall suspend effectiveness of the ordinance in question until the issue is determined. A petition certified insufficient for lack of the required number of valid signatures may be amended once by supplementary sheet(s) containing additional signatures if the petitioners file a notice of intention to so amend the petition with the City Clerk within five (5) days after receiving the copy of the City Clerk's certificate, excluding weekends and holidays. Supplementary signatures shall be filed with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after receipt of Clerk's notice of insufficient signatures. 
(e)  Council Procedure on Initiatory and Referendum Petitions. Upon receiving an initiatory or a referendum petitions from the Clerk, the council shall, within thirty (30) days: 
(1)  If it be an initiatory petition, enact the ordinance as submitted in the petition; or 
(2)  If it be a referendum petition, repeal the ordinance of part thereof to which petition refers; or 
(3)  In either case, move to submit the proposal to the electors. 
(f)  Submission to Electors. Should the council decide to submit the proposal to the electors, the proposal shall be submitted at the next election held in the city for any purpose, or, at the discretion of the council, at a special election called for that purpose. In the case of an initiatory petition, if no election is to be held in the city for any other purpose within one-hundred and fifty (150) days from the time the petition is presented to the council and the council does not adopt the ordinance, then the council shall call a special election to be held within seventy-five (75) days from such time for the submission of the initiative proposal. The result shall be determined by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon, except in cases where otherwise required by statute. If two (2) or more ordinances adopted at the same election shall have conflicting provisions, the provisions in the ordinance receiving the highest number of affirmative votes shall govern. 
(g)  Limitation on Amendment or Repeal of Initiatory or Referendum Ordinances. An ordinance repealed pursuant to referendum proceedings may not be reenacted for a period of one (1) year after date of its repeal. An ordinance adopted pursuant to initiatory proceedings may not be repealed or amended for a period of one (1) year after the date of adoption, except by a vote of the electors. 
ARTICLE 10. - GENERAL FINANCE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Revised municipal finance act, MCL 141.2101 et seq.; local government fiscal responsibility act, MCL 141.1201 et seq.; fiscal stabilization act, MCL 141.1001 et seq.; uniform budgeting and accounting act, MCL 141.421 et seq. 

Sec. 10.1. - Fiscal Year. 
    The Fiscal Year of the city shall begin on the first day of July of each year and end on the thirtieth day of June of the following year. 
Sec. 10.2. - Budget Procedures. 
    On or before the first day of April in each year, the City Clerk and the City Manager, acting upon recommendations submitted by the various department heads and the City, shall draw up estimates in writing of the probable expenses and revenues to be incurred for the ensuing fiscal year, specifying in detail all proposed expenditures for the support of the various departments, and for every other purpose for which any money will be required to be paid from any of the several general funds of the city during the year; and also the estimated amount of revenue from all sources other than tax levy. The estimate thus made shall be called "The Annual City Budget" and filed with the City Clerk. 
Sec. 10.3. - Budget Hearing. 
    A public hearing on the proposed budget shall be held before its final adoption, in the second half of the month of April as the City Council shall direct. 
    Notice of such public hearing, a summary of the proposed budget and notice that the proposed budget is on file in the office of the Clerk shall be published at least ten (10) days in advance of the hearing. The complete proposed budget shall be on file for public inspection during office hours at such office for a period of not less than ten (10) days prior to such public hearing. 
State Law reference- Public hearing required prior to adoption of budget, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 32. 
Sec. 10.4. - Adoption of Budget. 
    Not before the 10th day of May, nor later than the last day in May in each year, the City Council shall be ordinance adopt a budget for the next fiscal year, shall appropriate the money needed for municipal purposes during the next fiscal year of the city and shall provide for a levy of the amount necessary to be raised by taxes upon real and personal property for municipal purposes, subject to the limitations contained in Section 11.1. 
Sec. 10.5. - Budget Control. 
    Except for expenditures which are to be financed by the issuance of bonds or by special assessment, or for other expenditures not chargeable to a budget appropriation, no money shall be drawn from the treasury of the city except in accordance with an appropriation thereof for such specific purposes, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred without an appropriation covering all payments which will be due under such obligation in the current fiscal year. The City Council by resolution may transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance, or any portion thereof, from one account, department, fund, or agency to another. 
    The City Council may make additional appropriations during the fiscal year for unanticipated expenditures required of the city, but such additional appropriations shall not exceed the amount by which actual and anticipated revenues of the year are exceeding the revenues as estimated in the budget unless the appropriations are necessary to relieve an emergency endangering the public health, peace or safety. 
    No expenditure may be charged directly to the contingency fund. Instead, the necessary part of the appropriation for the contingency fund or similar other fund shall be transferred to the appropriate account and the expenditures thus charged to such account. 
    At the beginning of each quarterly period during the fiscal year, and more often if required by the City Council, the City Treasurer shall submit to the City Council data showing the relationship between the estimated and actual revenues and expenditures to date; and if it shall appear that the revenues are less than anticipated, the City Council may reduce appropriations, except amounts required for debt and interest charges, to such a degree as may be necessary to keep expenditures within the revenues. Along with such reports, the City Treasurer shall report operating revenues and disbursements of cemetery funds with a copy furnished the Cemetery Board. 
Sec. 10.6. - Depository. 
    The City Council shall designate the depository or depositories for the city funds, and shall provide for the regular deposit of all city monies. 
State Law reference- Designation of public fund depositories, MCL 129.11 et seq.; deposits of public moneys, MCL 211.43b. 
Sec. 10.7. - Independent Audit: Annual Report. 
    An independent audit shall be made of all accounts including special and trust funds of the city government at least annually. Such audit shall be made as soon after the close of the fiscal year as possible by certified public accountants selected by the City Council. 
    The City Manager shall have annual reports prepared of the affairs of the city and copies of such audit and annual reports shall be made available for public inspection at the office of the City Clerk. 
State Law reference- Annual accounting of public funds, Mich. Const. 1963, art. IX, § 21. 
ARTICLE 11. - TAXATION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- General powers of city to levy taxes for public purposes, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 21; charter to provide for taxation, MCL 117.3(h). 

Sec. 11.1. - Power to Tax: Tax Limit. 
    The City shall have the power to assess taxes and lay and collect rents, tolls, and excises. Exclusive of any levies authorized by statute to be made beyond charter tax rate limitations, the annual ad valorem tax levy shall not exceed one and one-half percent of the assessed value of all real and personal property, except as provided for in Section 6, Article 20 for the transitional periods. 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for taxation of real and personal property not to exceed two percent of value, MCL 117.3(g); property taxes, MCL 211.1 et seq. 
Sec. 11.2. - Subject of Taxation. 
    The subjects of ad valorem taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for county and school purposes as provided under the general law. Except as otherwise provided by this charter, city taxes shall be levied, collected, and returned in the manner provided by statute. 
State Law reference- Charter to provide that subjects of taxation for municipal purposes are the same as for state, county and school purposes, MCL 117.3(i); property taxes generally, MCL 211.1 et seq. 
Sec. 11.3. - Exemptions. 
    No exemptions from taxation shall be allowed except as expressly required or permitted by statute. 
State Law reference- Real estate exemptions, MCL 211.7 et seq. 
Sec. 11.4. - [Assessment roll.] 
    The City Assessor shall make and complete an assessment roll in the manner and form provided by general property tax laws of the state and at the time required by general property tax laws of the state. 
State Law reference- Time, place and method of assessments, MCL 211.10 et seq. 
Sec. 11.5. - [Board of review.] 
    A Board of Review is hereby created. It shall be composed of five members appointed by the Council. 
(a)  One member shall be a Council member appointed by the Council in January of each year. 
(b)  Four members shall be qualified electors of the city not otherwise holding an elected or appointed position or employed by the city, county, or school. One non-council member shall be appointed from each of the four wards of the city. 
(c)  The Council may appoint one alternate for the Council member position, and up to four alternates for the non-council positions. Each alternate must satisfy the qualifications of the person for whom he or she serves as an alternate. 
(d)  The Council may appoint, remove, or redesignate an individual to an alternate position. 
(e)  The four non-council members shall be appointed in the January of the year after the charter amendment creating this provision takes effect. Two members shall be appointed for one-year and two members appointed for two-year terms. Thereafter, each non-council member shall be appointed for two years. 
(f)  The City Assessor shall be the Clerk of the Board and shall be entitled to be heard at its sessions, but shall have no vote on any proposition or question. 
(Amended by ref. of 11-3-2009) 
State Law reference- Charter to provide for board of review, MCL 117.3(a); board of review, MCL 211.28 et seq. 
Sec. 11.6. - [Board meetings.] 
    The Board of Review shall meet on the time and dates as required of township Boards of Review by the general property tax laws at such place as designated by the Council. The Board of Review shall have the same powers and shall perform the same duties as are conferred by law and required of township Boards of Review. 
    Notices of time, date, location of meetings and assessments shall conform to the requirements of the general property tax law. 
Sec. 11.7. - City Tax Roll. 
    After the Board of Review has completed its review of the assessment roll, the Assessor shall prepare a copy of the assessment roll to be known as the "City Tax Roll." The Assessor shall then spread upon said tax roll the several amounts determined by the City Council to be charged, assessed, or reassessed against persons or property. The Assessor shall also spread the amounts of the general ad valorem city tax, county tax, and school tax according to and in proportion to the several valuations set forth in said assessment roll. To avoid fractions in computations on any tax roll, the Assessor may add to the amount of the several taxes to be raised not more than the amount prescribed by statute. Any excess created thereby on any tax roll shall belong to the city. 
State Law reference- Completion of assessment, avoidance of fractions, MCL 211.39. 
Sec. 11.8. - Tax Roll Certified for Collection. 
    After spreading the taxes and on or before June first, the Assessor shall certify the tax roll, and shall annex his warrant thereto directing the Treasurer to collect the taxes levied prior to March first of the following year. 
State Law reference- Collection of taxes, MCL 211.44 et seq. 
Sec. 11.9. - Tax Lien Property. 
    On July first the taxes thus assessed shall become a debt due the city from the persons to whom they are assessed, and the amounts assessed on any interest in property shall become a lien upon the property on which assessed as provided by statute. 
Sec. 11.10. - Taxes due: Notification Thereof. 
    City taxes shall be due on July first of each year. The Treasurer shall not be required to call upon the persons named in the city tax roll, nor to make personal demand for the payment of taxes, but he shall: 
(a)  Publish, between June fifteenth and July first, notice of the time when said taxes will be due for collection and the penalties and fees for late payment of same, and 
(b)  Mail a bill to each person named in said tax roll, but in cases of multiple ownership of property only one bill need be mailed. 
    Failure on the part of the Treasurer to publish said notice or mail such bills shall not validate the taxes or penalties and fees provided. 
Sec. 11.11. - Penalty Fees and Interest. 
    All taxes paid on or before the 14th day of August shall be collected by the Treasurer without additional charge. On August 15th the Treasurer shall levy a four (4) percent penalty on all unpaid city taxes to be paid thereafter and on September first [the] penalty shall be increased one percent each month or fraction thereof until such time as the taxes are paid or the tax roll is turned over to the County Treasurer. 
    Such penalty fee shall belong to the city and constitute a charge and shall be a lien against the property to which the taxes themselves apply, collectable in the same manner as the taxes to which they are added. It is provided, however, that if mailing of the tax statements by the Treasurer, as provided in Section (11.10) is delayed for any reason, the application of the penalty provided herein shall be postponed one day for each day of such delay. 
Sec. 11.12. - Failure or Refusal to Pay Tax. 
    If any person, firm, or corporation shall neglect or refuse to pay any tax assessed to him or them, the Treasurer shall collect the same as provided by statute. 
Sec. 11.13. - Delinquent Tax Roll to County Treasurer. 
    All city taxes on real property remaining uncollected by the Treasurer on the first day of March following the date when said roll was received by him shall be returned to the County Treasurer in the manner provided by statute. The taxes thus returned shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes returned to the County Treasurer are collected, in accordance with statute, and shall be and remain a lien upon the property against which they are assessed until paid. 
State Law reference- Return of delinquent taxes, MCL 211.55 et seq. 
Sec. 11.14. - Protection of City Lien: Purchase of Real Property. 
    The city shall have power to acquire by purchase any premises within the city at any tax or other public sale or by direct purchase from the State of Michigan or other fee owner, when such purchase is necessary to protect the lien of the city for taxes or special assessments, or both, on said premises, and may hold, lease or sell the same for the purpose of securing therefrom the amount of such taxes or special assessments, or both, together with any incidental expenses incurred in connection with the exercise of this power. Any such procedure exercised by the city in the protection of its tax lien shall be deemed to be a public purpose. 
Sec. 11.15. - County, and School Taxes. 
    For the purpose of assessing and collecting taxes for county, and school purposes, the city shall be considered the same as a township and all provisions of statute relative to the collection of and accounting for such taxes shall apply. For these purposes, the Treasurer shall perform the same duties and have the same powers as township Treasurers under the statute. 
ARTICLE 12. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Public improvement or public building, MCL 141.261 et seq.; notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq.; deferment of special assessment for homesteads, MCL 211.761 et seq. 

Sec. 12.1. - [City council power to determine.] 
    The City Council shall have the power to determine that the whole or any part of the expense of any public improvement shall be defrayed by special assessments upon the property especially benefited and shall so declare by resolution. Such resolution shall state the estimated cost of the improvement, what proportion of the cost thereof shall be paid by special assessments, and what part, if any, shall be a general obligation of the city, the number of installments in which assessment may be paid and shall designate the districts or land and premises upon which special assessments shall be levied. 
Sec. 12.2. - [Procedure.] 
    The City Council shall prescribe by general ordinance complete special assessment procedure concerning plans and specifications, estimate of costs, notice of hearing, the making of the assessment roll and correction of errors, the collection of special assessments, and any other matters concerning the making of improvements by the special assessment method. 
ARTICLE 13. - BORROWING POWER[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal power to borrow money and contract debts, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 21; charter may provide for city borrowing, MCL 117.4a. 

Sec. 13.1. - Municipal Borrowing Power. 
(a)  Subject to applicable provisions of law, the city may borrow money for any purpose within the scope of its powers which may be permitted by law, conducive to the public health, welfare and safety, and may issue bonds or other evidences of indebtedness thereof. 
(b)  Whenever any portion of public improvements shall be assessed by or charged to the city-at-large, and the balance of such cost assessed against the property benefited, the Council may provide for the payment of the city's portion for such cost in installments. In such case, bonds may be issued in anticipation of the payment of the amount assessed against the city-at-large, the same as they may be issued in anticipation of the payment of the amount assessed against the benefited property. In such cases, the Council shall appropriate in each fiscal year an amount which is sufficient to pay the principal of and interest in such bonds which are required to be paid during that year. 
(c)  Bonds may be issued in anticipation of the collection of special assessments levied with respect to one or more public improvements, but no special assessment district shall be required to pay the obligation of any other special assessment district and the ordinance or resolution authorizing such bond issue shall so provide. 
(d)  All collections on special assessment rolls or on any combination of such rolls shall be set apart in a separate fund and shall be used for the purpose for which levied, and for the payment of principal and interest on bonds issued in anticipation of such special assessments. If there is any deficiency in any special assessment fund to meet the payment of the principal or interest to be paid therefrom, moneys shall be advance[d] from the general or appropriate fund of the city to meet such deficiency, and shall be replaced in the fund from which advanced when the special assessment fund shall be sufficient therefore. 
(e)  Each bond or other evidence of indebtedness shall contain a statement specifying the purpose for which the same is issued, and the proceeds thereof shall not be used for any other purpose except for the retirement of such bond issue. 
(f)  All bonds and other evidences of indebtedness shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the Clerk, under the seal of the City. Interest coupons may be executed with the facsimile signatures of the Treasurer. A complete and detailed record of all bonds and other evidence of indebtedness shall be kept by the Treasurer. 
Sec. 13.2. - Limitations Upon Borrowing Power. 
(a)  The net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes shall not at any time exceed statutory limits. 
(b)  No bonds shall be sold to obtain funds for any purpose other than that for which they were specifically authorized, and, if such bonds are not sold within two years after authorization, such authorization shall be null and void, except when delay is authorized by the Municipal Finance Commission. In case of litigation, the two year period shall start at the time of the filing of the final judgment or decree. In case of bonds authorized to be issued in two or more parts or series, the first part or series shall be sold within two years after authorization. 
ARTICLE 14. - PURCHASES-SALES-CONTRACTS-LEASES 

Sec. 14.1. - [Purchasing procedure.] 
    Detailed purchasing, sale and contract procedures shall be established by ordinance, subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  The City Clerk shall be responsible for the purchase and sale of all city property. 
(b)  In all sales or purchases in excess of the amount set by ordinance: 
(1)  The sale or purchase shall be approved by the Council, and 
(2)  Sealed bids shall be obtained unless the Council by unanimous resolution of those present at the meeting, based upon the written recommendations of the City Manager, determines that it would not be advantageous to the city to obtain sealed bids. 
(c)  No sale or purchase shall be divided for the purpose of circumventing the dollar value limitation contained in this section. 
(d)  It is provided, however, that the Council may authorize the making of public improvements (or the performance of any other city work) by any city agency without competitive bidding. 
(e)  Purchases shall be made from the lowest competent bidder meeting specifications. Sales shall be made to the bidder whose bid is most advantageous to the city. 
(f)  All purchases and sales in excess of fifty dollars shall be evidence by written contract or purchase order. 
(g)  The purchase and sale of all city real property shall be subject to the provisions of Section (5.6). 
(h)  The purchasing services of the city shall be made available without charge to any public authority in which the city has and interest. 
Sec. 14.2. - Contracts. 
(a)  All contracts and leases to which the city is a party when this charter becomes effective shall remain in full force and effect. 
(b)  The authority to contract on behalf of the city is vested [in] the Council and shall be exercised in accordance with the provisions of statute and of this charter, provided that purchases and sales may be made by the City Clerk subject to the provisions of law and this charter. 
(c)  No compensation shall be paid to any contractor except in accordance with the terms of the contract. 
(d)  No contract shall be made with any person in default to the city. 
(e)  An individual agreement of employment shall not be deemed a contract requiring opinion by the Attorney or certification by the Clerk. 
Sec. 14.3. - Restriction on Powers to Lease Property. 
(a)  Any agreement or contract whereby the city leases its own property to any lessee for a period longer than three years shall be subject to 45 days to the same referendum procedures as is provided in the case of ordinances passed by the council. Petitions for such referendum must be filed within 45 days after publication. 
(b)  The transfer or assignment of any agreement or contract for renting or leasing of public property may be made only upon approval of the Council but approval of such transfer shall not be subject to referendum. 
(c)  Rental and leases and renewals thereof shall be for a fair consideration as determined by the Council. 
ARTICLE 15. - STREETS, SIDEWALKS, SEWERS, AND DRAINS 

Sec. 15.1. - [Control of public rights-of-way.] 
    The City shall have control of and maintain all streets, highways and alleys in the city and may improve the same by grading, graveling, curbing, paving, repaving, constructing sidewalks, or otherwise, and shall have authority to lay out open, widen, extend, straighten, alter, close, vacate or abolish any highway, street or alley in the city, whenever they shall deem the same a public improvement. The expense of such improvement and or maintenance may be paid by special assessment upon the property adjacent to or benefited by such improvement, in the manner in this charter provided for levying and collecting special assessment, or, in the discretion of the Council, a portion of such cost and expenses may be paid by special assessments as aforesaid, and the balance by the city. 
Sec. 15.2. - [Authority to establish or alter grade of streets and public grounds.] 
    The City shall have authority to determine and establish the grade of all streets, avenues, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, and public grounds within the city and may change or alter the grade of any street, sidewalk, curb, alley, or public ground, or any part thereof, whenever, in their opinion, the public convenience will be promoted thereby. Whenever a grade shall be established or altered, a record and diagram thereof shall be kept in the office of the official or department, as the Council may determine by administrative order. 
Sec. 15.3. - [Conformity of grades established by the city, paid by the city.] 
    Whenever any street, alley or public ground or highway shall have been graded, or pavement, sidewalk or curb shall have been constructed in conformity to grades established by authority of the city, and the expenses thereof shall have been assessed upon lots or lands bounded by or abutting upon such street, alley, sidewalk, curb or public highway, the owner or owners of such lots or lands shall not be subject to any special assessment occasioned by any subsequent change of grade of such pavement, alley, sidewalk, curb or public highway, but the expense of all the improvements occasioned by such change of grade shall be chargeable to and be paid by the city. 
Sec. 15.4. - [Council to determine payee of improvements.] 
    Such part of the expense of improving or repairing any street, land or alley, by grading, graveling, paving, repaving, curbing, constructing sidewalks or otherwise improving or repairing the same as Council shall determine, and in keeping the same free from dust and nuisance, may be paid by the city, or the whole or part of the expense of such improvement, as the Council shall determine, may be defrayed by special assessment upon the lots and premises included in a special assessment district, to be constituted of the lands fronting upon that part of the street or alley so improved or proposed so to be, or constituted of lands fronting upon such improvement and such other lands as in the opinion of the Council may be benefited by the improvement. 
Sec. 15.5. - [Special assessment for construction of sewers.] 
    Special assessments for the construction of sewers and drains shall be made in the manner provided in this charter for making special assessments. 
Sec. 15.6. - [Owners may connect private to public sewers upon approval.] 
    The owners or occupants of lots and premises may connect the same at their own expense by means of private drains with public sewers and drains, under such rules and regulations as may be determined by the appropriate city officials. 
Sec. 15.7. - [Improvements of ditches, etc., defrayed by special assessment.] 
    Such part of the expense of providing ditches and drains and improving water courses as the Council may determine, may be defrayed by special assessment upon the lands and premises benefited thereby. 
ARTICLE 16. - MUNICIPAL UTILITIES[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- Restrictions on municipal utilities, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, §§ 24, 25. 

Sec. 16.1. - General Powers Respecting Utilities. 
    The city shall possess and hereby reserve to itself all the powers granted to cities by statute and constitutions to acquire, construct, own, operate, improve, enlarge, extend, repair and maintain, either within or without its corporate limits, including, but not limited to public utilities for supplying water, light, heat, power, gas, sewage collection, sewage and garage disposal facilities, or any of them, to the municipality and the inhabitants thereof; and also to sell and deliver water, light, heat, power, gas and other public utility services without its corporate limits to an amount and to a territory not exceeding the limitations set by statute and constitution. 
Sec. 16.2. - Management of municipally Owned or Operated Utilities. 
    Each municipally owned or operated utility shall be administered as a regular department of the city government under the management and supervision of the City Manager. 
Sec. 16.3. - Fixing Rates. 
    The Council shall have the power to fix from time to time, such just and reasonable rates and other charges as may be deemed advisable for supplying the inhabitants of the city and others with such public utility services as the city may provide. 
    The rates and charges of any municipal public utility for the furnishing of public utility services shall be so fixed as to at least meet all the costs of such utilities. There shall be no discrimination in such rates within any classification of users thereof, nor shall free service be permitted, but higher rates may be charged for service outside the city limits. 
Sec. 16.4. - Collection of Charges. 
    The council shall provide by ordinance for the collection of all public utility rates and charges of the city. Such ordinance shall provide at least: 
(a)  The city shall have as security for the collection of such utility rates and charges a lien upon the real property supplied by such utility service and shall be enforced in the manner provided in such ordinance. 
(b)  The terms and conditions under which utility services may be discontinued in case of delinquency in paying such rates or charges. 
(c)  That suit may be instituted by the city in any competent tribunal for the collection of such rates or charges. 
Sec. 16.5. - Utility Finances. 
(a)  Separate accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the city. Such accounts for utilities for the furnishing of public utility services shall be designed to show the financial results of city ownership or operation in the same manner as the financial results of a corresponding privately-owned utility would be shown, except that taxes need not be accounted for. To that end the accounts shall show all assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses, reserves, and surplus. Revenues shall include charges rendered by such utility to any other city department or fund, including by the way of illustration but not limited thereto, charges for water for municipal buildings and fire hydrant rentals. Such charges shall be computed in a reasonable manner considering cost and value of the service and the practice of privately owned utilities and where the service is comparable to that provided to other customers, the charge shall be the same as to other customers. 
(b)  Expenses shall include charges for services rendered to such utility by other city departments. All the inter-departmental charges provided for herein shall actually be made in the accounts of the city. 
(c)  The rates and charges for any municipal public utility for the furnishing of public utility services shall be so fixed as to at least, meet all costs of such utility. 
(d)  Except for the inter-departmental charges provided for herein and except for temporary short-term loans in anticipation of taxes or receipts, there shall be no transfer of funds to or from any utility for the furnishing of public utility services from or to any other fund or account of the city, unless approved by a majority vote of the electors of the city voting thereon, or unless such utility is discontinued, and all outstanding debt service obligations and bond covenants have been met and all statutory requirements have been complied with. If money is loaned to other city funds in anticipation of tax collections or receipts, it shall be repaid to the utility at the earliest possible date at which monies are available, but in no case more than one year after borrowing. 
(e)  Nothing contained herein, however, shall prevent the city from pledging its full faith and credit for the payment of principal and interest on bonds issued for the purpose of any such utility or to use general city monies to pay such principal and interest if sufficient monies therefor are not available in the funds of such utility. 
ARTICLE 17. - PUBLIC UTILITY FRANCHISES 

Sec. 17.1. - Franchises Remain in Effect. 
    All franchises to which the city is a party when this charter becomes effective shall remain in full force and effect in accordance with their respective terms and conditions. 
Sec. 17.2. - Granting of Public Utility Franchises. 
(a)  Public utility franchises and all renewals, extensions thereof and amendments shall be granted by ordinance only. No exclusive franchise shall ever be granted. No franchise shall be granted for a longer period than thirty years. 
(b)  No franchise ordinance which is not subject to revocation at the will of the Council shall be enacted nor become operative until the same shall have first been referred to the people at a regular or special election and received the affirmative vote of three-fifths of the electors voting thereon. No such franchise ordinance shall be approved by the Council for referral to the electorate before thirty days after application has been filed with the Council nor until a public hearing has been held, nor until the grantee named therein has filed with the Clerk his unconditional acceptance of all terms of such franchise. No special election for such purpose shall be ordered by the Council unless the expense of holding such election as determined by the Council shall have first been paid to the Treasurer by the proposed grantee. 
(c)  A franchise ordinance or renewal or extension or amendment which is subject to revocation at the will of the Council may be enacted by the Council without referral to the voters but shall not be enacted unless the form in which it is finally enacted shall have been on file in the office of the Clerk for public inspection for at least four weeks after publication of a notice that such ordinance is so on file. 
State Law reference- Submittal to electors required if franchise irrevocable, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 25; expense of special election to be paid by grantee, MCL 117.5(i); franchise limited to 30 years, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 30. 
Sec. 17.3. - Conditions of Public Utility Franchises. 
    All public utility franchises granted or renewed after the adoption of this charter whether it be so provided in the granting ordinance or not, shall be subject to the following rights of the city, but this enumeration shall not be exclusive or impair the right of the Council to insert in such franchise any provision within the power of the city to impose or require: 
(a)  To repeal the same for misuse, nonuse or failure to comply with the provisions thereof. 
(b)  To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard of efficiency. 
(c)  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates. 
(d)  To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period. 
(e)  To use, control and regulate the use of its streets, alleys, bridges and other public places and the space above and beneath them. 
(f)  To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the Council to be conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public. 
Sec. 17.4. - Regulation of Rates. 
    All public utility franchises shall make provisions for fixing rates, fares and charges and may provide for readjustments thereof at periodic intervals. The value of the property of the utility used as a basis for fixing such rates, fares and charges shall in no event include a value predicted upon the franchise, goodwill or prospective profits. 
Sec. 17.5. - Use of Public Places by Utilities. 
    Every public utility whether it has a franchise or not shall pay such part of the cost of improvement or maintenance of streets, alleys, bridges and public places as shall arise from its use and shall protect and save the city harmless from all damages arising from said use. Every such public utility may be required by the city to permit joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys or other public places of the city by the city and by other utilities insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental thereof. In the absence of agreement and upon application by any public utility, the Council shall provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and compensation to be paid therefor, and the arbitration award shall be final. 
ARTICLE 18. - CEMETERY 

Sec. 18.1. - Cemetery. 
(a)  The present cemetery belonging to the city of Cadillac shall continue and the city shall have the power to acquire, own, hold, extend and improve such property for cemetery purposes as shall be necessary and suitable therefor. 
(b)  The Cemetery Board shall consist of three members, appointed by the City Council and responsible to the Council. One member shall be appointed by the Council during the month of January in each year for a term of three years. The Board shall elect one of its members chairman and the City Clerk shall be Clerk of the Board. 
(c)  The Cemetery Board shall serve as the advisory authority for the Cemetery with the responsibility of recommending rules and charges for general cemetery practices to the City Council. 
(d)  The City Manager shall be charged with the duty of enforcing all rules and ordinances of the city relating to the cemetery. He shall also be responsible for the care, management and preservation of the cemetery and grounds. 
(e)  Funds paid in trust shall be placed in a perpetual Care Fund which will be maintained as a separated fund. Interest earned by the fund as well as interest from other investments of the trust will be transferred to the city General Fund as received. 
(f)  The Cemetery Board shall be furnished copies of all financial reports compiled by the City Treasurer which apply to cemetery funds. 
ARTICLE 19. - AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference- Intergovernmental contracts between municipal corporations, MCL 124.1 et seq.; intergovernmental transfers of functions and responsibilities, MCL 124.531 et seq. 

Sec. 19.1. - [Authority.] 
    The Council shall have authority to enter into agreements with Wexford County, the Cadillac Area Public Schools, or any other governmental agency for the operation of such commissions, boards or authorities, as may be in existence or be established for the operation and supervision of a facility or department. Funds may be provided in the annual budget for the city's share for operation of such facility. Agreements, when entered into for funding, member representation of boards, and services shall provide contributions and representatives as proportionate as feasible to the number of governmental agencies operating such facility or department. 
ARTICLE 2[0]. - SCHEDULE OF TRANSITION 

Sec. 20.1. - [Purpose.] 
    The purpose of this schedule article is to inaugurate the government of the city under this charter and to accomplish the transition from the old to the new charter, and it shall constitute a part of this charter only to the extent and for the time required to accomplish this end. 
Sec. 20.2. - Election to Adopt This Charter. 
    This charter shall be submitted to a vote of the qualified electors of the city of Cadillac at a regular municipal election to be held on November 2, 1976. This election shall be conducted by the officers charged with the conduct and supervision of elections under the existing charter, and shall follow the election procedure established by law. 
Sec. 20.3. - Form of Ballot. 
    The form of the ballot for the submission of this charter shall be as follows: 
    Shall the proposed charter for the city of Cadillac drafted by the Charter Commission elected on November 4, 1975 be adopted? 
Yes 
No 
Sec. 20.4. - Effective Date of This Charter. 
    For all purposes not otherwise provided for herein this charter shall take effect at 12:01 a.m., January 1, 1978. 
Sec. 20.5. - Continuation of Appointed Officers and Employees. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, after the effective date of this charter, all appointive officers and all employees of the city shall continue in the respective offices and employments corresponding to the city office or employment which they held prior to the effective date of the charter as though they had been appointed or employed in the manner herein provided, and they shall in all respects be subject to the provisions of this charter; except that any officer or employee who holds an office or position which this charter provides shall be at the pleasure of the appointing officer or body and shall hold such position only upon such condition regardless of the term for which originally appointed. 
Sec. 20.6. - Transitional Finance and Taxation. 
    In order to accomplish the transition from the fiscal year as existing to the fiscal year provided for in this charter, the period from January 1, 1978 through March 31, 1979 and April 1, 1979 through June 30, 1980, shall constitute fiscal and budget periods. Special budgets for said periods shall be prepared by the City Manager and City Clerk and be submitted to the Council in the form required by the existing charter. These special budgets shall be for two (2) fifteen month periods each; and same shall be prepared by the existing City Manager and City Clerk in compliance with the provisions of this charter. The City Council shall hold a public hearing on the first budget on December 19, 1977, notice of which shall be published in some newspaper of general circulation in the city at least seven days prior to said hearing. At the meeting of the Council on January 2, 1978, the Council shall take up and consider said budget and make the appropriations therefore in the same manner as required by the existing charter. Taxes may be levied for appropriations for money needed for municipal purposes for the first fifteen month interim fiscal and budget period, and taxes levied in the year of 1978 shall be for appropriations for money needed for municipal purposes for fiscal period commencing January 1, 1978 and ending March 31, 1979. Taxes may be levied for appropriations for money needed for municipal purposes for the second fifteen month interim fiscal and budget period, and taxes levied in the year of 1979 shall be for appropriations for money needed for municipal purposes for the fiscal period commencing April 1, 1979 and ending June 30, 1980. There shall be an audit of these transitional fiscal periods in accordance with the provisions of Section (10.7). The ad valorem tax levy for the two (2) transitional fiscal periods shall not exceed 1.875 percent of the assessed value of all real and personal property. 
Sec. 20.7. - Fiscal Year Procedures. 
    All procedures and duties relating to the preparation of the assessment roll and Board of Review in 1978 shall be performed by the existing officers of the city in accordance with the provisions of this charter. 
RESOLUTION OF ADOPTION 
    At a regular meeting of the Charter Commission of the City of Cadillac held on the 12th day of August, 1976 the following resolution was offered by Commissioner Miltner. 
    RESOLVED, that the Charter Commission of the City of Cadillac does hereby adopt the foregoing proposed charter for the City of Cadillac. The Clerk of the Commission is directed (1) to transmit two copies of this charter to the Governor of the State of Michigan for his approval in accordance with statute, (2) to file with the City Clerk a copy of this Charter, and (3) to cause this proposed Charter to be published in the Cadillac Evening News. 
    The resolution was seconded by Commissioner Frier and adopted by the following vote: 
    Yeas: Commissioners Gibson, Lee, Crain, Miltner, Snider, Frier and Reiser. 
    Nays: None. 
    Absent: Sorger. 
    The chairman declared the foregoing resolution carried unanimously and requested the members of the Charter Commission to authenticate said resolution and also the two copies of the charter to be presented to the Governor. The members thereupon authenticated said resolution and the copies of the charter to be presented to the Governor by subscribing their names as follows. 
    Audrey J. Crain, James D. Gibson, Charles H. Miltner, David H. Reiser, Chairman, Alan C. Frier, Robert M.D. Lee, John M. Snider. 
    All of the Commissioners present at the meeting having attested as to said resolution and the copies to be transmitted to the Governor and to be filed with the City Clerk, the meeting adjourned subject to the call of the Chairman. 
    John H. Weed, Clerk of the Charter Commission, City of Cadillac, Michigan. 
    Edward W. TenHouten, Attorney for Commission. 
    I, John H. Weed, Clerk of the Charter Commission of the City of Cadillac, being duly sworn, saith that an election duly called and held in the City of Cadillac on the 4th day of November, 1975, the following persons were duly elected as the Charter Commission to frame a revised charter for the city, namely Gerald A. Faloon, Charles H. Miltner, Jon M. Moore, David H. Reiser, Audrey J. Crain, Stephen J. Sorger, Alan C. Frier, John M. Snider and James D. Gibson and thereafter, on April 28, 1976 the resignation of Jon M. Moore was tendered to the Commission and accepted and at the same meeting Robert M.D. Lee was duly sworn as a member of said Commission in his place and stead, and that thereafter on May 19, 1976 the resignation of Gerald A. Faloon was tendered to the Commission and accepted and no person was appointed to this vacancy; that the annexed and the forgoing charter was duly adopted by said Charter Commission by the forgoing resolution which is a true and direct copy thereof, and presented to the electors of the City of Cadillac in accordance with the requirements of this charter and laws of the State of Michigan. 
    Further deponent sayeth not. 
    John H. Weed, Clerk of the Charter Commission of the City of Cadillac, Michigan. 
    Subscribed and sworn to before me this 12th day of August, 1976, Kenneth C. Rudolph, Notary Public, Wexford County, Michigan. My Commission expires: September 3, 1979. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Referendum Date  Section 
this Charter 11- 4-1999 2.5  7-17-2006 8.9 8.11 11- 3-2009 11.5  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Cadillac, Michigan," and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as the "Cadillac City Code." 
(Prior Code, § 1.5) 
State Law reference- Authority to codify ordinances, MCL 117.5b. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Code and any amendment thereto, shall, for the purpose of this Code, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Generally. When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general. All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the council may be effectuated. Terms and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical terms, technical phrases and terms, and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings. 
    Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Cadillac, Michigan. 
    City. The term "city" means the City of Cadillac, Michigan. 
    City council and council. The terms "city council" and "council" mean the City Council of the City of Cadillac, Michigan. 
    Civil infraction. The term "civil infraction" means an act or omission prohibited by law which is not a crime and for which civil sanctions may be ordered. 
    Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Cadillac, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. In computing a period of days, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any period or a fixed or final day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the period or day is extended to include the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
    Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either...or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either...or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly, but not in combination. 
    County. The term "county" means Wexford County, Michigan, as the context requires. 
    Crime. The term "crime" means an act or omission forbidden by law that is not designated as a civil infraction and that is punishable, upon conviction, by any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Imprisonment. 
(2)  A fine not designated as a civil fine. 
(3)  Other penal discipline. 
    Gender. Terms of one gender include the other gender. 
    Health department and department of public health. The terms "health department" and "department of public health" mean the county health department. 
    Health officer. The term "health officer" means the director of the county health department. 
    Includes and including. The terms "includes" and "including" are terms of enlargement and not of limitation or exclusive enumeration, and the use of the terms does not create a presumption that components not expressed are excluded. 
    Joint authority. A grant of authority to three or more persons as a public body confers the authority on a majority of the number of members as fixed by statute or ordinance. 
    May. The term "may" is construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
    May not. The term "may not" states a prohibition. 
    MCL. The abbreviation "MCL" means the Michigan Compiled Laws, as amended. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Municipal civil infraction. The term "municipal civil infraction" means an act or omission that is prohibited by this Code or any ordinance of the city, but which is not a crime under this Code or other ordinance, and for which civil sanctions, including, without limitation, fines, damages, expenses and costs, may be ordered, as authorized by ch. 87 of Public Act No. 236 of 1961 (MCL 600.8701 et seq.). A municipal civil infraction is not a lesser included offense of a violation of this Code that is a criminal offense. 
    Must. The term "must" is construed as being mandatory. 
    Officers, departments, boards, commissions or employees. References to "officers," "departments," "boards," "commissions" or "employees" are to city officers, city departments, city boards, city commissions and city employees. 
    Person. The term "person" means and shall include any individual, copartnership, corporation, association, club, joint venture, estate, trust, and any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the individuals constituting such group or unit. 
    Public acts. References to "public acts" shall be references to the Public Acts of Michigan. (For example, a reference to Public Act No. 279 of 1909 is a reference to Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1909.) Any reference to a public act, whether by act number or by short title, is a reference to the act as amended. 
    Public place. The term "public place" means any place to or upon which the public resorts, or travels, whether such place is owned or controlled by the city or any agency of the state, or is a place to or upon which the public resorts or travels by custom, or by invitation, express or implied. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curblines or lateral lines and the right-of-way lines which is intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    State. The term "state" means the State of Michigan. 
    Street, highway and alley. The terms "street," "highway," and "alley" mean the entire width, subject to an easement for public right-of-way, or owned in fee by the city, county or state, of every way or place, of whatever nature, whenever any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right for purposes of public travel. The term "alley" shall mean any such way or place providing a secondary means of ingress and egress from a property. 
    Week. The term "week" means seven consecutive days. 
    Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Written. The term "written" shall include any representation of words, letters, symbols or figures. 
    Year. The term "year" shall mean 12 consecutive months. 
(Prior Code, §§ 1.8, 1.12) 
State Law reference- Definitions and rules of construction applicable to state statutes, MCL 8.3 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Section catchlines and other headings; references and history notes. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code, printed in boldface type, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and are not titles of such sections, or of any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any such section, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code have no legal effect and only indicate legislative history. State law references and editor's notes that appear in this Code after sections or subsections, or that otherwise appear in footnote form, are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters, articles, divisions and subdivisions or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code. 
(d)  No provision of this Code shall be held invalid by reason of deficiency in any chapter, article, division, subdivision or section heading. 
(Prior Code, § 1.6) 
State Law reference- Catchlines in state statutes, MCL 8.4b. 
Sec. 1-4. - Title of officer to include deputy or subordinate. 
    Whenever, by the provisions of this Code, any officer of the city is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty, the title of said officer shall mean and include such officer or his deputy or authorized subordinate. 
(Prior Code, § 1.9) 
Sec. 1-5. - Tense. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context, all words used in this Code indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of adoption of this Code but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any act, event, or requirement for which provision is made therein, either as a power, immunity, requirement or prohibition. 
(Prior Code, § 1.10) 
Sec. 1-6. - Notice regarding repairs, connections, etc. 
(a)  Notice regarding sidewalk repairs, sewer or water connections, dangerous structures, abating nuisances or any other act, the expense of which if performed by the city, may be assessed against the premises under the provisions of this Code, and shall be served: 
(1)  By delivering the notice to the owner personally or by leaving the same at his residence, office or place of business with some person of suitable age and discretion; 
(2)  By mailing said notice by certified or registered mail to such owner at his last known address; or 
(3)  If the owner is unknown, by posting said notice in some conspicuous place on the premises at least five days before the act or action concerning which the notice is given is required or is to occur. 
(b)  No person shall interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, conceal, or tear down any official notice or placard posted by any city officer, unless permission is given by said officer to remove said notice. 
(Prior Code, § 1.11) 
Sec. 1-7. - Amendment procedure. 
    This Code shall be amended by ordinance. The title of each amendatory ordinance, adapted to the particular circumstances and purposes of the amendment, shall be substantially as follows: 
(1)  To amend any section: 
An ordinance to amend sections ____________ and ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Cadillac, Michigan. 
(2)  To insert a new section or chapter: 
An ordinance to amend the Code of ordinances, City of Cadillac, Michigan, by adding a new section (or a new chapter, as the case may be) which new section (or chapter) shall be designated as section ____________ (or proper designation if a chapter is added) of this Code. 
(3)  To repeal a section or chapter: 
An ordinance to repeal section ____________ or chapter (as the case may be) of the Code of Ordinances, City of Cadillac, Michigan. 
(Prior Code, § 1.2) 
Sec. 1-8. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of the supplement shall be numbered so that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be prepared so that when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)  Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in the Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in the Code. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to the Code. 
(4)  Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections. 
(5)  Change the terms "this ordinance," or similar terms, to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section" or "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code). 
(6)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in the Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously adopted by the city relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions as to state statutes, MCL 8.3u. 
Sec. 1-10. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any city ordinance on the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any ordinance or portion of any ordinance: 
(1)  Annexing property into the city or describing the corporate limits. 
(2)  Deannexing property or excluding property from the city. 
(3)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(4)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed or agreement. 
(5)  Granting any specific right or franchise, or establishing the procedure for granting a right or franchise. 
(6)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(7)  Providing for the duties of city officers or employees not codified in this Code. 
(8)  Providing for salaries or other employee benefits. 
(9)  Adopting or amending a master plan. 
(10)  Levying or imposing any special assessments. 
(11)  Dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley. 
(12)  Establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk. 
(13)  Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision. 
(14)  Not codified in this Code that levies, imposes or otherwise relates to taxes, exemptions from taxes and fees in lieu of taxes. 
(15)  Pertaining to rezoning property. 
(16)  That is temporary, although general in effect. 
(17)  That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(18)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
(b)  The ordinances or portions of ordinances designated in subsection (a) of this section continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  Unless specifically provided otherwise, the repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance originally repealed, nor impair the effect of any saving provision therein. 
(b)  The repeal or amendment of an ordinance does not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor does such repeal or amendment affect any rights, privileges, suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the amendment or repeal. 
State Law reference- Effect of repeal of state statutes, MCL 8.4. 
Sec. 1-13. - Severability. 
    It is the legislative intent of the city council in adopting this Code, that all provisions and sections of this chapter be liberally construed to protect and preserve the peace, health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and should any provision or section of this chapter be held unconstitutional or invalid, such holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of any of the remaining provisions or sections, it being the intent that this chapter shall stand, notwithstanding the invalidity of any provision or section thereof. The provisions of this section shall apply to the amendment of any section of this Code, whether or not the wording of this section is set forth in the amendatory ordinance. 
(Prior Code, § 1.13) 
Sec. 1-14. - Penalty. 
(a)  Unless a violation of this Code or any ordinance of the city is specifically designated in the Code or ordinance as a municipal civil infraction, the violation shall be deemed a misdemeanor. 
(b)  The penalty for a misdemeanor violation shall be a fine not exceeding $500.00 (plus costs of prosecution), or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both, unless a specific penalty is otherwise provided for the violation, by this Code or any ordinance. However, unless otherwise provided by law, a person convicted of a violation of this Code which substantially corresponds to a violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of imprisonment is 93 days, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 93 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(c)  The sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil infraction shall be a civil fine in the amount as provided by this Code or any ordinance, plus any costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions, as authorized under ch. 87 of Public Act No. 236 of 1961 (MCL 600.8701 et seq.), and other applicable laws. 
(1)  Unless otherwise specifically provided for, a particular municipal civil infraction violation, by this Code or any ordinance, the civil fine for a violation shall be not less than $50.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. 
(2)  Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeated violations by a person of any requirement or provision of this Code or any ordinance. As used in this section, the term "repeat offense" means a second (or any subsequent) municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provisions (i) committed by a person within any six-month period (unless some other period is specifically provided by this Code or any ordinance) and (ii) for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. Unless otherwise specifically provided by this Code or any ordinance for a particular municipal civil infraction violation, the increased fine for a repeat offense shall be as follows: 
a.  The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be no less than $250.00, plus costs. 
b.  The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense, or any subsequent repeat offense, shall be no less than $500.00, plus costs. 
c.  A "violation" includes any act which is prohibited or made or declared to be unlawful or an offense by this Code or any ordinance and any omission or failure to act where the act is required by this Code or any ordinance. 
d.  Each day on which any violation of this Code or any ordinance continues constitutes a separate offense and shall be subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate offense. 
e.  In addition to any remedies available at law, the city may bring an action for an injunction or other process against a person to restrain, prevent or abate any violation of this Code or any city ordinance. 
The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any section of this Code whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. 
(Prior Code, § 1.12; Ord. No. 95-21, 8-7-1995) 
Sec. 1-15. - Responsibility. 
    Whenever any act is prohibited by this Code, by an amendment thereof, or by any rule or regulation adopted thereunder, such prohibition shall extend to and include the causing, securing, aiding, or abetting of another person to do said act. 
(Prior Code, § 1.7) 
Sec. 1-16. - Use of appearance tickets by certain city officials. 
(a)  The following public servants, including his or her deputy or authorized subordinate, shall have the authority to serve upon a person, an appearance ticket for a misdemeanor, municipal civil infraction or civil infraction prohibited by an ordinance of the city, if the public official, or his or her deputy or duly authorized subordinate, has reasonable cause to believe the person has committed an offense, municipal civil infraction or civil infraction, to wit: 
(1)  Public safety director, fire marshal, fire chief or their designees. 
(2)  Zoning administrator. 
(3)  City engineer. 
(4)  Public works director. 
(5)  Street superintendent. 
(6)  Superintendent of parks, forestry and cemetery. 
(7)  Parks supervisor. 
(8)  Community development director. 
(9)  Person in charge of downtown maintenance. 
(10)  City police officer. 
(11)  City clerk. 
(12)  City code/parking enforcement officer. 
(b)  Appearance ticket means a complaint or written notice issued and subscribed by a police officer or other public servant authorized in subsection (a) of this section, directing a designated person to appear in a designated local court at a designated future time in connection with his alleged violation of a city ordinance for which the maximum permissible penalty does not exceed 93 days in jail and a fine of $500.00. The appearance tickets shall be numbered consecutively, be in such form as determined by the attorney general, the state court administrator, and the director of the department of the state police, and shall consist of the following parts: 
(1)  The original which shall be a complaint or notice to appear by the officer and filed with the court. 
(2)  The first copy which shall be the abstract of court record. 
(3)  The second copy which shall be retained by the local enforcement agency. 
(4)  The third copy which shall be delivered to the alleged violator. 
(c)  This section is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth the Public Act No. 366 of 1984 (MCL 764.9c). 
(Prior Code, § 1.15; Ord. No. 95-21, 8-7-1995; Ord. No. 2002-16, 5-20-2002; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 8-2-2010) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Home rule cities, MCL 117.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq.; freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq. 

Secs. 2-19-2-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq.; standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.; conflicts of interests as to contracts, MCL 15.321 et seq.; political activities by public employees, MCL 15.401 et seq.; legal defense of public employees, MCL 691.1408; incompatible offices, MCL 15.181 et seq.; nondiscrimination in employment, MCL 37.2102. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-40-2-66. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATIVE POLICY AND PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-67. - City manager. 
    The city manager shall see that all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations adopted by the city council, and the provisions of this Code, are properly enforced. He shall attend all meetings of the city council, regular and special. During the absence or disability of the manager, some qualified person to temporarily perform the duties of the manager shall be designated as prescribed in section 7.2 of the Charter. 
(Prior Code, § 1.41) 
Sec. 2-68. - Department heads. 
    All administrative officers are responsible to the city manager for the effective administration of their respective departments and offices, and all activities assigned to them. He shall employ or appoint all officers and employees, except as otherwise provided by the city Charter or this Code. The city manager may set aside any action taken by any administrative officer and may supersede him in the functions of his office but, as to officers appointed by the city council, such action shall be subject to approval by the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 1.42) 
Sec. 2-69. - Vacancies. 
    In case of a vacancy in office or during the absence of any administrative officer, the city manager may designate any interim acting head or perform personally the functions of the office, until such vacancy is filled in accordance with the Charter. 
(Prior Code, § 1.43) 
Sec. 2-70. - All departments. 
    All departments of the city shall comply with the following: 
(1)  All department heads shall keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular field and shall inaugurate, with the approval of the city manager in the case of departments responsible to him or in the case of other departments, with the approval of the officer or body to whom the department head is responsible, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the service and to the public. 
(2)  Reports of the activities of each department shall be made to the manager as he shall direct. 
(3)  Each department head shall be held responsible for the preservation of all public records under his jurisdiction and shall provide a system of filing and indexing the same. 
(Prior Code, § 1.44) 
Sec. 2-71. - Administrative manual. 
    The city manager is authorized to adopt such administrative regulations in addition to, but not inconsistent with, the Charter and this Code, as he shall deem necessary and proper to provide for the adequate functioning of all departments. Such regulations shall comprise the administrative manual. 
(Prior Code, § 1.45) 
Sec. 2-72. - Payment of monies. 
    All monies belonging to the city shall be paid out by checks drawn by the city treasurer. 
(Prior Code, § 1.46) 
Sec. 2-73. - Approval of legal documents. 
    The mayor shall sign, the city clerk shall attest to, the city manager shall approve as to substance, and the city attorney shall approve as to form, all contracts and agreements requiring the assent of the city, unless otherwise provided for by law, the Charter, ordinances or the provisions of this Code. 
(Prior Code, § 1.47) 
Secs. 2-74-2-104. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq.; freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-105. - General provisions. 
    All boards and commissions existing at the time of the adoption of this Code shall be continued and the members serving thereon shall remain in office for the duration of the term for which they were appointed. 
(Prior Code, § 1.91) 
Sec. 2-106. - Vacancies. 
    Unless otherwise provided, any vacancy occurring in the membership of any board or commission shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term in the manner provided for original appointment. 
(Prior Code, § 1.92) 
Sec. 2-107. - Removal. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Code, or other law, the appointing authority may remove any member of any board or commission for cause, but any member shall be entitled to a public hearing on such removal, on written demand filed with the appointing authority within ten days after notice of removal has been given to such member. 
(Prior Code, § 1.93) 
Sec. 2-108. - Compensation. 
    Unless otherwise provided, all members of boards and commissions shall serve without compensation as members thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 1.94) 
Secs. 2-109-2-129. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-130. - Created. 
    The planning commission is hereby created with the powers and duties set forth, and in accordance with Public Act No. 33 of 2008 (MCL 125.3801 et seq.). 
(Prior Code, § 1.101) 
Sec. 2-131. - Members; appointments; terms. 
    The planning commission shall consist of nine members, consisting of two members not holding an elective municipal office, who shall be appointed by the mayor with approval of the council from each of the four wards of the city, and the mayor of the city. The term of each appointed member shall be for a period of three years, except in the first instance, the term of two of the members first appointed shall be for one year, and the term of three of the members first appointed shall be for two years. Members, other than the mayor, may be removed, after a public hearing, by the city council for inefficiency, neglect of duties or malfeasance in office. All vacancies shall be filled by the council, and all vacancies shall be appointed from the ward in which the vacancy occurs. In the event any member shall move his residency from the ward in which he resided when appointed, the office shall be deemed vacant. The city manager shall attend all meetings of the commission and act as the clerk of the commission. 
(Prior Code, § 1.102) 
Secs. 2-132-2-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HOUSING COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-161. - Created. 
    Pursuant to Public Act No. 18 of the extra session of 1933 (MCL 125.651 et seq.), the commission created in and for the city, known as the Cadillac Housing Commission is created. 
(Prior Code, § 1.121) 
Sec. 2-162. - Appointment of members. 
    The mayor of the city is hereby directed to appoint the members of the city housing commission, with the consent and approval of the city council. Said housing commission shall consist of five members, each of whose term shall be five years. Members of the first housing commission shall be appointed for the terms of one year, two years, three years, four years and five years, respectively, and annually thereafter one member shall be appointed for a term of five years. Said members shall serve without compensation and may be removed from office by the appointing authority. Any vacancy in office shall be filled by the appointing authority for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Prior Code, § 1.122) 
Sec. 2-163. - Powers and duties. 
    The city housing commission shall have all the powers and duties vested or permitted to be vested in housing commissions by said Public Act No. 18 of the extra session of 1933 (MCL 125.651 et seq.), it being intended to vest in the city housing commission all powers and duties permitted by law. 
(Prior Code, § 1.123) 
Sec. 2-164. - Employees. 
    The city housing commission shall select and appoint such employees as it shall deem necessary for the proper exercise of its powers, functions and duties, and shall pay them such compensation as it shall, with the approval of the mayor and city council, fix and determine. 
(Prior Code, § 1.124) 
Sec. 2-165. - Payment of annual service fee in lieu of taxes. 
(1)  Pursuant to section 11a(1) of Public Act No. 18 of 1933 (MCL 125.661a(1)), the housing commission shall, beginning in 2014, being the 2013 tax year, pay on or before March 31 of that year, and on or before the same date annually, a service fee in lieu of taxes equal to ten percent of the annual shelter rents obtained from the projects and facilities owned and operated by a qualified entity or qualified entities. 
    Pursuant to MCL 125.661a(3), the term "qualified entity" or "qualified entities" means either of the following: 
(a)  A Michigan nonprofit corporation or a Michigan limited partnership having a Michigan nonprofit corporation as its sole general partner, if one of the following applies: 
i.  The nonprofit corporation is owned by the commission. 
ii.  A majority of the members of the board of directors of the nonprofit corporation are elected and removable by the commission. 
iii.  The commission is the sole member of the nonprofit corporation. 
(b)  A for-profit corporation, partnership, or company formed or incorporated by the commission for the sole purpose of syndicating low income housing tax credits in connection with the redevelopment of a housing project that has been owned by the commission, if the commission maintains oversight responsibility for the management and operation of the project for which low income housing tax credits were syndicated and the for-profit entity does not engage in any other business activity unrelated to the housing project. 
(2)  The housing commission is responsible for paying the service fee in lieu of taxes for all facilities owned or operated by a qualified entity. 
(3)  No later than 30 days after the close of each calendar year, the housing commission shall provide to the city an accounting showing the gross annual shelter rents received during the previous year from its qualified entities. The housing commission shall provide all information in connection with such accounting as may reasonably be requested by the city for the purpose of verifying the amount of annual shelter rents and the resulting payment of the service fee in lieu of taxes to be paid. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 2-17-2014) 
Secs. 2-166-2-181. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ELECTED OFFICIALS COMPENSATION COMMISSION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Local officers compensation commission, MCL 117.5c. 

Sec. 2-182. - Created. 
    The elected officials compensation commission, which has the duty to establish the salaries of all city elected officials, is created. 
(Prior Code, § 1.141) 
Sec. 2-183. - Memberships; terms; removal, and filling of vacancies. 
    The commission shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the majority of the city council. No member or employee of the legislative, judicial or executive branch of any level of government or members of the immediate family of such members or employees shall be eligible to be a member of the commission. All appointments to the commission shall be for a term of five years, except that the terms of the first members of said commission shall be as follows: one member for one year, one member for two years, one member for three years, one member for four years, and one member for five years. Members shall be appointed before October 1 of the year of the appointment. If any member shall subsequently become disqualified, he shall immediately cease to be a member. All vacancies to the commission shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term in the same manner as the other members were appointed. 
(Prior Code, § 1.142) 
Sec. 2-184. - Organization; meetings; salaries. 
    The commission shall, immediately after appointment, meet and organize by the election of one of their members as chairman and such other officers as they deem necessary. The commission shall meet for not more that 15 days in every odd numbered year. The commission shall make its determination of salaries within 45 calendar days of its first meeting. A majority of the members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for conducting business. The members shall receive no compensation, but shall be entitled to reimbursement of their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. The commission shall determine the salaries of such local elected officials, which determined salaries shall be the salaries, unless rejected by the city council by resolution of two-thirds of the members elected to and serving the city council. The salaries as determined, shall be filed with the city clerk and shall become effective 30 days after they are filed with the city clerk, unless rejected by the city council. In case the city council rejects the commission's determined salaries, the existing salaries shall prevail. No other compensation shall be paid to local elected officials, however, expenses incurred in the course of city business and accounted for to the city shall be reimbursed. 
(Prior Code, § 1.143) 
Sec. 2-185. - Amendments. 
    The procedure for establishing the compensation of elected officials may be changed by Charter amendment or revision. 
(Prior Code, § 1.144) 
Secs. 2-186-2-208. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CADILLAC AREA COUNCIL FOR THE ARTS 

Sec. 2-209. - Created. 
    The Cadillac Area Council for the Arts is created. The Cadillac Area Council for the Arts shall consist of not more than 25 members, to be appointed in the first instance by the mayor, and thereafter to be elected by the membership thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 1.151) 
Sec. 2-210. - Members to serve without remuneration. 
    Membership on said council shall be honorary and the members shall serve without remuneration. 
(Prior Code, § 1.152) 
Sec. 2-211. - Organization. 
(a)  The council shall organize by annually electing a chairman, vice-chairman, secretary and treasurer from its membership and shall adopt its rules of procedure and shall hold such meetings, either regular or special, as it may deem necessary to carry on its work. 
(b)  The Cadillac Area Council for the Arts shall be permitted to adopt bylaws setting forth its membership and rules of procedure. 
(Prior Code, § 1.153) 
Sec. 2-212. - Functions of the council. 
    The functions of the Cadillac Area Council for the Arts shall be to study, analyze and promote the cause of art as a cultural attribute to the city and its citizens, to cooperate with existing and future organizations interested in the various fields of art and to coordinate their activities so as to best promote and stimulate an interest in a comprehensive and considered plan for the promotion of art in the city, and to establish policies, standards and interest in the various cultural fields. 
(Prior Code, § 1.154) 
Secs. 2-213-2-232. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CEMETERY BOARD 

Sec. 2-233. - Powers and duties. 
    The city cemetery board shall be organized in accordance with, and have powers and duties described in, article 18 of the city Charter. 
(Prior Code, § 1.161) 
Secs. 2-234-2-259. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Revised municipal finance act, MCL 141.2101 et seq.; uniform budgeting and accounting act, MCL 141.421 et seq.; deposit of public moneys, MCL 211.43b. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-260. - Handgun registration. 
    There is hereby established a fee, as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time, for processing a handgun registration, which fee shall be charged for each handgun registered. 
(Prior Code, § 9.289; Ord. No. 86-05, 6-2-1986; Ord. No. 87-13, 7-20-1987; Ord. No. 92-03, 2-3-1992) 
Sec. 2-261. - Security escorts. 
    There is hereby established a fee, as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time, for a security escort furnished to a local bank or business by the city police department. 
(Prior Code, § 9.291; Ord. No. 86-05, 6-2-1986) 
Sec. 2-262. - Accident report fees. 
    There is hereby established a fee, as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time, for furnishing a copy of an accident report by the city police department. 
(Prior Code, § 9.292; Ord. No. 86-05, 6-2-1986) 
Sec. 2-263. - Funeral escorts. 
    There is hereby established a fee, as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time, for the furnishing of a funeral escort by the city police department. The funeral parlor in charge of the funeral shall be responsible for paying this fee. 
(Prior Code, § 9.293; Ord. No. 86-05, 6-2-1986) 
Secs. 2-264-2-289. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASES, CONTRACTS AND SALES 

Sec. 2-290. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to provide for the fair and equitable treatment of all persons involved in public purchasing by this city, to maximize the purchasing value of public funds in procurement, and to provide safeguards for maintaining a procurement system of quality and integrity. 
(Prior Code, § 1.262; Ord. No. 86-11, 7-21-1986) 
Sec. 2-291. - Applicability. 
    This division applies to contracts for procurement of supplies, services, and construction, entered in by this city after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, unless the parties agree to its application to contracts entered into prior to the effective date. It shall apply to every expenditure of public funds by a public agency for public purchasing irrespective of its source. When the procurement involves the expenditure of federal assistance or contract funds, the procurement shall be conducted in accordance with any mandatory federal law and regulation which are not reflected in this division. Nothing in this division shall prevent any public agency from complying with the terms and conditions of any grant, gift or bequest which are otherwise consistent with law. 
(Prior Code, § 1.263; Ord. No. 86-11, 7-21-1986) 
Sec. 2-292. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City purchasing agent or purchasing agent means the purchasing agent of the City of Cadillac. 
    Contractual services means and includes the rental, repair or maintenance of equipment, machinery, roads and other city owned property providing for operations and/or services. 
    Local vendor means a vendor or business with an established place of business within the city. 
    Public improvement means any enhancement to property or equipment belonging to the city. 
    Supplies means and include all supplies, materials and equipment. 
(Prior Code, § 1.264; Ord. No. 86-11, 7-21-1986; Ord. No. 89-15, 9-9-1989) 
Sec. 2-293. - City purchasing agent-Appointed. 
    The purchasing agent shall be responsible for the purchase and sale of all city property, and the purchasing agent shall be appointed and designated as such by the city manager. The purchasing agent shall be the city clerk, as specified in the city Charter, and shall be responsible for the purchase and sale of all city property. 
(Prior Code, § 1.265; Ord. No. 86-11, 7-21-1986) 
Sec. 2-294. - Same-Powers and duties. 
    The purchasing agent shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Bulk purchases. Exploit the possibilities of buying "in bulk" so as to take full advantage of discounts. 
(2)  Encourage competition. Endeavor to obtain as full and open a competition as possible on all purchases and sales. 
(3)  Federal tax exemptions. Act so as to procure for the city all federal tax exemptions to which it is entitled. 
(4)  Forms. Prescribe and maintain such forms as is reasonably necessary to the operation of this division. 
(5)  Minimize expenditure. Act to procure for the city the highest quality in supplies and contractual services, at the least expense to the city. 
(6)  Purchasing analysis. Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products and secure for the city the benefits of research done in the field of purchasing by other governmental jurisdictions, national technical societies, trade associations having national recognition and by private businesses and organizations. 
(7)  Rules and regulations. Establish and amend, when necessary, all rules and regulations authorized by this division and any others necessary to its operation. 
(Prior Code, § 1.266; Ord. No. 86-11, 7-21-1986) 
Sec. 2-295. - Purchasing committee. 
(a)  An administrative committee known as the purchasing committee, consisting of the city manager, purchasing agent, director of finance, assistant city manager and the city attorney, or their designated representatives, and the department head, or his designated representative, at any meeting during which bids or purchases affecting his department are considered, is hereby established. 
(b)  The duties of the purchasing committee shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Preparation and/or review of plans and specifications for the purchase or disposal of any materials, supplies or services. 
(2)  Opening and review of bids. 
(3)  Providing recommendations to the city council on all purchases requiring the council's approval, that the bid is the lowest or best bid meeting specifications and is in the best interest of the city. Such recommendations shall include a tabulation of bids and all information pertinent to the council's decision making. 
(4)  Determining that adequate funds are budgeted and available and shall further specify the account number to be charged. 
(c)  The purchasing committee shall be convened at the request of the purchasing agent or city manager and shall serve in an advisory capacity on all questions of purchasing policy and practices. 
(Prior Code, § 1.267; Ord. No. 86-11, 7-21-1986) 
Sec. 2-296. - Sale or lease of real estate; transfer or assignment of agreement. 
(a)  The sale, lease or disposition of any real estate owned by the city, or any interest therein, shall be subject to the provisions of article 5, section 5.6 of the city Charter. Any agreement or contract whereby the city leases its own property to any lessee for a period longer than three years shall be subject for 45 days to the same referendum procedures as is provided in the case of ordinances passed by the council. Petitions for such referendum must be filed within 45 days after any such lease is entered into by the city. 
(b)  The transfer or assignment of any agreement or contract for renting or leasing of public property may be made only upon approval of the council, but approval of such transfer shall not be subject to a referendum. Rental and leases and renewals thereof shall be for a fair consideration as determined by council. 
(Prior Code, § 1.268; Ord. No. 86-11, 7-21-1986) 
Sec. 2-297. - Small item purchase under $500.00. 
(a)  All items under the price of $500.00 may be purchased from a local vendor by a department head, or his designated representative, when it has been determined by the department head that it is not economically feasible to buy the item in quantities that require the city to purchase the item by competitive bidding. 
(b)  The department head shall promptly turn in a copy of the receipt for the item purchased to the finance office. The receipt will also contain the signature of the city employee who actually received the item. 
(Prior Code, § 1.269; Ord. No. 86-11, 7-21-1986; Ord. No. 96-09, 7-1-1996) 
Sec. 2-298. - Purchase of items $500.00 and over, and less than $7,500.00. 
(a)  All purchases under $2,500.00 and $500.00 and over shall be approved by the purchasing agent. Sealed bids need not be taken for such items, at the discretion of the purchasing agent. Before giving approval for any such purchase, the purchasing agent shall make sure that an appropriation has first been approved by the city council, that a sufficient unencumbered balance remains in the appropriation, and that sufficient funds will be available to cover the claim or meet the obligation when it becomes due and payable. 
(b)  All purchases of services and supplies under $7,500.00 and $2,500.00 and over shall be approved by the city manager. Sealed bids need not be taken on such items, at the discretion of the city manager. Before giving approval for any such purchases, the purchasing agent shall make sure that an appropriation has first been approved by the city council, that a sufficient unencumbered balance remains in the appropriation and that sufficient funds will be available to cover the claim or meet the obligation when it becomes due and payable. 
(c)  The purchasing committee may convene at the request of the city manager or purchasing agent to review and/or give recommendation. 
(Prior Code, § 1.270; Ord. No. 86-11, 7-21-1986; Ord. No. 96-09, 7-1-1996) 
Sec. 2-299. - Purchases of $7,500.00 and over. 
(a)  All contracts and purchases involving $7,500.00 or more must be approved by the city council. If the council, by unanimous resolution of those present at a meeting based upon the written recommendation of the city manager, determines that it would not be advantageous to open sealed bids, then sealed bids may be dispensed with. Every approval of a purchase by the council without sealed bids must specify that supplies or services may be purchased without competitive bidding. 
(b)  No sale or purchase shall be divided for the purpose of circumventing the dollar limitation contained in this section. 
(c)  The council may authorize the making of public improvements by the city personnel without competitive bidding. 
(d)  Due to their unique nature, sealed bids for professional services normally will be waived by the city council. When it is deemed by the council to be in the best interest, selection based on criteria reflecting the need for the service will be utilized. 
(e)  The invitation to bid should be advertised once in an official newspaper published in the city or other general publications stating the necessary information to permit bids to be made. Notice inviting bids shall be published at least five working days preceding the last day set for the receipt of the proposals. The newspaper notice may include a general description of the supplies or services to be purchased and shall state whether and where bid blanks and specifications may be secured and the time and place of opening bids. The council shall reserve the right to reject any and all bids submitted and such right of rejection shall be included with any notice of request for bids. 
(f)  The purchasing committee shall review purchases and provide necessary recommendations to the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 1.271; Ord. No. 86-11, 7-21-1986; Ord. No. 96-09, 7-1-1996) 
Sec. 2-300. - Determination of best bid. 
    Purchases shall be made from the lowest competent bidder whose bid is most advantageous to the city. The city has the right to accept or reject any or all bids it deems necessary. In determining which bid is most advantageous and/or competent, the city manager and city council, upon the advice of the purchasing committee, shall consider: 
(1)  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required; 
(2)  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
(3)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder; 
(4)  The quality of performance of previous contracts or services of the bidder; 
(5)  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or services; 
(6)  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service; 
(7)  The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies, or contractual services to the particular use required; 
(8)  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract; 
(9)  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid. 
(Prior Code, § 1.272; Ord. No. 86-11, 7-21-1986) 
Sec. 2-301. - Award to other than low bidder. 
    When the award is not given to the lowest bidder, a full and complete statement of the reasons for awarding the bid to a higher bidder shall be prepared by the purchasing agent and filed with other papers relating to the transaction. 
(Prior Code, § 1.273; Ord. No. 86-11, 7-21-1986) 
Sec. 2-302. - Local vendors. 
(a)  This section applies only to contracts for the purchase of services, materials or supplies; capital outlay; and services for construction, maintenance, repair, or operation of city facilities, where the contract price exceeds $7,500.00. 
(b)  As used in this section only, the following definitions apply: 
    Cadillac bidder means a bidder who meets all of the following requirements for at least six consecutive months prior to the date bids are due: 
(1)  The bidder has a place of business or permanent business address in the City of Cadillac. 
(2)  The bidder pays personal property and real property taxes in the City of Cadillac. 
(3)  The bidder is in compliance with all applicable provisions of the City Code. 
(4)  The bidder is not indebted to or in default with the city. 
    Local bidder means a Cadillac bidder, surrounding area bidder, or State of Michigan bidder, as defined herein. 
    Lowest bidder means the person or entity that submits the lowest bid that is responsive to the city's request for bids. 
    State of Michigan bidder means a bidder who meets all of the following requirements for at least six consecutive months prior to the date bids are due: 
(1)  The bidder has a place of business in the State of Michigan but not in the city, Clam Lake Township, Cherry Grove Township, Selma Township, and/or Haring Township. 
(2)  The bidder is a personal property and real property taxpayer in the State of Michigan but not in the city, Clam Lake Township, Cherry Grove Township, Selma Township, and/or Haring Township. 
(3)  The bidder is in compliance with all applicable provisions of the City Code. 
(4)  The bidder is not indebted to or in default with the city. 
    Surrounding area bidder means a bidder who meets all of the following requirements for at least six consecutive months prior to the date bids are due: 
(1)  The bidder has a place of business or permanent business address outside the city, but within Clam Lake Township, Cherry Grove Township, Selma Township, and/or Haring Township. 
(2)  The bidder pays personal property and real property taxes in Clam Lake Township, Cherry Grove Township, Selma Township, and/or Haring Township. 
(3)  The bidder is in compliance with all applicable provisions of the City Code. 
(4)  The bidder is not indebted to or in default with the city. 
    Surrounding county bidder means a bidder who meets all of the following requirements for at least six consecutive months prior to the date bids are due: 
(1)  The bidder has a place of business or permanent business address outside the City, Clam Lake Township, Cherry Grove Township, Selma Township, and/or Haring Township, but within Wexford, Missaukee or Osceola County. 
(2)  The bidder pays personal property and real property taxes in Wexford, Missaukee or Osceola County. 
(3)  The bidder is in compliance with all applicable provisions of the City Code. 
(4)  The bidder is not indebted to or in default with the city. 
(c)  A local bidder with the lowest responsive bid who is not the lowest bidder shall be given the opportunity to competitively reduce its bid to match the bid submitted by the lowest bidder if the local bidder's bid is within the following differential of the lowest bidder's bid: 
Cadillac bidder 5% differential Surrounding area bidder 3% differential Surrounding county bidder 2% differential State of Michigan bidder 1% differential  
(d)  In reducing a bid under subsection (c), a local bidder shall reduce only the amount of the bid and shall not alter any bid specifications, contract requirements, or the scope of the work to be performed. 
(e)  If the local bidder with the lowest responsive bid elects not to reduce its bid, then the local bidder with the next lowest responsive bid falling within the differential set forth in subsection (c) shall be given an opportunity to reduce its bid to match the bid of the lowest bidder. 
(f)  If no bids are submitted by local bidders, or if no local bidders elect to competitively reduce their bids, then the contract shall be awarded to the lowest bidder. 
(g)  If two or more local bidders bid the same amount and reduce their bids to match the bid of the lowest bidder, then the purchasing committee shall give preference first to the Cadillac bidder then to the surrounding area bidder then to the surrounding county bidder and then to State of Michigan bidder and recommend to the city council the most competent local bidder whose bid is most advantageous to the city considering, among other things, the criteria set forth in section 2-300. 
(h)  Notwithstanding any other part of this section, the city reserves the right to make emergency purchases without obtaining bids; to accept or reject any and all bids in whole or in part; to waive irregularities in any bid in the best interest of the city; and to consider, among other criteria, ability, qualifications, proposed timeframe, experience, price, type and amount of equipment, accessories, options, insurance, permits, licenses, other pertinent factors, and overall capability to meet the needs of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 1.274; Ord. No. 86-11, 7-21-1986; Ord. No. 89-15, 9-9-1989; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 1, 5-21-2012) 
Sec. 2-303. - Bid deposits; performance bond. 
    When deemed necessary by the purchasing agent, bid deposits and/or performance bonds shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. A successful bidder shall forfeit any bid deposit required by the purchasing agent upon failure on the bidder's part to enter a contract within the time specified after the award. 
(Prior Code, § 1.275; Ord. No. 86-11, 7-21-1986) 
Sec. 2-304. - Bidding procedure. 
(a)  In public; stated time and place. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. 
(b)  Sealed bids. Bids shall be submitted sealed to the purchasing agent and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. 
(Prior Code, § 1.276; Ord. No. 86-11, 7-21-1986) 
Sec. 2-305. - Bidders in default to the city. 
    The city council shall not accept the bid of a contractor who is in default on the payment of taxes, licenses or other monies due the city, nor shall the council award any contract to a person who is in default on the payment of taxes, licenses or other monies due the city. 
(Prior Code, § 1.277; Ord. No. 86-11, 7-21-1986) 
Sec. 2-306. - Appropriation sufficiency. 
    Prior to the approval of any purchase by the city council, the purchasing agent shall check to make sure that an appropriation has been made for this purchase, that a sufficient unencumbered balance remains in the appropriation for this purchase, and that funds will be available to cover the claim or meet the obligation when it becomes due and payable. 
(Prior Code, § 1.278; Ord. No. 86-11, 7-21-1986) 
Sec. 2-307. - Purchasing order. 
    A city purchasing order shall be initiated by the purchasing agent and forwarded to the vendor on all items purchased or contracted under the authority of sections 2-297 through 2-303. 
(Prior Code, § 1.279; Ord. No. 86-11, 7-21-1986) 
Sec. 2-308. - Emergency purchases. 
    In case of an emergency which requires immediate purchase of supplies or contractual services, the city manager shall be empowered to purchase on the open market, at the lowest obtainable price, any necessary contractual services or supplies. A full report of the circumstances of an emergency purchase shall be filed with the city council by the city manager within ten days after such purchase and shall be entered in the council minutes. 
(Prior Code, § 1.280; Ord. No. 86-11, 7-21-1986) 
Sec. 2-309. - Public improvements. 
    No public improvement costing more then $2,500.00 shall be contracted for or commenced until estimates, drawings, profiles and specifications, where appropriate, have been submitted by the engineer to the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 1.281; Ord. No. 86-11, 7-21-1986) 
Sec. 2-310. - Contracts. 
    All contracts must be approved by the city attorney as to form and by the city manager and shall be signed by the mayor and city clerk. An individual agreement of employment shall not be deemed a contract requiring an opinion by the city attorney or certification by the city clerk. 
(Prior Code, § 1.282; Ord. No. 86-11, 7-21-1986) 
Sec. 2-311. - Surplus stock. 
    All agencies shall submit to the purchasing agent, at such times and in such form as the purchasing agent shall prescribe, reports showing stocks of all supplies which are no longer used or which have become obsolete, worn out or scrapped. 
(1)  Sale. The purchasing agent shall have the authority to sell supplies which have become unsuitable for public use, or to exchange the same for, or trade in the same on, new supplies pursuant to provisions of the city Charter or to conduct an auction for sale of items. Sales under this section shall be made to the highest responsible bidder. 
(2)  Transfer. The purchasing agent shall have the authority to transfer surplus stock to other agencies. 
(Prior Code, § 1.283; Ord. No. 86-11, 7-21-1986) 
Sec. 2-312. - Cooperative purchasing. 
    The purchasing agent shall have the authority to join with other units of government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best interest of the city would be served thereby, upon approval of the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 1.284; Ord. No. 86-11, 7-21-1986) 
Sec. 2-313. - Purchasing services available to other public agencies. 
    The purchasing services of the city shall be made available without charge to any public authority in which the city has an interest. 
(Prior Code, § 1.285; Ord. No. 86-11, 7-21-1986) 
Sec. 2-314. - Payment to contractor. 
    No compensation shall be paid to any contractor except in accordance with the terms of the contract. 
(Prior Code, § 1.286; Ord. No. 86-11, 7-21-1986) 
Secs. 2-315-2-340. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CODE OF ETHICS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2014-12, §§ 1, 2, adopted Nov. 17, 2014, repealed the former Art. VI, §§ 2-341-2-395, and enacted a new Art. VI as set out herein. The former Art. VI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2012-08, §§ 1-1-4-4, adopted June 18, 2012. 

Secs. 2-341-2-395. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-396. - Code of ethics adopted. 
(a)  Employees and elected officials of the City of Cadillac shall comply with all obligations imposed on them by the Political Activities of Public Employees Act, Act 169 of 1976, MCL 15.401 et seq; the Contracts of Public Servants with Public Entities Act, Act 317 of 1968, MCL 15.321 et seq; and the Standards of Conduct for Public Officers and Employees Act, Act 196 of 1973, MCL 15.341 et seq. 
(b)  Any employee or elected official who violates any of the statutes identified in paragraph (a) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, which is punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 and/or imprisonment for not more than 90 days. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 2, 11-17-2014) 
ARTICLE VII. - HUMAN RELATIONS 

Sec. 2-397. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following words and phrases have the following meanings: 
    Discrimination or discriminate shall mean without limitation, any act which, because of age, color, disability, education, familial status, gender expression, gender identity, height, marital status, national origin, race, religion, sex, sexual orientation, or weight results in the unequal treatment or separation of any person, or denies, prevents, limits, adversely affects the benefit or enjoyment of any person, of employment, ownership, or occupancy of real property, or public accommodations and public services. 
    Gender expression shall be defined as a gender-based appearance, expression, or behavior of an individual, regardless of the individual's assigned sex at birth. 
    Gender identity shall be defined as an individual's internal sense of their own sex and a defining component of sex. 
    Sexual orientation shall mean, emotional, romantic, and/or sexual attractions, or the absence thereof, to people. Sexual orientation also refers to a person's sense of identity based on those attractions, related behaviors, and membership in a community of others who share those attractions. 
(Ord. No. 2018-11, § 2, 9-17-2018) 
Sec. 2-398. - Prohibition. 
    No person, corporation, company, association or other entity shall discriminate against any person or persons within the city regarding employment, housing, public accommodations, and public services on the basis of age, color, disability, education, familial status, gender expression, gender identity, height, marital status, national origin, race, religion, sex, sexual orientation, or weight. To the extent that this article confers benefits on any classes protected from discrimination under this article, it shall not be construed to be preempted by state or federal statute. 
(Ord. No. 2018-11, § 2, 9-17-2018) 
Sec. 2-399. - Exceptions. 
    Section 2-398 shall not apply to: 
(a)  to a private club, or other establishment not in fact open to the public, except to the extent that the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations of the private club or establishment are made available to the customers or patrons of another establishment that is a place of public accommodation or is licensed by the state under Act No. 8 of the Public Act of 1933, being MCL §§ 436.1-436.58, the Michigan Liquor Control Act, as amended. 
(b)  a religious educational institution or an educational institution operated, supervised, or controlled by a religious institution or organization which limits admission or gives preference to an applicant of the same religion. 
(c)  the rental of housing accommodations in a building which contains housing accommodations for not more than two families living independently of each other if the owner or a member of the owner's immediate family resides in one of the housing accommodations, or to the rental of a room or rooms in a single-family dwelling by a person if the lessor or a member of the lessor's immediate family resides in the dwelling. 
(d)  the rental of housing accommodations for not more than three months by the owner or lessor where it was occupied by him/her and maintained as his/her home for at least three months immediately preceding occupancy by the tenant and is temporarily vacated while maintaining legal residence. 
(e)  with respect to age only, the sale, rental or lease of housing accommodations meeting the requirements of federal, state or local housing programs for senior citizens, or accommodations otherwise intended, advertised, designed or operated, bona fide, for the purpose of providing housing accommodations for persons 50 years of age or older. 
(f)  with respect to gender only, a private educational institution which now or hereafter provides an education to only persons of one gender. 
(g)  with respect to gender only, a group homeless shelter that shelters only persons of one gender. 
    A governmental exemption shall not apply to any action by a governmental entity or agency where a person's qualification is expressly limited by statute, charter, ordinance or policy as otherwise provided at law. 
(Ord. No. 2018-11, § 2, 9-17-2018) 
Sec. 2-400. - Complaint procedures. 
(a)  Any person claiming a violation of this chapter shall file a signed, written complaint with the city manager, or his or her designee, setting forth the details, including names, dates, witnesses and other factual matters relevant to the claim, within 180 days of the incident forming the basis of the complaint. 
(b)  No person shall provide false information to any authorized employee investigating a complaint regarding a violation of this chapter. 
(c)  In the course of investigation, the city manager, or his or her designee, may request a person to produce books, papers, records or other documents which may be relevant to an alleged violation of this chapter. If said person does not comply with such request, the city attorney may apply to the Wexford County circuit court for an order requiring production of said materials. 
(d)  Within 30 days of a written complaint being filed, the city manager, or his or her designee, shall undertake an investigation of any complaint filed in accordance with this section alleging a violation of this chapter not currently recognized or proscribed by Michigan or federal anti-discrimination statutes, and cause all other complaints to be referred to an appropriate state or federal agency for review. After the completion of an investigation, the city manager, or his or her designee, shall give written notice of the results of the investigation to the person who filed the complaint and the person accused of the violation. If the investigation establishes that a violation of this chapter occurred, the city manager, or his or her designee, shall attempt to resolve the matter by conciliation and persuasion or refer the complaint to the city attorney for prosecution in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(e)  Conciliation agreements: In cases involving alleged violations of this article, the city manager, or his or her designee, may enter into agreements whereby persons agree to methods of terminating discrimination or to reverse the effects of past discrimination. 
(f)  The city attorney may commence a civil action to obtain injunctive relief to prevent discrimination prohibited by this chapter, to reverse the effects of such discrimination, or to enforce a conciliation agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2018-11, § 2, 9-17-2018) 
Sec. 2-401. - Violations, fines and penalties. 
    Any person in violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and upon a determination or admission of responsibility shall be subject to a civil fine of not more than $500.00, costs of prosecution and such other costs, damages, expenses, sanctions, and remedies as authorized by law, including but not limited to, the Revised Judicature Act, and specifically MCL 600.8302, as amended. Each day upon which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate and new violation. 
(Ord. No. 2018-11, § 2, 9-17-2018) 
Sec. 2-402. - Private civil action. 
(a)  To the extent allowed by law, an individual who is the victim of discriminatory action in violation of this chapter may bring a civil action for appropriate injunctive relief or damages or both against the person(s) who acted in violation of this article. 
(b)  As used in subsection (a), "damages" means damages for injury or loss caused by each violation of this chapter, including reasonable attorney fees. 
(c)  Private actions and remedies under this section shall be in addition to any actions for violations which the city may take. 
(Ord. No. 2018-11, § 2, 9-17-2018) 
Sec. 2-403. - Interpretation. 
    This non-discrimination ordinance shall not be read to prohibit or interfere with a person's, or religious institution's, free exercise of religion as protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution and Article 1, Section 4, of the Michigan Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 2018-11, § 2, 9-17-2018) 
Secs. 2-404-2-420. - Reserved. 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan liquor control code of 1998, MCL 436.1101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Persons under 21-Possession. 
(a)  No person under the age of 21 years shall purchase, knowingly possess, consume, attempt to consume, transport, or have under his control in any motor vehicle any alcoholic liquor unless said person is employed by a licensee and is possessing, transporting or having such alcoholic liquor in a motor vehicle under his control during regular working hours and in the course of his employment. 
(b)  No person under the age of 21 years shall purchase, knowingly possess, consume, attempt to consume, or have under his control any alcoholic liquor. 
(Prior Code, § 9.193; Ord. No. 95-22, 8-7-1995; Ord. No. 95-27, 10-2-1995; Ord. No. 2000-17, 1-15-2001) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 436.1703. 
Sec. 4-2. - Same-Furnishing. 
    No person, either directly or indirectly, shall at any time sell, furnish, give or deliver any alcoholic liquor to any person unless such person shall have attained the age of 21 years. The provisions of this section shall not prohibit the following: 
(1)  The furnishing, giving or delivering of alcoholic liquor to any person who has not attained the age of 21 years if said furnishing, giving or delivering is by a natural or adoptive parent to his child within the confines of said parent's home. 
(2)  The use of alcoholic liquor when actually used as an ingredient in the preparation of foods. 
(3)  The furnishing, giving or delivering of alcoholic liquor to a person who has not attained the age of 21 years if such furnishing, giving or delivering is done at the direction of a physician or surgeon. 
(4)  The furnishing, giving or delivering of alcoholic liquor to a person who has not attained the age of 21 years if such furnishing, giving or delivering is in connection with a ceremony of an established religion. 
(Prior Code, § 9.194) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 436.1701. 
Sec. 4-3. - False information or representation. 
(a)  No person shall furnish any false information or make any false representation to any law enforcement officer or to any person engaged in selling, furnishing, giving or delivering alcoholic liquor for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining or offering or attempting to purchase or obtain any alcoholic liquor for any person, including himself, under the age of 21 years. 
(b)  No person shall furnish any documentary evidence to any person under 21 years to be used by any such person for the purpose of obtaining or purchasing or offering or attempting to purchase or obtain alcoholic liquor. 
(Prior Code, § 9.195) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 436.1703. 
Sec. 4-4. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Any person under the age of 17 years who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon apprehension, be taken to the juvenile division of the probate court and dealt with in such manner as prescribed by the laws of this state. 
(b)  Any person 17 years of age or older who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as prescribed in section 1-14. 
(Prior Code, § 9.196; Ord. No. 2000-04, 2-21-2000) 
Secs. 4-5-4-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUDITY ON LICENSED PREMISES 

Sec. 4-27. - Conduct in premises licensed to sell intoxicating liquor (alcoholic liquors). 
(a)  Purpose and intent. It is hereby determined that display or depiction of nudity and sexual acts in establishments licensed to sell intoxicating liquors deteriorates the residential, business and commercial environment of the city. It is also determined that establishments that engage in these activities negatively affect property values. It is further determined that the prohibitions contained in this article are the minimum amount necessary to achieve its purposes. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Female breast means and is considered uncovered if the nipple only or the nipple and areola only are covered. 
    Nudity means uncovered, or less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks and human female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola or the covered human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
(c)  Acts prohibited. No person holding a license pursuant to the state liquor control act or the person in charge of the licensed premises, or any employee of the licensee, shall engage in or permit on the licensed premises, any person, brutes, beasts or animals to perform acts of or acts, whether live, on film, video tape, broadcast or by any other means which constitute or simulate: 
(1)  Sexual intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, flagellation or any other act by a person involving the touching or contacting of the genitals or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law. 
(2)  The touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, pubic region or genitals or the stimulation thereof by any device, tool, implement or object. 
(3)  The actual or simulated displaying or exposure of simulations of the pubic hair, pubic region, anus, vulva or genitals of humans, brutes, beasts or animals. 
(4)  The exposure of postpubertal female breast by any person. For the purpose of this subsection, a female breast is considered exposed if any portion of the breast, below a line immediately above the top of the areola is exposed. 
(5)  Scenes wherein artificial devices or inanimate objects are employed to depict any of the prohibited activities described in subsections (1) through (5) of this section. 
No licensee shall permit any person to remain in or about the licensed premises who is nude or engaging in acts prohibited by this Code. 
(d)  Addition to other liabilities. Prosecution under this Code is additional to any other liabilities to which the defendant may be subjected by law. 
(Prior Code, § 9.300; Ord. No. 92-05, 2-3-1992) 
Sec. 4-28. - Revocation and nonrenewal of liquor licenses. 
(a)  The city council or its agent, from time to time, may review the activities of all licensed liquor establishments in the city. 
(b)  The city council, upon finding that any violation of law or ordinance, or violation of the rules and regulations of the liquor control commission may recommend sanctions as provided by law up to and including nonrenewal or revocation of said liquor licenses. 
(Prior Code, § 9.301; Ord. No. 92-05, 2-3-1992) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Cruelty enumerated. 
    No person shall cruelly treat or abuse any animal or bird in the following manner: 
(1)  No owner shall fail to provide their animals with sufficient, wholesome and nutritious food, water in sufficient quantities, proper air, shelter space and protection from the weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and humane care and treatment. 
(2)  No person shall beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment, overload, overwork, or otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate, or permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight, or other combat between animals or between animals or humans. 
(3)  No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal. 
(4)  No person shall crop a dog's ears or dock a dog's tail, except when a licensed veterinarian issues a signed certificate that the operation is necessary for the dog's health and comfort. In no event shall any person, except a licensed veterinarian, perform such an operation. 
(5)  Live chickens, ducklings, or rabbits younger than eight weeks of age may not be sold in quantities of fewer than ten to a single purchaser. 
(6)  No person shall give away any live animal, fish, reptile, or bird as a prize for, or an inducement to enter, any contest, game, or other competition, as an inducement to enter a place of amusement, or as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade. 
(7)  Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be possible and shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal's owner; in the event the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such operator shall at once report the accident to the appropriate law enforcement agency. 
(Prior Code, §§ 9.131, 9.179; Ord. No. 90-23, 11-5-1990; Ord. No. 91-16, 12-2-1991) 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, MCL 750.50. 
Sec. 6-2. - Poisoning animals. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any poisonous substance on any exposed public or private place where it endangers, or is likely to endanger, any animal or bird. 
(Prior Code, § 9.132) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.437. 
Sec. 6-3. - Birds and birds' nests. 
    No person, except a public officer acting in his official capacity, shall molest, injure, kill or capture any wild bird, or molest or disturb any wild bird's nest or the contents thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 9.133) 
Sec. 6-4. - Places prohibited. 
(a)  No person may ride, walk, or otherwise have control of any horse on any sidewalk, walkway, bicycle path, park, cemetery, playground, parking lot, or other place open to use by the public, except city streets and alleys and private property with the permission of the owner. Upon approval of the director of public safety, law enforcement horse patrols are exempt from this provision. 
(b)  This section is punishable as a municipal civil infraction. 
(Prior Code, § 9.171; Ord. No. 2002-11, 5-20-2002) 
Secs. 6-5-6-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LIVESTOCK 

Sec. 6-27. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Livestock means any horse, cattle, swine, sheep, pony, goat, rabbit or other animal or fowl except dogs, cats, birds or animals commonly classified as pets. 
(Prior Code, § 9.136) 
Sec. 6-28. - Prohibited within city; exception. 
(a)  No person may keep livestock within the city except by permission of the city council. 
(b)  Exception: The city manager or his or her designee may permit the keeping of rabbits and chickens on property within the city zoned for residential uses, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  No more than six rabbits or six egg laying chickens, or a combination of each resulting in no more than six rabbits and egg laying chickens, may be kept on the same property. 
(2)  The city manager may only permit the keeping of rabbits or egg laying chickens on property zoned and occupied as a single family residential use. 
(3)  The chickens and/or rabbits shall be provided with a covered, predator-proof enclosure that is thoroughly ventilated, designed to be easily accessible, cleaned and maintained by the owners and shall be at least two square feet in size for each chicken or rabbit kept. No more than two enclosures shall be permitted on any single property. 
(4)  No chicken or rabbit enclosure shall be located in any front or side yards, nor shall they be closer than three feet to any property line or less than 20 feet away from any residential structure located on any adjacent property. 
(Prior Code, § 9.137; Ord. No. 2016-08, § 1, 9-6-2016) 
Sec. 6-29. - Application. 
    Any person seeking permission from the city council to keep livestock within the city, or seeking an exception and permission to keep rabbits and/or egg laying chickens from the city manager pursuant to section 6-28(b), shall make application to the city council or city manager in writing describing particularly the place where the applicant proposes to keep such livestock, the number thereof, the distance from such place to the public streets on each side and the distance to the dwelling houses upon the lands adjoining such proposed place. 
(Prior Code, § 9.138; Ord. No. 2016-08, § 1, 9-6-2016) 
Sec. 6-30. - Report; permit 
    All applications shall be filed with city clerk or his or her designee, together with a fee established by the city for review of the application, who shall make a report and recommendation to the city council or city manager. If the city council determines that it will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, the city council may grant the permit to keep livestock within the city. If the city manager determines that keeping of rabbits or chickens meets the conditions of section 6-28(b) and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, the city manager or his or designee may grant the permit to keep rabbits and/or chickens. Any permit granted pursuant to this section shall specify the type, number and place where such livestock may be kept. No person shall keep any livestock in the city contrary to the terms and conditions of any permit. The city council or city manager may revoke any permit for violations of this section, any terms and conditions of any permit or where there is a danger to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Prior Code, § 9.139; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 2, 8-2-2010; Ord. No. 2016-08, § 1, 9-6-2016) 
Sec. 6-31. - Sanitation. 
    All persons keeping any livestock shall keep the places they are kept in a clean and sanitary condition and in accordance with any applicable statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations established by any department or agency including, but not limited to, the local health department and the Michigan Department of Agriculture & Rural Development. 
(Prior Code, § 9.140; Ord. No. 2016-08, § 1, 9-6-2016) 
Sec. 6-32. - Running at large. 
    No livestock may be permitted to run at large within the city. 
(Prior Code, § 9.141) 
State Law reference- Livestock running at large prohibited, MCL 433.51 et seq. 
Secs. 6-33-6-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - KEEPING ANIMALS 

Sec. 6-47. - Public nuisance. 
(a)  No person shall own, harbor or keep any animal or animals that unreasonably annoy humans, endanger the life or health of any other animal or persons, or substantially interfere with the rights of citizens, other than their owners, to the enjoyment of life or property. 
(b)  The term "public nuisance" shall mean and include, but is not limited to, any animal that: 
(1)  Is repeatedly found at large; 
(2)  Damages the property of anyone other than its owner; 
(3)  Molests or intimidates pedestrians or passersby; 
(4)  Chases vehicles; 
(5)  Excessively makes disturbing noises, including, but not limited to, continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, or other utterances causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored; 
(6)  Causes fouling of the air by odor and thereby creates unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept harbored; 
(7)  Causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings where the animal is kept or harbored; 
(8)  Is offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare by virtue of the number and/or types of animals maintained; 
(9)  Attacks other domestic animals; or 
(10)  Has been found by the authority for animal control, after notice to its owner and a hearing, to be a public nuisance animal by virtue of being a menace to the public health, welfare or safety. 
(Prior Code, § 9.172; Ord. No. 90-23, 11-5-1990; Ord. No. 91-16, 12-2-1991) 
Sec. 6-48. - Restraint. 
(a)  All animals shall be secured by a leash or lead under the control of a responsible person or obedient to that person's commands, or in a secured area, or within the real property limits of its owner. 
(1)  All dogs and cats shall be kept under restraint. 
(2)  No owner shall fail to exercise proper care and control of their animals to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance. 
(3)  Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure in such a manner that such female dog or cat cannot come into contact with another animal except for planned breeding. 
(4)  Every vicious animal, as determined by the city police department shall be confined by the owner within a building or secure enclosure and shall be securely muzzled or caged whenever off the premises of its owner. 
(b)  This section is punishable as a municipal civil infraction. 
(Prior Code, § 9.173; Ord. No. 90-23, 11-5-1990; Ord. No. 91-16, 12-2-1991; Ord. No. 95-21, 8-7-1995) 
Sec. 6-49. - Vicious animals prohibited. 
    No person shall own, harbor or keep any animal that attacks, bites, or injures human beings or domesticated animals without adequate provocation, or which, because of temperament, conditioning, or training, has a known propensity to attack, bite or injure human beings or domesticated animals. 
(Prior Code, § 9.174; Ord. No. 90-23, 11-5-1990; Ord. No. 91-16, 12-2-1991) 
Sec. 6-50. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Wild animal means any living member of the animal kingdom, including those born or raised in captivity, except the following: human beings, domestic dogs (excluding hybrids with wolves, coyotes or jackals), domestic cats (excluding hybrids with ocelots or margays), farm animals, rodents, any hybrid animal that is part wild, and captive-bred species of common cage birds. 
(Prior Code, § 9.175; Ord. No. 90-23, 11-5-1990; Ord. No. 91-16, 12-2-1991) 
Sec. 6-51. - Wild animals prohibited; exception. 
(a)  No person shall own, possess, or have custody on his premises any wild or vicious animal for display, training, or exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This section shall not be construed to apply to persons who possess a valid exhibit license issued by The U.S. Department of Agriculture Animal and Plant Inspection Service as required by the Federal Animal Welfare Act of 1966, as amended or AAZPA accredited facilities. 
(b)  No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild animal without a state department of natural resources permit. 
(Prior Code, § 9.176; Ord. No. 90-23, 11-5-1990; Ord. No. 91-16, 12-2-1991) 
Sec. 6-52. - Performing animal exhibitions. 
(a)  No person may sponsor, promote, train a wild animal to participate in, contribute to the involvement of a wild animal in, or attend as a spectator any activity or event in which any wild animal engages in unnatural behavior or is wrestled, fought, mentally or physically harassed, or displayed in such a way that the animal is abused or stressed mentally or physically or is induced or encouraged to perform through the use of chemical, mechanical, electrical, or manual devices in a manner that will cause or is likely to cause physical injury or suffering. This prohibition applies to events and activities taking place in either public or private facilities or property, and applies regardless of the purpose of the event or activities and irrespective of whether or not a fee is charged to spectators. 
(b)  All equipment used on a performing animal shall fit properly and be in good working condition. 
(Prior Code, § 9.176; Ord. No. 90-23, 11-5-1990; Ord. No. 91-16, 12-2-1991) 
Sec. 6-53. - Animal waste. 
    The owner of every cat and dog, shall be responsible for the removal of any excreta deposited by their animal on public walks, recreation areas, or private property. Any person who fails to remove such waste will be subject to a municipal civil infraction and an initial fine of $25.00. 
(Prior Code, § 9.177; Ord. No. 90-23, 11-5-1990; Ord. No. 91-16, 12-2-1991; Ord. No. 95-21, 8-7-1995) 
Sec. 6-54. - Impoundment. 
(a)  Unrestrained dogs and cats and nuisance animals may be taken by the police and impounded in an animal shelter and there be confined in a humane manner. 
(b)  If, by a license tag or other means, the owner of an impounded animal can be identified, the officer may immediately, upon impoundment, notify the owner by telephone or certified mail. 
(c)  An owner reclaiming an impounded dog or cat shall pay a fee as established by the county animal control authority for each day the animal has been impounded. 
(Prior Code, § 9.178; Ord. No. 90-23, 11-5-1990; Ord. No. 91-16, 12-2-1991) 
Sec. 6-55. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the director of public safety acting through the city police department. It is unlawful to interfere with any person lawfully enforcing this article. 
(Prior Code, § 9.180; Ord. No. 90-23, 11-5-1990; Ord. No. 91-16, 12-2-1991) 
Secs. 6-56-6-83. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DOGS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Dog law, MCL 287.261 et seq. 

Sec. 6-84. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Owner means when applied to the proprietorship of a dog shall include every person having a right of property in such dog, and every person who keeps or harbors such dog or has it in his care, and every person who permits such dog to remain in or about any premises occupied by him. 
    Reasonable control means keeping a dog on suitable leash or under the oral control of the owner or custodian or some other person with the permission of the owner or custodian, in all cases other than while upon private property, or unless the dog is confined in a closed automobile or shipping receptacle. 
(Prior Code, § 9.146) 
Sec. 6-85. - State license required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own, maintain, keep or harbor any dog within the city without first procuring a license therefor as prescribed by state law. Application for a license shall be made as provided by law and shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the dog, and the name and address of the applicant and the last known previous owner. 
(Prior Code, § 9.147) 
State Law reference- Dog licensing, MCL 287.266 et seq. 
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1-8-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STATE CONSTRUCTION CODE 

Sec. 8-19. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, adopted April 19, 2010, repealed § 8-19 which pertained to responsibility for administration and enforcement and derived from § 8.2 of the prior code; Ord. No. 81-04, adopted May 4, 1981; Ord. No. 2002-12, adopted May 20, 2002; and Ord. No. 2006-04, adopted March 20, 2006. 
Sec. 8-20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, adopted April 19, 2010, repealed § 8-20 which pertained to agency designated and derived from § 8.3 of the prior code; Ord. No. 81-04, adopted May 4, 1981; and Ord. No. 2006-04, adopted March 20, 2006. 
Sec. 8-21. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, adopted July 21, 2014, repealed § 8-21, entitled "Transfer of responsibility for the administration and enforcement of the State Construction Code" which derived from Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, adopted April 19, 2010. 
Sec. 8-22. - Designation of enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the City of Cadillac under the Stille-DeRossett Hale Single State Construction Code Act, 1972 PA 230. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Section 8b(6) of the Stille-DeRossett Hale Single State Construction Code Act, 1972 PA 230, MCL 125.1508b(6), as amended, the city elects to administer and enforce 1972 PA 230 and the Michigan Building Code, Michigan Plumbing Code, Michigan Mechanical Code, and Michigan Electrical Code. The city shall also administer and enforce the respective provisions of the Michigan Residential, Rehabilitation and Uniform Energy Codes and all applicable laws and ordinances. A government official registered in accordance with 1986 PA 54, shall be appointed to receive all fees, issue permits, plan reviews, notices, orders and certificates of use and occupancy. All personnel performing plan reviews and inspections shall be registered in accordance with 1986 PA 54. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 2, 7-21-2014; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 1, 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 8-23. - Construction board of appeals. 
(a)  Pursuant to Section 14 of the Stille-Derossett-Hale Single State Construction Code Act, Act 230 of 1972, MCL 125.1514 (the "Act"), the city hereby establishes a construction board of appeals. 
(b)  The construction board of appeals shall consist of five members, who shall be appointed for two-year terms by the city council. Prior to any appointment, the city manager may make a recommendation on appointments. 
(c)  The construction board of appeals shall have the powers and responsibilities prescribed by the Act. 
(d)  Additionally, as authorized by MCL 125.1514(2), the construction board of appeals may establish its own rules and procedures, provided that such rules and procedures shall not be inconsistent with the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 2-2-2015) 
Secs. 8-24-8-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FENCES 

Sec. 8-44. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fence/wall means any artificial barrier, partition or structure erected as a dividing structure between adjoining lots either wholly or in part. Exception: privacy screens. 
    Privacy screen means an accessory structure surrounding, in whole or part, a rear or side yard deck, patio or porch, with said deck, patio or porch being affixed or adjacent to the dwelling or other principal use. The walls of a privacy screen must either be attached directly to the deck, patio or porch or located within one foot from said deck, patio or porch. The term "privacy screen" shall be considered as attached to the dwelling unit or other principal use. 
(Prior Code, § 8.31; Ord. No. 90-10, 5-21-1990; Ord. No. 99-10, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 8-45. - Permit-Required for construction. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or to cause to have constructed any fence, wall or privacy screen upon any property within the city without first having obtained a permit. 
(Prior Code, § 8.32; Ord. No. 90-10, 5-21-1990; Ord. No. 99-10, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 8-46. - Same-Application. 
    Prior to construction of a fence, wall or privacy screen, it shall be necessary to file a construction permit application with the zoning administrator or his or her designee. Said application shall contain the following information, on a form to be provided by said official: 
(1)  The property owner's name, address and phone number. 
(2)  The name, address and phone number of contractor erecting the fence, wall or privacy screen (unless said fence, wall or privacy screen is being erected by the property owner). 
(3)  The property address on which the fence, wall or screen is to be erected. 
(4)  The present use of said property and its zoning classification. 
(5)  The purpose of the fence, wall or privacy screen. 
(6)  A description of the fence, wall or privacy screen, including type, height after erection, construction materials, percentage of open space, anchoring method and depth of posts. 
(7)  A site plan, with dimensions, to indicate the following: 
a.  Fence/wall. Location of the proposed fence/wall in relation to adjacent lot lines, public rights-of-way and existing buildings located on the lot to which the fence will be erected. 
b.  Privacy screen. Location of the proposed privacy screen in relation to the deck, patio or porch to which it will be attached and distance to adjacent lot lines. 
(8)  A copy of the manufacturer's installation instructions. 
(9)  If the fence or wall is to be located directly on the property line, the abutting property owner must give written consent on the fence permit application form. 
(Prior Code, § 8.33; Ord. No. 90-10, 5-21-1990; Ord. No. 99-10, 6-21-1999; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 3, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 8-47. - Fees. 
    A fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time shall be paid for such permit to the treasurer of the city. Failure to obtain said permit prior to erection of a fence or privacy screen shall result in a fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Prior Code, § 8.34; Ord. No. 90-10, 5-21-1990; Ord. No. 99-10, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 8-48. - Construction requirements; exceptions. 
(a)  Requirements. Fence construction must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The type of fencing erected shall be compatible with the intent of this article and with the character of the area in which said fencing is to be placed. 
(2)  All fencing, walls and privacy screens shall be constructed of good quality, durable materials, capable of sustaining longterm wear. The use of raw recycled materials is prohibited. Examples: pallets, broken concrete, tires, stumps. 
(3)  All materials, including structural members, must be protected to prevent deterioration. Fences constructed of iron or steel must be protected with at least one ounce per square foot of galvanized coating or equivalent. 
(4)  All fencing shall be designed and constructed to withstand wind and snow loads common to the area. Support posts must be at least two feet in the ground. 
(5)  All fencing shall be installed to manufacturer's specifications which, in all instances, shall meet or exceed state construction code requirements. 
(6)  If the design of the fence or wall is such that the fencing material is not uniformly distributed on each side of the support posts, then the posts must be located on the inside of the fence. 
(7)  No fence, wall or other barrier or construction (i.e., railroad ties, steps, etc.) shall be located within two feet of any sidewalk, alley or street, and a minimum of one foot from any public right-of-way; provided, however, paving with a height no greater than the abutting public way may be placed within the two-foot setback. 
(8)  No fence, wall or other barrier or construction erected on a corner shall serve as an obstruction to vision above a height of 30 inches from the established street grades within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any street right-of-way lines, by a straight line drawn between said right-of-way lines, at a distance along each line of 25 feet from their point of intersection, except that in the interests of public safety, corner clearance requirements may be made more restrictive upon a recommendation of the city police department. 
(9)  All fencing shall be located entirely on the private parcel on which the fence is to be erected at a minimum distance of two inches from adjacent property lines, and shall not overhang any abutting property; provided, however, said wall or fence may be located directly on the property line if the abutting property owners consent, in writing, to placement of the fence on said line. 
(10)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, there shall be no erection of any fence or other barrier having barbed wire, spikes, barbs or other dangerous projections, nor shall any electrical current be charged through any fence whatsoever. 
(b)  Exceptions. Within commercial and industrial (zoned) districts, it shall be permissible to erect fencing with barbed wire or other similar devices, provided: 
(1)  The barbed wire shall be no less than a minimum of six feet above the ground level. 
(2)  The number of strands shall be limited to three and shall be located on arms or supports projecting over the subject private property. 
(3)  No part of the fence shall project into or over public or neighbor's private property. 
(4)  Residential front yard or side (street) yard fences may have pointed tops when at least four feet in height. 
(Prior Code, § 8.35; Ord. No. 90-10, 5-21-1990; Ord. No. 98-22, 11-2-1998; Ord. No. 99-10, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 8-49. - Heights and open spaces. 
(a)  Requirements. Fence height and visual open spacing must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The height of a fence, wall or privacy screen shall be measured from the highest grade, deck or patio adjacent to the fence, wall or screen. 
(2)  Open space is the visual openings uniformly distributed vertically per lineal foot of the fence. 
(3)  Fences and walls for security and/or screening purposes, when located in commercial and industrial zones, must not exceed 12 feet in height and if located along a residentially zoned property, must not exceed eight feet in height. 
(4)  Fences or walls when located in a required front yard setback or required side (street) yard setback on corner lots, must comply with the following: 
Zone Height Open Space Residential Up to 36 inches Minimum 20 percent Greater than 36 inches* Minimum 35 percent Commercial/Industrial Up to 12 feet Not required  
*Fences greater than 48 inches in height must have the proposed fence design reviewed and approved by the city planning commission. The board shall judge the aesthetic compatibility of the fence with the size of the lot and architecture of the subject home and homes in the neighborhood. Consideration will be given to setback, open space, height, material, color, design and function. 
(5)  Fences or walls, when located in rear yards or in nonrequired yards must not exceed six feet in height and may be constructed without any air space. 
(6)  Fences or walls when located in a required front yard setback or side (street) yard setback and constructed primarily with wire, must use a minimum of 12-gauge wire. 
(b)  Exception. Fences or walls constructed for security or screening purposes in industrial or commercial zones. (See subsection (a)(3) of this section.) 
(Prior Code, § 8.36; Ord. No. 90-10, 5-21-1990; Ord. No. 99-10, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 8-50. - Lakeside yard-Waterfront. 
    Placement of fences in lakeside (front) yards shall be governed by the provisions of section 46-715 related to the setback of structures, structures being defined in section 46-4. However, in no case shall the standards of fence placement be less than as required by this article. 
(Prior Code, § 8.37; Ord. No. 90-10, 5-21-1990; Ord. No. 99-10, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 8-51. - Same-Road front. 
    Fences constructed in the road front yard shall not exceed six feet in height; provided, however, fences erected on corner lots shall meet the visual clearance provisions of section 8-48(a)(8). 
(Prior Code, § 8.38; Ord. No. 90-10, 5-21-1990; Ord. No. 99-10, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 8-52. - Privacy screens. 
    Privacy screens shall meet the provisions of section 46-655, pertaining to accessory buildings, as supplemented or amended by the following: 
(1)  They may be constructed in a solid fashion. 
(2)  They may be constructed of combustible materials without a fire resistance rating. 
(3)  They shall not exceed a height of eight feet as measured from the top of the floor surface of the deck, patio or porch. 
(4)  They shall be subject to review and approval of the zoning administrator or his or her designee and shall not require approval by the planning commission. 
(5)  Pursuant to determination of area as related to ground coverage, the privacy screen shall be considered part of the deck, patio or porch to which it is either affixed or adjacent to, and shall be added to the area calculation of said deck, patio or porch. 
(Prior Code, § 8.39; Ord. No. 90-10, 5-21-1990; Ord. No. 99-10, 6-21-1999; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 4, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 8-53. - Maintenance. 
    All fences, walls and privacy screens must be maintained in good repair, without broken or rusted pieces, peeling paint, rotten or vermin infested wood. Vertical pieces shall remain vertical and horizontal pieces shall remain horizontal. 
(Prior Code, § 8.40; Ord. No. 90-10, 5-21-1990; Ord. No. 99-10, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 8-54. - Exemptions. 
    The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  A construction fence or soil erosion fence erected in conjunction with a temporary activity covered by a valid permit, or snow fence erected during the winter. 
(2)  Fencing associated with public schools and public recreational areas. 
(Prior Code, § 8.41; Ord. No. 90-10, 5-21-1990; Ord. No. 99-10, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 8-55. - Appeals. 
    Any person who is refused a permit, or otherwise found in violation of this article, may appeal to the zoning board of appeals, and the zoning board of appeals may grant an exception to this article in accordance with division 2 of article II of chapter 46, pertaining to zoning. 
(Prior Code, § 8.42; Ord. No. 90-10, 5-21-1990; Ord. No. 99-10, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 8-56. - Violations. 
    Any violation of this article shall be punishable as a municipal civil infraction. 
(Prior Code, § 8.43; Ord. No. 90-10, 5-21-1990; Ord. No. 99-10, 6-21-1999) 
Secs. 8-57-8-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RENTAL UNITS 

Sec. 8-86. - Applicability; exceptions. 
(a)  Applicability. This Code shall apply to any dwelling or part thereof which is occupied by persons pursuant to an oral or written rental agreement for monetary compensation. These shall include, but not be limited to, single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, multiple-family dwellings, mobile homes (whether located within or outside of a mobile home park or a seasonal mobile home park) roominghouses and boardinghouses. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Single-family dwellings, which are rented for less than three months of any calendar year. 
(2)  Multifamily apartment complexes, as long as they remain under the jurisdiction of and/or a financial obligation is owed to an agency such as HUD, MSHDA and FHA such as Leeson Court, Kirtland Terrace, Harbor View, Maple Hill Apartments, Lakeside Apartments, Cadillac Shores and Mayberry Apartments. 
(3)  Roominghouses or boarding-type houses that are rented to only persons of the operator's immediate family, or not more than two persons not so related. 
(4)  Transient rental dwelling units such as hotels, motels and bed and breakfast establishments. 
(Prior Code, § 8.81; Ord. No. 88-19, 10-3-1988; Ord. No. 90-27, 12-3-1990; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 5, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 8-87. - Registration and inspection. 
(a)  All buildings or structures within the scope of this article shall be registered with the city manager or his or her designee. See the fee schedule as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time. 
(1)  No person shall occupy rented buildings covered by this article unless a current, unrevoked registered rental certificate has been issued by the city manager or his or her designee, for the specific named dwelling. 
(2)  No person shall operate or permit occupancy of buildings covered by this article unless a current, unrevoked registered rental certificate has been issued by the city manager or his or her designee in said person's name for the specifically named dwelling. 
(b)  Failure to register as required by this section shall result in a fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time in addition to the initial fee. 
(c)  The city manager or his or her designee shall make an appointment by email to the owner/agent for inspection of the rental dwelling unit within 20 working days of filing for registration by the owner or his or her agent or expiration of the registered rental certificate. The owner/agent must contact the city manager or his or her designee at least 24-hours before the original inspection date, with an alternate date and time, to change the appointment. 
(d)  The city manager or his or her designee shall inspect each unit registered and shall issue a registered rental certificate provided that provisions of this article are complied with. 
(e)  If violations are found, a certificate will not be issued and the owner shall have 30 days to correct said violations. Any follow-up inspections, due to uncorrected violations or appointments missed by the owner/agent, will be charged an amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time. A time extension may be granted by the city manager or his or 
her designee upon evidence of extenuating circumstances. The owner shall complete a form as provided on the city's website to request an extension. 
(f)  Less time to enforce a violation may be imposed by the city manager or his or her designee to correct a life or health threatening situation. 
(g)  If the violations are not corrected by the time of the follow-up inspection, the owner shall be then given ten more days for corrective action and each follow-up inspection shall be charged to the owner at a cost as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(h)  Violations not corrected within 60 days may be corrected by the city and the cost may be assessed against the property pursuant to section 16-113. 
(Prior Code, § 8.82; Ord. No. 88-19, 10-3-1988; Ord. No. 92-04, 3-2-1992; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 5, 8-2-2010; Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 8-88. - Registered rental certificate applications. 
(a)  The following shall apply to the issuance of any registered rental certificate: 
(1)  Application for a registered rental certificate or for renewal shall be made by the owner via e-mail to the public safety director, fire chief, fire captain or their designees on electronic forms furnished by the public safety department and shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in this article. The application shall include current contact information, including a current e-mail address, for both the applicant/owner and a designated agent, when the owner is absent, upon whom service of notice under this article and service of process for violation of this article may be made. The designated agent must give written approval for the use of his name as the designated agent. Applicants, owners and agents consent to electronic service of notice and service of process under this article via e-mail. 
(2)  If, after inspection, the dwelling is found to be in accordance with all the provisions of this article, a certificate will be issued. 
(3)  The city manager or his or her designee shall not issue a certificate when the existing conditions constitute a hazard to the health, safety, or welfare of those who may occupy the premises or where the existing conditions are a hazard to the health, safety, or welfare of the community. 
(4)  Registered rental certificate shall be for a period of three years from the date of issuance (unless sooner revoked) and may be renewed upon compliance with this article for successive periods of three years. 
(5)  Interim inspections by the property owner are encouraged. 
(6)  Each certificate shall be kept by the owner or the designated agent. A designated parking plan, a trash disposal arrangement and pickup schedule shall be kept with the certificate. 
(b)  No certificate is transferable to another dwelling, and each person issued a housing certificate shall give notice in writing to the city manager or his or her designee within 24 hours after having transferred or otherwise disposed of legal control of any licensed dwelling. Such notice shall include the name, address and e-mail address of persons succeeding to the ownership or control of such dwelling, and to whom the certificate is to be transferred. Within ten days of any transfer or ownership, the assignee shall comply with this article. 
(c)  Every person holding a registered rental certificate shall keep or have records of all written requests for repair and complaints by tenants, which are related to the provisions. Such records shall be available to the building official for inspection and copy upon request. 
(d)  A record of all registered rental certificates issued shall be kept on file in the office of the city manager or his or her designee, and copies will be furnished upon request and payment of a fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time. 
(e)  Violations of this section shall be punishable as municipal civil infractions. 
(Prior Code, § 8.83; Ord. No. 88-19, 10-3-1988; Ord. No. 92-04, 3-2-1992; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 5, 8-2-2010; Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 8-89. - Temporary certificate. 
    The city manager or his or her designee may issue a temporary registered rental certificate for all or part of a building in the process of erection, alteration or in the process of correcting non-health/life threatening violations of a building or part thereof to be occupied. No temporary registered rental certificate may be issued for longer than two months, and no temporary registered rental certificate shall be effective more than five days after erection or alteration of the building is completed. 
(Prior Code, § 8.84; Ord. No. 88-19, 10-3-1988; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 5, 8-2-2010; Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 8-90. - Fees. 
    Housing maintenance certificate fees shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time. 
(Prior Code, § 8.85; Ord. No. 88-19, 10-3-1988; Ord. No. 95-11, 6-5-1995) 
Secs. 8-91-8-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 8-121. - Adoption of 2015 International Property Maintenance Code. 
    The city hereby adopts by reference the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code issued by International Code Council, Inc., except those sections herein deleted or amended. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, § 1, 11-1-2010; Ord. No. 2015-14, § 2, 8-3-2015; Ord. No. 2018-05, § 1, 4-2-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-05, § 1, adopted April 2, 2018, amended § 8-121 and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Adoption of 2012 International Property Maintenance Code" to "Adoption of 2015 International Property Maintenance Code," as set out herein. 
Sec. 8-122. - Purpose. 
    The city adopts the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code for the purpose of regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings, and structures; providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary, and fit for occupation and use; condemning buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use; and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, § 1, 11-1-2010; Ord. No. 2015-14, § 2, 8-3-2015; Special Instruction of 1-2-2019) 
Sec. 8-123. - Additional definitions. 
    In addition to the definitions set forth in the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Department means the Office of the City Manager of the City of Cadillac. 
    Jurisdiction means the City of Cadillac. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, § 1, 11-1-2010; Ord. No. 2015-14, § 2, 8-3-2015; Special Instruction of 1-2-2019) 
Sec. 8-124. - Amendments. 
Section 101.1: These regulations shall be known as the "International Property Maintenance Code of the City of Cadillac," hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Section 103.1: This code shall be enforced by the City Manager or their designee. The City Manager or their designee shall be known as the code official. 
Section 103.2: Appointment. This section is deleted in its entirety. 
Section 103.5: The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be established by resolution of the City Council. 
Section 107.6: It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such until the provisions of the compliance order or notice have been complied with; or until such owner or the owner's authorized agent shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgage or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice issued by the code official a signed and notarized statement acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation. A violation of this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor offense. 
Section 108.8: The owner of any structure placarded pursuant to Section 108.4 is responsible for paying a monthly, non-refundable administrative fee while the placard remains on the structure. The administrative fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council in an amount sufficient to defray the cost incurred by the City to monitor the structure for the purpose of preventing public safety hazards. The owner or party in interest whose name appears on the City's real property tax assessment records shall be notified of the amount owed by first class mail at the address shown on the City's real property tax assessment records. After 30 days, any unpaid amount shall be reported to the City Assessor for placement on the next tax roll of the City and imposition of a lien against the property, as permitted by state law. 
Section 111.1 through Section 111.8: These sections are deleted in their entirety and are replaced by the following: 
Section 111.1: Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the right to a hearing before the city's Construction Code Board of Appeals as established in Article II of the Cadillac City Code. 
Section 111.2: Appeal to Circuit Court. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Construction Code Board of Appeals under Section 111.1 may appeal said decision to the circuit court. 
Section 112.4: Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine in an amount to be established by resolution of the City Council. 
Section 202: (Add definitions) 
ABANDONED VEHICLE. A vehicle which has remained on private property for a period of time so as to appear to be abandoned and which remains on private property for a period of 48 hours. 
INOPERABLE VEHICLE. A vehicle, which is incapable of performing the function for which it was manufactured because of damage, missing or malfunctioning parts or equipment, or for any other reason. The term "inoperable vehicle" shall include junk vehicles and scrap vehicles. A historic motor vehicle, duly registered and certified as such as prescribed by the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq.), shall not be deemed an inoperable vehicle. Vehicles presently in use and subject to routine maintenance (oil change, tire rotation, etc.) shall not be deemed inoperable. 
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A motorized or nonmotorized vehicle that is not generally used as a primary means of transportation and is generally used for recreational purposes. The term "recreational vehicle" includes, but is not limited to a motor home, motorcoach, trailer, camper, watercraft, snowmobile, offroad motorcycle, quad runner, dune buggy, offroad vehicle, personal aircraft or plane. 
Section 302.4: All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of 12 inches. In addition to the remedies otherwise provided, any costs incurred by the City in the destruction or maintenance of weeds in violation of this Ordinance may be placed on the next tax roll of the City and the City may impose a lien against the property, as permitted by state law. (The remainder of this section shall be in effect as written.) 
Section 302.8: Except as provided for in other regulations, no inoperative, abandoned or unlicensed motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled. Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray booth. 
Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo a major overhaul, including body work, provided that such work is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such purposes and subject to obtaining an operational permit from the fire code official pursuant to the International Fire Code. 
Mobile homes must be located within a licensed mobile home park or within a designated area, properly zoned, such as a mobile home district. 
Storage of recreational vehicles is limited to those recreational vehicles owned by the owner of record, renter or legal occupant of property. 
Recreational vehicles shall be stored or parked within the confines of the rear or side yard areas with a minimum three-foot setback from side or rear lot lines. On lake front property, the yard abutting the lake shall be considered as the rear yard for the enforcement of this section. The code enforcement officer shall determine if rear lot storage is possible for purposes of this section. 
Recreational vehicles shall not be connected to sanitary facilities or permanent water connections, and shall not be occupied for a period to exceed 72 hours. 
The code enforcement officer may, upon written request, grant a one-time extension of 72 hours renewal for occupancy. 
Section 304.14: During the period from April 1 through October 31, every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved rightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. (The remainder of this section shall be in effect as written.) 
Section 602.3: Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat for the occupants thereof shall supply heat at all times to maintain a temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. (The remainder of this section shall be in effect as written.) 
Section 602.4: Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat at all times to maintain a temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are occupied. (The remainder of this section shall be in effect as written.) 
Section 704.2.5: Carbon monoxide alarms. Existing residential occupancies shall be equipped with carbon monoxide alarms. Alarms shall be installed outside of each separate dwelling unit sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the sleeping area. Alarms shall receive power from building wiring where such wiring is served from a commercial source. When primary power is interrupted, the alarm shall receive back-up power from a battery. 
Exception: Alarms having a 10-year sealed battery may be used in lieu of a wired alarm. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, § 1, 11-1-2010; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 1, 5-21-2012; Ord. No. 2015-14, § 2, 8-3-2015; Ord. No. 2018-05, § 1, 4-2-2018) 
Sec. 8-125. - Copies available. 
    Complete printed copies of the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code shall be kept in the office of the city clerk and shall be available for inspection by and distribution to the public in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, § 1, 11-1-2010; Ord. No. 2015-14, § 2, 8-3-2015; Special Instruction of 1-2-2019) 
Sec. 8-126. - Conflicts. 
    If a provision of the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code conflicts with a provision of any charter provision or ordinance of the city, the provision that establishes the higher standard for promotion or protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2010-14, § 1, 11-1-2010; Ord. No. 2015-14, § 2, 8-3-2015; Special Instruction of 1-2-2019) 
Sec. 8-127. - Violations. 
    Any violation of this Article or the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code shall be punishable as a municipal civil infraction unless otherwise specified. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, § 2, 3-20-2017; Ord. No. 2018-05, § 1, 4-2-2018) 
Chapter 10 - BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Defective or deteriorated merchandise. 
    No licensee or permittee shall sell or offer for sale any defective, faulty, incomplete or deteriorated articles of merchandise, unless the goods are so represented to prospective customers. 
(Prior Code, § 7.11) 
Secs. 10-2-10-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS LICENSES; PEDDLER, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANT PERMITS; AND HOME OCCUPATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, adopted March 20, 2017, repealed art. II, §§ 10-21-10-40 and enacted a new art. II, §§ 10-21-10-37 as set out herein. Former art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Prior Code, Ord. No. 2008-02, March 17, 2008; and Ord. No. 2010-10, adopted August 2, 2010. 

Sec. 10-21. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is not to prohibit or unreasonably restrict businesses that operate within the city, but instead, and subject to the requirements of this article, to license or permit such businesses and monitor business operations in the city so that the risks to the public health, safety and welfare are minimized. Licenses and permits for business operations in the city will be segregated into the following categories: 
(1)  Business licenses. It is the intent of this article to license all businesses within the city occupying or operating from traditional buildings or structures to ensure that no business operation unreasonably threatens the public health, safety and welfare and so that each business is properly informed of, and in compliance with, all zoning, building, fire and related city codes. Business licenses will be issued and renewed, as set forth in this article, utilizing a risk based approach across three risk tiers; Tier 1 will be the highest risk; Tier 2 will be moderate risk; and, Tier 3 will be low risk. Tiers will be assigned by the city fire department based on the potential community safety risk. For illustrative purposes only, Tier 1 (high risk) occupancies will include such things as industrial manufacturing facilities, restaurants/bars, hotels and furniture and general retail stores in excess of 3,000 square feet. Tier 2 (moderate risk) occupancies will include such things as churches, general retail stores less than 3,000 square feet and automobile repair facilities. Tier 3 (low risk) occupancies will include such things as business offices, coffee shops and similar occupancies. 
(2)  Peddler, solicitors and transient merchant permits. The city recognizes that peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants conducting business in the city without occupying traditional buildings or structures may create unique health, safety and/or welfare considerations and it is the intent of this article to require permits for all peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants conducting such business. These types of businesses are, by their nature, temporary and transient and pose unique health or safety risks to the public, such as when food items are prepared and vended from temporary or other nonstationary/unconventional means. Further, unique safety concerns may arise from the use of amusement, riding and moving devices, or from those temporary or transient businesses that provide a social climate that encourages the gathering of large crowds in congested areas. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 10-22. - Licenses or permits required; exemptions. 
(a)  No person, directly or indirectly, engaged in the business of manufacturing or sale of any goods or services within the city (whether such operation is from traditional buildings or structures or as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant) may operate, conduct, maintain, or manage any such business without a valid and effective license or permit issued by the city in the manner prescribed in this article. A business license shall be required for each premise or parcel upon which there is a traditional building or structure from which business is transacted or conducted. A peddler, solicitor and transient merchant permit shall be required for each person that is directly or indirectly engaged in the sale of any goods or services within the city. 
(b)  No person may conduct a going out of business sale without first obtaining a license for the sale in accordance with Public Act No. 39 of 1961 (MCL 442.211 et seq.). 
(c)  Business license exemption. Home occupations that are operating in compliance with Chapter 46 of the Cadillac City Code, shall not require a business license. 
(d)  Peddler, solicitor or transient merchant exemption: The following are specifically exempted from the peddler, solicitor or transient merchant permit requirements of this article: 
(1)  Special events approved by city: Any person operating as part of a larger special event (like arts and crafts fairs, farmers' markets, festivals, and exhibitions), which has been specifically approved by the city under other applicable provisions of the city code, provided that any such person was included within the original application for the special event by the organizer of the event and further provided that any person engaged in the business of selling prepared food from any motor vehicle, conveyance, cart, stand, booth or other similar structure or fixture that is cooked or heated with a device or appliance using any gas or liquid until and unless the motor vehicle, conveyance, cart, stand, booth or other similar structure or fixture, device or appliance is reviewed or inspected by appropriate city departments. However, no person shall be permitted to operate beyond the date of the special event approved by the city without an approved permit in conformance with this article. 
(2)  Limousine carriers, taxicab carrier, or transportation network company: To the extent limousine and taxicab carriers and transportation network companies are exempt from fees and licenses pursuant to Public Act 345 of 2016, such limousine and taxicab carriers and transportation network companies are exempt from this article. 
(3)  Veterans: A veteran, as defined by Public Act 359 of 1921, shall be excluded from this article, but only to the extent such veteran is in compliance with Act 359, sells his or own goods, and only if the proceeds from the sale of the goods are to be used for his or her direct personal benefit or gain. For purposes of this subsection, "goods" shall not include any food or services and the sale of which shall require a permit. 
(4)  Any person under the age of 18 years of age is exempt, unless such persons under age 18 are peddling or vending from a motor vehicle. Then those persons shall be required to obtain a permit. 
(5)  Any person representing any established public or private school; provided that sales are under the sponsorship of the school. 
(6)  Any person exempt from the permitting requirements of this article by virtue of state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 10-23. - Multiple businesses; state or county license is not exemption. 
    The granting of a license or permit under this article to any person for a business that is composed of, or operated in conjunction with, other trades, professions, businesses or privileges that also require other licenses or permits under this Code shall not relieve the person to whom such license or permit is granted under this article from the necessity of securing any other licenses or permits for each such trade, profession, business or privilege required to have such licenses or permits issued by any department or agency. Further, the fact that a license or permit has been granted to any person by any federal, state or county agency or authority to engage in the operation, conduct, maintenance or management of any business or premises shall not exempt such person from the necessity of procuring a license or permit from the city if such license or permit is required by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 10-24. - Application. 
    A person shall submit a complete application for a business license or peddler, solicitor or transient merchant permit to the city clerk in the form and manner prescribed by the city manager and shall state under oath such facts as may be required for, or applicable to, the granting of such license or permit, including the following: 
(1)  Business license (Tier 1, 2 and 3): 
a.  The full names, business addresses and residence addresses of all owners, proprietors, officers and managers of the business. 
b.  The place or places in the city where the business will be located and conducted. 
c.  The nature and character of the goods, wares, merchandise or services to be sold or offered for sale. 
d.  The nature and kind of business to be conducted and the manner of operating the same, including whether the licensee will operate solely from the premises for which the license is requested or whether the business also involves motor vehicles or other conveyances in the operation of the business. 
1.  If a motor vehicle or other conveyance is to be used, a description of the same, together with the license number, vehicle identification number or other adequate means of identification. If a motor vehicle is to be used, a statement that the applicant or operator of the motor vehicle has a current valid operator's license and whether the applicant or operator of the motor vehicle has ever had his or her driving privileges revoked, suspended or restricted within three years immediately prior to the date of application, and the nature of any such revocation, suspension or restriction. The applicant must also provide proof that the motor vehicle to be used is properly insured. 
2.  If the business operation also involves the use of a cart, stand, booth or other similar structure or fixture to be placed upon any property not subject to the business license and is otherwise not exempt, a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant permit shall also be obtained pursuant to the requirements of this article. 
e.  A list of all assumed, trade or firm names under which business will be transacted. 
f.  Whether or not the applicant or any person managing the business has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor and if so, a full description of the nature of the conviction, including the court where the conviction was adjudicated and the month and year of the conviction. 
g.  If the nature and character of the business also requires a federal, state, or county license or approval, proof that such license or approval has been obtained and the expiration date of such license or approval. 
h.  A statement as to whether any of the owners, proprietors, officers or managers of the business have ever held any licenses or permits issued or required by the city and whether any licenses or approvals (federal, state or local, including any issued by the city) have ever been revoked, suspended, or denied within three years immediately preceding the date of application and the circumstances surrounding the revocation, suspension or denial. 
i.  If food is to be sold as part of the business, a health card, license, or its equivalent, if applicable, issued by either the county health department or other appropriate regulatory agency or authority. 
j.  Such other information the city clerk deems reasonably necessary to determine whether the requirements of this article have been met. 
(2)  Peddler, solicitors and transient merchant permits: 
a.  The full names, business addresses and residence addresses of all owners, proprietors, officers and managers of the business and the name and address of each person engaged, directly or indirectly, with peddling, soliciting, or the operation of the business in any manner whatsoever shall also be included. 
b.  The place or places in the city where it is proposed to maintain or conduct the business and the days and hours of operations. 
c.  The nature and character of the business, including the type of goods, wares, merchandise or services to be sold or offered for sale in the city and the manner in which the business will be conducted, including whether the licensee will operate solely from a fixed location or whether the business also involves motor vehicles or other conveyances in the operation of the business. 
1.  If a motor vehicle or other conveyance is to be used, a description of the same, together with the license number, vehicle identification number or other adequate means of identification. If a motor vehicle is to be used, a statement that the applicant or operator of the motor vehicle has a current valid operator's license and whether the applicant or operator of the motor vehicle has ever had his or her driving privileges revoked, suspended or restricted within three years immediately prior to the date of application, and the nature of any such revocation, suspension or restriction. The applicant must also provide proof that the motor vehicle to be used is properly insured. 
2.  If the business operation involves the use of a cart, stand, booth or other similar structure or fixture to be placed upon the property of another, evidence that the legal owner of that property has consented to the use of the property for that purpose. 
d.  A list of all assumed, trade or firm names under which business will be transacted. 
e.  Whether or not the applicant or any person engaged, directly or indirectly, with peddling, soliciting, or the operation of the business in any manner whatsoever, has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor and if so, a full description of the nature of the conviction, including the court where the conviction was adjudicated and the month and year of the conviction. 
f.  If the nature and character of the business requires a federal, state, or county license or approval, proof that such license or approval has been obtained and the expiration date of such license or approval. 
g.  The nature and character of any proposed advertising for the business. 
h.  A statement as to whether any of the owners, proprietors, officers or managers of the business have ever held any licenses or permits issued or required by the city and whether any licenses or approvals (federal, state or local, including any issued by the city) have ever been revoked, suspended, or denied within three years immediately preceding the date of application and the circumstances surrounding the revocation, suspension or denial. 
i.  If food is to be sold, a health card, license, or its equivalent, if applicable, issued by either the county health department or other regulatory agency. 
j.  Such other information the city clerk deems reasonably necessary to determine whether the requirements of this article have been met. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 10-25. - Fees and bonds required; expiration and renewal. 
    The fees that are required to be paid and the amount of any bond required to be posted, or insurance required to be carried, to obtain any license or permit to engage in the operation, conduct, or carrying on of any business or privilege for which a license or permit is required by the provisions of this article shall be non-refundable and shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. A separate fee shall be required for each separate premise where business is conducted and for each peddler, solicitor or transient merchant engaged in the business, either directly or indirectly. No license or permit shall be issued, nor any renewal of any such license or permit granted, unless all of the requirements of this article and the Cadillac City Code have been met and all fees have been paid, required bonds posted and evidence of insurance coverage provided. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 10-26. - Inspections; certificates. 
(a)  Business licenses. No new business license involving the use of a traditional building or structure shall be issued until and unless the property where the business is located is reviewed or inspected by appropriate city departments, in its discretion, including, without limitation, community development, utilities, engineering, police and fire. Similarly, no business license shall be renewed until and unless the property where the business is located is reviewed or inspected by appropriate city departments, in its discretion. Each department required to review or inspect property must certify that the proposed use is not prohibited by any applicable Cadillac City Code provision, rule or regulation including, without limitation any zoning or fire regulations. If the proposed use is prohibited or does not meet any requirement of the Cadillac City Code, a license shall not be issued or renewed and the applicant shall be notified in writing by the city clerk pursuant to section 10-29. 
(b)  Peddler, solicitors and transient merchant permits. No new permit shall be issued to any peddler, solicitor or transient merchant who is engaged in the business of selling prepared food from any motor vehicle, conveyance, cart, stand, booth or other similar structure or fixture that is cooked or heated with a device or appliance using any gas or liquid until and unless the motor vehicle, conveyance, cart, stand, booth or other similar structure or fixture, device or appliance is reviewed or inspected by appropriate city departments. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 10-27. - Expiration date; significant change in business; renewals. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article for city directed peddler, solicitor and transient merchant sale locations, every license or permit issued pursuant to this article shall expire and terminate at 12:00 midnight one year after date of issuance of such license or permit. However, in the event of a significant change in business operations (i.e., change of ownership, location, or product focus) the license or permit issued for that business shall immediately expire and terminate and a new license or permit application shall be filed pursuant to section 10-24. It shall be the responsibility of the business owner or manager to notify the city clerk in writing of any such significant change in business operations. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this article, an application for renewal of a license shall be considered in the same manner as an original application. At least 30 days prior to expiration of any license or permit, the licensee or permittee shall apply for a renewal license or permit in the following manner: 
(1)  Business license renewal application: Business license renewal applications shall be submitted annually in the manner prescribed by this article and on an application form approved by the city. Renewal applications shall, at a minimum, require the applicant to confirm or update all of the information originally required by section 10-24(a). The city clerk may request from the applicant any additional information reasonably necessary to determine whether there has been a significant change in business operations. Except for instances where there has been a significant change in business operations which requires a new application, the city may, in its discretion, require an on-site inspection for renewal applications as follows: 
a.  A Tier 1 business-Review and inspection on an annual basis. 
b.  Tier 2 business-Review and inspection on a biennial basis. 
c.  Tier 3 business-Review and inspection on a triennial basis. 
(2)  Peddler, solicitor and transient merchant permit renewal application. Peddler, solicitor and transient merchant permit renewal applications shall be submitted annually in the manner prescribed by this article and on an application form approved by the city. Renewal applications shall, at a minimum, require the applicant to confirm or update all of the information originally required by section 10-24(b). The city clerk may request from the applicant any additional information reasonably necessary to determine whether there has been a significant change in business operations. Peddlers, solicitors or transient merchants engaged in the business of selling prepared food from any motor vehicle, conveyance, cart, stand, booth or other similar structure or fixture that is cooked or heated with a device or appliance using any gas or liquid shall be subject to annual review and inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 10-28. - Late renewals. 
    After 15 days from the date the license or permit expires, 25 percent shall be added to the normal fee; after 30 days, 50 percent shall be added to the normal fee and after 60 days, the license or permit fee shall be double the normal fee. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 10-29. - Refusal, revocation or suspension; notice. 
(a)  At any time the city clerk may refuse to issue any license or permit requested under this article and may suspend or revoke any license or permit issued for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to pay all required fees at the time the application is submitted; 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for a license or permit; 
(3)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the operation of a business; 
(4)  Any violation amounting to a felony, or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
(5)  Conducting a business in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a nuisance per se to the health, safety or welfare of the public; 
(6)  Failure to comply with an authorized requirement of any city official as it relates to the operation or business pertaining to the license or permit; 
(7)  The failure of any applicant, licensee, or permittee, (including all employees, agents and representatives of the applicant, licensee or permittee) to meet and satisfy any provision of this Code or any other duly established rule or regulation of the city applicable to the business for which the license or permit has been requested or granted. 
(8)  Failure to obtain any other required license or permit for the business from any federal, state or local agency or authority and lack of any evidence that such state license or permit has been obtained and proof that all fees pertaining thereto have been paid. 
(9)  Failure to provide any information reasonably requested by the city clerk related to the application. 
(10)  Engaging in any prohibited conduct under section 10-36 of this article. 
(b)  Any application fees paid to the city shall be non-refundable, including any instance in which a license or permit is refused, revoked or suspended. 
(c)  Any refusal, revocation or suspension of any license or permit under this article shall be in writing and shall state the reasons for the same. Refusal, revocation or suspension of any license or permit shall be effective upon mailing to the last known address of the applicant, licensee or permittee and no person shall operate any business at any time without a valid license or permit. 
(d)  Any person whose license or permit has been refused, revoked or suspended shall have the right to appeal the decision of the city clerk to the city manager within ten days after mailing of the notice of the refusal, revocation or suspension. 
(e)  If a person whose license or permit has been refused, revoked or suspended fails to appeal, then the decision of the city clerk shall be final. If the application was refused, a person may reapply in the same manner for an original license or permit, including payment of the required fees, at any time. If a license or permit is suspended, the license or permit shall be inactive and shall be ineffective during the period of suspension, after which the license or permit shall return to active and effective status until expiration. If a license or permit is revoked, the license or permit shall be deemed to be fully and completely revoked for a period of one year after such revocation after which a person may reapply in the same manner for an original license or permit. 
(f)  If a person whose license or permit has been refused, revoked or suspended files an appeal with the city manager within the time prescribed, the city manager shall provide the person with an opportunity to be heard on the appeal and shall review the record and the action of the city clerk. Based upon the entire record presented, the city manager may affirm, overrule or modify the action of the city clerk. The city manager's decision shall be final. The city manager shall provide written notice by mailing a copy of the decision to the last known address of the applicant, licensee or permittee. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 10-30. - Display and carry of license and permits. 
    Any license or permit issued pursuant to this article shall either be conspicuously displayed on the premises of the business for which it was issued or, in the case of peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants, conspicuously displayed on any cart, stand, booth or other similar structure or fixture used in the business and carried upon his or her person at all times when engaged in the operation, conduct or maintenance of any business for which the permit was issued. Upon request by any city employee, the licensee or permittee shall produce the license or permit for examination or surrender the license or permit to the city when applying for a renewal thereof. 
    No person shall carry or display any expired, suspended or revoked license or permit, or any license or permit for which a duplicate has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 10-31. - License and permits are not nontransferable. 
    Licenses and permits issued under this article are not transferable, without the consent and in the sole discretion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 10-32. - Evidence of doing business. 
    The fact that any person represents himself or herself as being engaged in any business, trade or occupation for which a license or permit is required under this article, or that such person exhibited a sign or advertisement indicating that he or she is engaged in such business, trade or occupation, shall be prima facie evidence of the liability of such person to pay the required license or permit fee. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 10-33. - Indebtedness to city. 
    No license or permit shall be granted to any person owing any personal property taxes, money judgments or any other indebtedness to the city, except for real property taxes and special assessments, or to any person using any personal property in the operation of a business upon which personal property taxes are delinquent. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 10-34. - Use of public property or the public rights of way for peddler, solicitor and transient merchant permits. 
    All persons, whether or not licensed under this article, using any cart, wagon, motor vehicle or other conveyance, when stopping upon the streets or public rights-of-way of the city for the purposes of conducting business, shall draw up to and parallel with the curbline and in such a manner so as not to obstruct vehicle or pedestrian travel. No person shall engage in selling in a fixed location on a street corner or public right-of-way for longer than necessary to complete the sale without specific permission from the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 10-35. - Peddlers and transient merchants. 
(a)  The following words, terms or phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Peddler means any person, whether a resident of the city or not, who travels by foot, wagon, cart, motor vehicle, or other conveyance, from place to place, carrying, selling or offering for sale items, goods, wares, merchandise or services, or who, without traveling from place to place, sells or offers the same for sale from a motor vehicle, wagon, trailer, railroad car, or other vehicle or conveyance, or from a cart, stand, booth, display case, or other temporary or portable structure or fixture. The term "peddler" shall include vendor, hawker, huckster, concessionaire, or solicitor and shall include route salespersons selling randomly to customers, but not route salespersons supplying only prior customer orders. The term "peddler" also means any person, whether resident of the city or not, [who] sells or offers for sale edible items, goods, wares or merchandise from a temporary or portable structure or fixture on any public place, street or public right-of-way within the city and/or city park system. 
    Transient merchant means any person, whether a resident of the city or not, engaged in the retail sale of edible items, goods, wares or merchandise from any private lot, premises, building, room or structure on a temporary basis where such person does not have a permanent business location within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 10-36. - Prohibited practices. 
(a)  In addition to the causes listed in section 10-29 of this article for suspension or revocation of a license or permit, the following conduct by any person, licensee, permittee, agent or employee shall be considered a violation of this Code, and may result in the suspension or revocation of a license granted under this article: 
(1)  Entering a private residence under pretense other than for peddling. 
(2)  Remaining in a private residence or in or on other private property after the owner or occupant has requested the person to leave. 
(3)  Going in and upon the premises of a private residence to peddle or solicit when the owner or occupant thereof has displayed a "No Peddling" or equivalent sign on such premises. 
(4)  Peddling or soliciting at a private residence prior to 8:00 a.m. and after 8:00 p.m., unless by prior invitation of the owner or occupant. 
(5)  Peddling, soliciting or operating a concession on a street, city property or within an area which has been closed by city council or city manager for an art fair, street fair or other special event, unless otherwise included in the special event. 
(6)  Shouting or calling wares or using a public address system, horn, bell, or other noise-making device to call attention to the licensee's or permittee's business in such a way as to disturb residents or adjacent businesses, unless such noise-making devices are specifically approved as part of the license or permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 10-37. - City directed peddler, solicitor and transient merchant sale locations. 
(a)  The city may designate areas within the city and within the public rights-of-way or on public property upon which peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants may be permitted to operate. 
(b)  By January 31 of each year, the city shall designate such locations for which permits may be offered. 
(c)  City directed peddler, solicitor and transient merchant sale locations in the public rights-of-way or on public property shall be offered to interested persons by way of sealed bid. 
(d)  The city may advertise the bidding process for any city directed peddler, solicitor and transient merchant sale locations in any manner, including but not limited to posting on its website or publication in any print media. 
(e)  The city manager shall determine the duration and scope of any permit offered by the city, including but not limited to a minimum bid amount. Minimum bids for such city designated locations need not be uniform and may reflect differences based upon location and duration of each permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 10-38. - Administrative rules. 
    The city manager may promulgate any rules necessary or desirable for the administration of this article that are not inconsistent with any provisions contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Secs. 10-39-10-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COMMERCIAL PREMISES 

Sec. 10-69. - Parking areas. 
    It shall be unlawful for any licensee, manager or person in charge of any business establishment to cause, create, allow or maintain any nuisance on its parking area whereby the peace, good order, or sanitation of the neighborhood is disturbed, or persons owning or occupying property in the neighborhood are disturbed or annoyed. 
(Prior Code, § 6.1) 
Sec. 10-70. - Premises kept free from waste material, etc. 
    It shall be the duty of the licensee, manager or person in charge of any business establishment to keep the premises whereon said business establishment is located, together with the parking area and that portion of any alley adjoining said business establishment, free from their own rubbish, waste products, cans, bottles and debris, including napkins, straws, paper cups and plates and other waste material. 
(Prior Code, § 6.2) 
Sec. 10-71. - Driving through premises unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to drive through or upon any driveway or parking lot, used in conjunction with any business establishment, for purposes other than those for which said driveway and parking lot were constructed. 
(Prior Code, § 6.3) 
Sec. 10-72. - Causing litter prohibited. 
    No person shall put, deposit or throw any food, beverage, paper cup, napkin, paper plate, dish, bottle, container, straw, scrap paper, handbills, shavings, dirt, trash, hulls, shells, stalks or other kind of refuse or waste materials in or upon any driveway, sidewalk, street, alley, parking lot or parking area on the premises or in the vicinity of any business establishment in such manner and extent as thereby to render the same unclean, unsightly, unsanitary or unsafe. 
(Prior Code, § 6.4) 
State Law reference- Littering, MCL 324.8901 et seq. 
Sec. 10-73. - Business has duty to report violations. 
    It shall be the duty of the licensee, manager or person in charge of any business establishment, to immediately report to the police department of the city, any violations of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 6.5) 
Chapter 12 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Housing and slums clearance projects, MCL 125.651 et seq.; housing corporation law, MCL 125.601 et seq.; urban redevelopment corporations, MCL 125.901 et seq.; rehabilitation of blighted areas, MCL 125.71 et seq.; state housing development authority act of 1966, MCL 125.1401 et seq.; downtown development authority, MCL 125.1651 et seq.; economic development corporations, MCL 125.1601 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1-12-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOUSING DEVELOPMENT TAX EXEMPTIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-19. - No exemptions granted except for elderly and handicapped persons. 
    The city hereby determines that no exemptions under the provisions of section 15a(1) of the state housing authority act of 1966 (P.A. No. 346 of 1966) (the "Act") shall be granted or apply to any class of housing projects developed, utilized or in existence in the city, except for the following classes of housing: 
(1)  Housing projects for elderly and handicapped persons; and 
(2)  The rehabilitation of an existing multi-family housing development to provide multi-family housing for low-income persons and families. "Rehabilitation" means the substantial repair, renovation, and improvement of an existing multi-family housing development. This subsection (2) does not apply to new construction or to single-family homes. 
(Prior Code, ch. 3, art. I; Ord. No. 2016-09, § 1, 9-6-2016) 
Secs. 12-20-12-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HARBOR VIEW 

Sec. 12-40. - Purpose. 
    It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the state and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of low income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the state housing development authority act of 1966, Public Act No. 346 of 1966 (MCL 125.1401 et seq.). The city is authorized by said act to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any and all classes of housing exempt from taxation under the act, at any amount it chooses, not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for the act. It is further acknowledged that such housing for persons of low income is a public necessity, and as the city will be benefited and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by providing certain real estate tax exemption therefor is a valid purpose; further, that the continuance of the provisions of this article for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the periods hereinafter contemplated are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of housing developments which are constructed and financed in reliance thereon. The City of Cadillac Limited Dividend Housing Association (the sponsor) has offered, subject to receipt of a mortgage loan from the authority, to erect, own and operate a housing development identified as Harbor View, formerly known as Cadillac Lakeside Towers, on certain property located at Holly Road and South Street in the city to serve persons of low income, and that the sponsor has offered to pay the city on account of said development an annual service charge for public services in lieu of taxes on that part of the development designed for and occupied by elderly citizens. 
(Prior Code, § 1.68) 
Sec. 12-41. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the State Housing Development Authority Act, Public Act No. 346 of 1966 (MCL 125.1401 et seq.). 
    Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
    Contract rents are as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development in regulations promulgated pursuant to the U.S. Housing Act of 1937, as amended by the Housing Community Development Act of 1974. 
    Elderly means those persons 62 years of age or older or who otherwise qualify pursuant to the rules and regulations or practices of the authority for residency in an elderly housing project. 
    Elderly housing project means a specific parcel of property designed and improved for rental to a low or moderate income individual which qualifies as an elderly housing project under the rules and regulations or standard practices of the state housing development authority to the extent it is occupied by the elderly, excluding one unit for a development manager or caretaker. 
    Housing development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for persons of low income and such elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal, and educational facilities as the authority determines improve the quality of the development as it relates to housing for persons of low income. 
    Mortgage loan means a loan to be made by the authority to the sponsor for the construction and permanent financing of the housing development. 
    Sponsor means persons or entities which have applied to the authority for a mortgage loan to finance a housing development. 
    Utilities mean fuel, water, sanitary sewer services and/or electrical service. 
(Prior Code, § 1.69) 
Sec. 12-42. - Class of housing development exempt from taxation. 
    It is hereby determined that the class of housing development to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes shall be that portion of Harbor View, formerly known as Cadillac Lakeside Towers, designed for and occupied by the elderly, which are financed or assisted pursuant to the act. 
(Prior Code, § 1.70) 
Sec. 12-43. - Payment in lieu of taxes. 
    An annual service charge for public services shall be charged to the owner of said project, or his assigns, in lieu of property taxes on the project which is to be designed for and occupied by the elderly, in the amount of four percent of the contract rents (as defined by the rules pursuant to the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended) of the preceding calendar year, exclusive of utilities paid by the tenants and the project, and the amount paid to the city during the preceding calendar year for the annual charge from and after the commencement of the construction of the development, so long as a mortgage loan to the state housing development authority remains outstanding and unpaid or the authority has any interest in the property. The service charge shall be paid to the city on or before July 1 of each year next following the date construction is commenced. The service charge shall not be less than $130.00 per unit. 
(Prior Code, § 1.71) 
Sec. 12-44. - Contractual effect of division. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15a(5)of the act (MCL 125.1415a(5)), to the contrary, a contract between the city and the sponsor with the authority as third party beneficiary thereunder, to provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu thereof as previously described is effected by this division. 
(Prior Code, § 1.72) 
Sec. 12-45. - Duration. 
    This division shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as the mortgage loan remains outstanding and unpaid or the authority has any interest in the property; provided that construction of the housing development commenced before March 19, 1980. 
(Prior Code, § 1.73) 
Sec. 12-46. - Collection procedures. 
    The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined hereunder shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable in the city, except that the annual payment shall be paid on or before July 1 of each year. The entire tax collection procedure provided by the general property tax act shall be effective with respect to such payment, including, but not by way of limitation, the provisions providing for interest and penalties on late payments, return of delinquent taxes, and the sale of lands for delinquent taxes. 
(Prior Code, § 1.74) 
Secs. 12-47-12-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - NORTHLAND MEADOWS 

Sec. 12-66. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the state and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of low to moderate income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the state housing development authority act of 1966, Public Act No. 346 of 1966 (MCL 125.1401 et seq.). The city is authorized by this act to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this act at any amount it chooses, not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this act. 
(b)  It is further acknowledged that such housing for persons of low to moderate income is a public necessity, and as the city will be benefited and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by providing certain real estate tax exemption for such housing is a valid public purpose; further, that the continuance of the provisions of this division for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the periods contemplated in this division are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of housing developments which are constructed and financed in reliance on such ordinance and service charge. 
(c)  The city acknowledges that Northland Meadow Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership, the sponsor, has offered, subject to receipt of an allocation under the low income housing tax credit program (LIHTCP) from the state housing development authority, the authority, to erect, own and operate a housing development identified as Northland Meadow, the housing development on certain property located in the city, as legally described in exhibit A in section 12-99, to serve elderly persons and persons and families of low to moderate income, and that the sponsor has offered to pay the city, on account of this development, an annual service charge for public services in lieu of taxes on that part of the development designed for and occupied by persons of low income. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12, § 1(1.75), 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 12-67. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the state housing development authority act, Public Act No. 346 of 1966 (MCL 125.1401 et seq.). 
    Annual shelter rents means the total collection during an agreed annual period from all occupants of the housing development representing rent or occupancy charges, exclusive of charges for gas, electric or other utilities furnished the occupants. 
    Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
    Contract rents are defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development in regulations promulgated pursuant to the U.S. Housing Act of 1937, as amended. 
    Elderly means a single person who is 55 years of age or older or a household in which at least one member is 55 years of age and all other members are 50 years of age or older. 
    Housing development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for persons of low to moderate income and such elements of other housing, recreational, communal and educational facilities as the authority determines improves the quality of the development as it relates to housing for persons of low to moderate income. Northland Meadow is of this type. In all cases the development is subject to the provisions of chapter 46, pertaining to zoning. 
    HUD means the Department of Housing and Urban Development of the United States Government. 
    Mortgage loan means a loan to be made by the authority to the sponsor for the construction and/or permanent financing of the housing development. 
    Persons and/or families of low to moderate income means any person or family eligible to move into a housing development, including elderly persons or families, as defined in the act. 
    Sponsor means Northland Meadow Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership, which has applied to the authority for a mortgage loan to finance a housing development. 
    Utilities means fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service which are paid by the housing development. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12, § 1(1.76), 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 12-68. - Class of housing developments exempt from taxation. 
    It is determined that the class of housing development to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes shall be multiple dwellings for elderly persons and persons and families of low to moderate income which are financed or assisted pursuant to the act, and is limited to the number of units allowable by zoning. It is further determined that Northland Meadow is of this class. Passage of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall not be deemed precedent for other similar pilot ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12, § 1(1.77), 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 12-69. - Establishment of annual service charge. 
    The housing development identified as Northland Meadow and the property on which it shall be constructed shall be exempt from all property taxes from and after the project is placed in service as evidenced by a certificate of occupancy from the appropriate public officials. The city, acknowledging that the sponsor and the authority have established the economic feasibility of the housing development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of the ordinance from which this division is derived and the qualification of the housing development for exemption from all property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this division, and in consideration of the sponsor's offer, subject to receipt of an allocation under the LIHTC program to construct, own and operate the housing development, agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes. The annual service charge shall be equal to eight percent of the annual shelter rents actually collected for the first year, and each year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12, § 1(1.78), 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 12-70. - Payment in lieu of taxes. 
(a)  Notwithstanding section 12-69, the service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for the part of the housing development which is tax exempt and which is occupied by other than low to moderate income persons or families shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes which would be paid on that portion of the housing development, if the housing development were not tax exempt. 
(b)  The term "low to moderate income persons or families," as used herein, means, with respect to any housing development that is tax exempt, persons or families eligible to move into that development. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12, § 1(1.79), 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 12-71. - Contractual effect of division. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15A(5) of the act (MCL 125.1415a(5)), to the contrary, a contract between the city and the sponsor with the authority, as third party beneficiary under the contract to provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by enactment of the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12, § 1(1.80), 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 12-72. - Verification of annual shelter rent. 
    The sponsor shall verify annual shelter rent revenues to the city with a statement of profit and loss of the housing development as reported to the state housing development authority by an independent certified public accountant or other form of financial documentation deemed suitable by the city. The statement of profit and loss or other form of financial documentation, together with a statement showing how the service charge was calculated, shall be submitted to the city treasurer by April 30 each year. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12, § 1(1.81), 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 12-73. - Duration. 
    This division shall remain in effect so long as the mortgage loan remains outstanding and unpaid, so long as the housing development remains subject to income and rent restrictions pursuant to section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended; provided that construction of the housing development commences within one year from the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived. Notwithstanding the above, the exemption shall cease for that portion of the project which is not operated consistent with section 12-68. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12, § 1(1.82), 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 12-74. - Payment of service charge. 
    The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under this division shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes, except that the estimated annual payment shall be paid on or before June 1 of each year following the annual tax collection. Any adjustment in payment shall be made effective June 15, and any claim for overpayment will be adjusted in the next year's payment. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12, § 1(1.83), 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 12-75. - Termination. 
    Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, should the sponsor fail to pay the final adjusted service charge in lieu of taxes granted hereunder, or fail to provide the verification of the calculations used to make the payment, the service charge in lieu of taxes granted by the ordinance from which this division is derived shall automatically be terminated, retroactive to January 1 of that year. The city shall file a notice of termination to the sponsor of the housing development and the authority, by certified mail, within 30 days of such termination. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12, § 1(1.84), 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 12-76. - Acknowledgment. 
    The city hereby acknowledges receipt of documentation from the authority indicating that the authority's participation with the housing development is limited solely to the allocation of tax credits under the low income housing tax credit program. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12, § 1(1.85), 8-7-2006) 
DIVISION 4. - MAPLE HILL APARTMENTS 

Sec. 12-77. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of low to moderate income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 PA 346, as amended, MCL 125.1401 et seq. The City of Cadillac is authorized by this Act to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from Taxation under this Act at any amount it chooses, not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this Act. 
(b)  It is further acknowledged that such housing for persons of low to moderate income is a public necessity, and as the City of Cadillac will be benefited and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by providing certain real estate tax exemption for such housing is a valid public purpose; further, that the continuance of the provisions of this division for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the periods contemplated in this division are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of housing developments which are constructed and financed in reliance on such division and service charge. 
(c)  The City of Cadillac acknowledges that Maple Hill Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership (a "Sponsor") has offered, subject to receipt of an allocation under the low income housing tax credit program (the "LIHTCP") from the Michigan State Housing Development Authority (the "authority"), to rehabilitate, own and operate a housing development identified as Maple Hill Apartments (the "Housing Development") on certain property located at 207 Pearl Street, 209 Pearl Street, and 211 Pearl Street in the City of Cadillac as legally described in "Exhibit A" attached to ordinance no. 2016-10, to serve persons and families of low to moderate income, and that the sponsor has offered to pay the City of Cadillac, on account of this development, an annual service charge for public services in lieu of taxes on that part of the development designed for and occupied by persons of low income. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10, § 1, 9-6-2016) 
Sec. 12-78. - Definitions. 
    Act means the State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346 of 1966, of the State of Michigan, as amended. 
    Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
    Annual shelter rents means the total collection during an agreed annual period from or paid on behalf of all occupants of the housing development representing rent or occupancy charges, exclusive of charges for gas, electric or other utilities furnished to the occupants. 
    Housing development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for persons of low to moderate income and such elements of other housing, recreational, communal and educational facilities as the authority determines improves the quality of the development as it relates to housing for persons of low to moderate income. Maple Hill Apartments is of this type. In all cases, the development is subject to the provisions of the city zoning ordinance and section 12-19 of the City Code of Ordinances. 
    Persons and/or families of low to moderate income means any person or family eligible to move into a housing development, including elderly persons or families (as defined in the Act). 
    Mortgage loan means a loan to be made to the sponsor by the United States Department of Agriculture for permanent financing of the housing development and any other construction and/or permanent loan made pursuant to the Act to finance the rehabilitation of the housing development. 
    Sponsor means Maple Hill Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership, which has applied to the authority for a low income tax credit under LIHTCP to finance the rehabilitation of the housing development known as Maple Hill Apartments. 
    Utilities means fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service[s] which are paid by the housing development. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10, § 1, 9-6-2016) 
Sec. 12-79. - Class of housing developments exempt from taxation. 
    It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes shall be rehabilitated multi-family housing for persons and families of low to moderate income which are financed or assisted pursuant to the Act, and is limited to the number of units allowable by zoning. It is further determined that Maple Hill Apartments is of this class. Passage of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall not be deemed precedent for other similar PILOT ordinances. The classes of housing developments exempt from taxation are defined in section 12-19 of the City Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10, § 1, 9-6-2016) 
Sec. 12-80. - Establishment of annual service charge. 
    The housing development identified as Maple Hill Apartments and the property on which it is located shall be exempt from all property taxes from and after completion of the rehabilitation. The city, acknowledging that the sponsor, the authority has established the economic feasibility of rehabilitating the housing development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this division and the qualification of the housing development for exemption from all property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this division, and in consideration of the sponsor's offer, subject to receipt of an allocation under the LIHTC program to rehabilitate, own and operate the housing development, agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes. The annual service charge shall be equal to six percent of the annual shelter rents actually collected for the first year, and each year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10, § 1, 9-6-2016) 
Sec. 12-81. - Limitation on the payment of annual service charge. 
    Notwithstanding section 12-80, the service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for the part of the housing development which is tax exempt and which is occupied by other than low to moderate income persons or families shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes which would be paid on that portion of the housing development if the housing development were not tax exempt. 
    The term "low to moderate income persons or families" as used herein means, with respect to any housing development that is tax-exempt, persons or families eligible to move into that development consistent with LIHTCP and the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10, § 1, 9-6-2016) 
Sec. 12-82. - Contractual effect of ordinance. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15(a)(5) of the Act, to the contrary, a contract between the City of Cadillac and the sponsor with the authority as third party beneficiary under the contract to provide tax 
exemption and accept payments in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by enactment of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10, § 1, 9-6-2016) 
Sec. 12-83. - Verification of annual shelter rent. 
    The sponsor shall verify annual shelter rent revenues to the city with a statement of profit and loss of the housing development as reported to the Michigan State Housing Development Authority by an independent certified public accountant or other form of financial documentation deemed suitable by the City of Cadillac. The statement of profit and loss or other form of financial documentation, together with a statement showing how the service charge was calculated, shall be submitted to the city treasurer by April 30 each year. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10, § 1, 9-6-2016) 
Sec. 12-84. - Duration. 
    This division shall remain in effect so long as the longer of (a) the project mortgage loan remains outstanding and unpaid, (b) the housing development remains subject to income and rent restrictions pursuant to section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, (c) the authority has any interest in the project (including without limitation regulatory agreement restrictions), provided that rehabilitation of the housing development occurs within 36 months from the effective date of this division; provided, however, that in no event shall this division remain in effect for longer than 16 years after completion of rehabilitation. Notwithstanding the above, the exemption shall cease for that portion of the project which is not operated consistent with section 12-79 above. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10, § 1, 9-6-2016; Ord. No. 2018-09, § 1, 8-20-2018) 
Sec. 12-85. - Payment of service charge. 
    The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under this division shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes, except that the estimated annual payment shall be paid on or before June 1 of each year following the annual tax collection. Any adjustment in payment shall be made effective June 15, and any claim for overpayment will be adjusted in the next year's payment. Collection procedures shall be in accordance with the provisions of the General Property Tax Act (1893 PA 206, as amended; MCL 211.1, et seq). 
(Ord. No. 2016-10, § 1, 9-6-2016) 
Sec. 12-86. - Severability. 
    The various sections and provisions of this division shall be deemed to be severable, and should any section or provision of this division be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of this division as a whole or any section or provision of this division other than the section or provision so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10, § 1, 9-6-2016) 
DIVISION 5. - CADILLAC CASTLE 

Sec. 12-87. - Purpose. 
    It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of low to moderate income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 PA 346, as amended, MCL 125.1401, et seq ). The city of Cadillac is authorized by this act to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this act at any amount it chooses, not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this act. It is further acknowledged that such housing for persons of low to moderate income is a public necessity, and as the city will be benefitted and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by providing certain real estate tax exemption for such housing is a valid public purpose; further, that the continuance of the provisions of this division for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the period contemplated in this division are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of housing developments which are constructed and financed in reliance on such tax exemption. 
    The city acknowledges that Cadillac Castle Limited Dividend Housing Association limited partnership (the "sponsor") has offered, subject to receipt of an allocation under the LIHTC program from the Michigan State housing development authority and or federally or authority aided financing for the project, to erect, own and operate a housing development identified as Cadillac Castle on certain property located at 820, 824, 900, and 924 S. Mitchell Street, as well as 823, and 831 Aspen Street, as legally described in "exhibit A" in the city of Cadillac, to serve persons and families of low to moderate income, and that the sponsor has offered to pay the city of Cadillac on account of this housing development, an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08, § 1, 7-16-2018) 
Sec. 12-88. - Definitions. 
    All terms shall be defined as set forth in the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966, being Public Act 346 of 1966 of the State of Michigan, as amended, except as follows: 
(1)  Act means the State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346 of 1966 of the State of Michigan, as amended. 
(2)  Annual shelter rent means the total collections during an agreed annual period from all occupants of a housing development representing rent or occupancy charges, exclusive of charges for gas, electricity, heat, trash, water and sewer charges, or other utilities furnished to the occupants. 
(3)  Authority means the Michigan State housing development authority, a public body, corporate and politic of the State of Michigan. 
(4)  Housing development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for persons of low to moderate income and such elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal, and educational facilities as the authority determines improve the quality of the development as it relates to housing for persons of low to moderate income. 
(5)  LIHTC program means the Low Income Housing Tax Credit Program administered by the authority under section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
(6)  Elderly means those persons 55 years of age or older or a household in which at least one member is 55 years of age and all other members are 50 years of age or older. 
(7)  Sponsor means Cadillac Castle Limited Dividend Housing Association, which has applied to the authority for an allocation under the LIHTC program to finance a housing development. 
(8)  Utilities mean water, sanitary sewer service, trash, gas and/or electrical services which are paid by the housing development. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08, § 1, 7-16-2018) 
Sec. 12-89. - Class of housing developments exempt from taxation. 
    It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes shall be multiple dwellings for elderly persons of low to moderate income, which are financed or assisted pursuant to the act and is limited to the number of units allowable by zoning. It is further determined that Cadillac Castle is of this class. Passage of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall not be deemed precedent for other similar PILOT ordinances. The classes of housing developments exempt from taxation are defined in section 12-19 of the city code of ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08, § 1, 7-16-2018) 
Sec. 12-90. - Establishment of annual service charge. 
    The housing development identified as Cadillac Castle, and the property on which it shall be constructed shall be exempt from all property taxes from and after the commencement of construction. The city, acknowledging that the sponsor and the authority have established the economic feasibility of the housing development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this division from which this division is derived, and the qualification of the housing development for exemption from all property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this division, and in consideration of the sponsor's offer, subject to receipt of an allocation under the LIHTC program, to construct, own and operate the housing development, agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes. The annual service charge shall be equal to one percent of the difference between the annual shelter rent actually collected for the first year, and each year thereafter, less utilities. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08, § 1, 7-16-2018) 
Sec. 12-91. - Limitation on the payment of annual service charge. 
    Notwithstanding section 12-90, the service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for the part of the housing development which is tax exempt and which is occupied by other than low to moderate income persons or families shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes which would be paid on that portion of the housing development if the housing development were not tax exempt. 
    The term "low to moderate income persons or families" as used herein means, with respect to any housing development that is tax-exempt, persons or families eligible to move into that development. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08, § 1, 7-16-2018) 
Sec. 12-92. - Contractual effect of ordinance. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15(a)(5) of the act to the contrary, a contract between the city and the sponsor with the authority as third party beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effectuated by enactment of this division from which this division is derived. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08, § 1, 7-16-2018) 
Sec. 12-93. - Payment of service charge. 
    The annual service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under the ordinance shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to the city except that the annual payment shall be paid on or before August 15th, of each year. The sponsor shall verify annual shelter rent revenues to the city with a statement of profit and loss of the housing development as reported to the state housing development authority by an independent certified public accountant. 
    The statement of profit and loss, together with a statement showing how the service charge was calculated shall be submitted to the city treasurer by April 30 th of each year. Any adjustment or claim for overpayment will be adjusted in the next year's payment. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08, § 1, 7-16-2018) 
Sec. 12-94. - Duration. 
    This division shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as the housing development is supported by a federally or authority-aided mortgage and remains subject to income and rent restrictions pursuant to section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended; and provided that construction of the housing development commences within 36 months from the effective date of this ordinance from which this division is derived. Notwithstanding the above, the exemption shall cease for that portion of the project which is not operated consistent with section 12-89 above. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08, § 1, 7-16-2018) 
Sec. 12-95. - Termination. 
    Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, should the sponsor fail to pay the final adjusted service charge in lieu of taxes granted hereunder, or fail to provide the verification of the calculations used to make the payment, the service charge in lieu of taxes granted by the ordinance shall automatically be terminated, retroactive to January 1 of that year. The city shall file a notice of termination to the sponsor of the housing development and the authority, by certified mail, within 30 days of such termination. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08, § 1, 7-16-2018) 
ARTICLE III. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-96. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases as used in this article, shall have the same meaning as given to them in Act 197 or as hereinafter in this section provided, unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary: 
    Act 197 means Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.). 
    Authority means the Cadillac Downtown Development Authority provided for by this article. 
    Board or board of trustees means the board of trustees of the authority, the governing body of the authority. 
    Chief executive officer means the city manager. 
    Downtown development tax means the tax authorized herein pursuant to Act 197 to be imposed by the authority in the downtown area. 
    Downtown district means the downtown district designated by this article as now existing or hereafter amended. 
(Prior Code, § 1.202) 
Sec. 12-97. - Purpose. 
    The city council hereby determines that it is necessary for the best interests of the city to halt property value deterioration and increase property tax valuation where possible in the business district of the city, to eliminate the causes of that deterioration and to promote economic growth by establishing a downtown development authority pursuant to Act 197. 
(Prior Code, § 1.203) 
Sec. 12-98. - Creation of authority. 
    There having been heretofore created pursuant to Act 197 a downtown development authority for the city, said authority is continued. The authority shall be a public body corporate and shall be known and exercise its powers under the title of Cadillac Downtown Development Authority. The authority may adopt a seal, may sue and be sued in any court of this state and shall possess all of the powers necessary to carry out the purpose of its incorporation as provided by this article and Act 197. The enumeration of a power in this article or in Act 197 shall not be construed as a limitation upon the general powers of the authority. 
(Prior Code, § 1.204) 
Sec. 12-99. - Description of downtown district. 
    The downtown district in which the authority shall exercise its powers as provided by Act 197 shall consist of the territory in the city, described in exhibit A, attached to Ord. No. 842, 6-14-1976, by reference, following this section, subject to such changes as may hereinafter be made pursuant to this article and Act 197. 
EXHIBIT A 
    Commencing at the intersection of East Harris and North Simons Streets as a point of beginning: 
    Thence Northwesterly along the centerline of North Simons Street to its intersection with East Mason Street; 
    Thence Southwesterly along the centerline of East Mason Street to its intersection with North Shelby Street; 
    Thence Northwesterly along the centerline of North Shelby Street to its intersection with East Nelson Street; 
    Thence Southwesterly along the centerline of East Nelson Street to its intersection with the North-South alley in Block 15 of Mitchell's Revised Plat; 
    Thence Northwesterly along the centerline of said alleys in Blocks 15 and 16 of Mitchell's Revised Plat and Blocks 45 and 46 of G.A. Mitchell's Plat of the Southeast Quarter of Section 33, Township 22 North, Range 9 West to its intersection with East River Street; 
    Thence Northeasterly along the centerline of East River Street to its intersection with North Shelby Street; 
    Thence Northwesterly along the West line of North Shelby Street to its intersection with North line of Wheeler Street; 
    Thence continue North along the West line of Lot 1, Block 217, Chittenden & Wheeler's Addition to the City of Cadillac; 
    Thence Northwesterly to the Southeast corner of Lot 4, Block 213, Chittenden & Wheeler's Addition to the City of Cadillac; 
    Thence North along the vacated alley to the centerline of Simons Street; 
    Thence Westerly along the centerline of Simons Street to the centerline of North Mitchell Street; 
    Thence Northwesterly along the centerline of North Mitchell Street to the intersection with a point being an extension of the line lying between Lots 4 and 5 of Kramer's Addition to the City of Cadillac; 
    Thence Southwesterly along the lot line between Lots 4 and 5 of Kramer's Addition to the Penn Central Railroad right-of-way; 
    Thence Southerly along the Penn Central right-of-way to its intersection with the North line of W. North Street; 
    Thence Westerly along the North line of W. North Street to the West right-of-way line of the Ann Arbor Railroad; 
    Thence Southerly along the West line of the Ann Arbor Railroad right-of-way to its intersection with the centerline of Lake Street; 
    Thence Southeasterly along the centerline of Lake Street to its intersection with the centerline of South Street; 
    Thence East on the centerline of South Street to its intersection with the centerline of South Mitchell Street; 
    Thence South on centerline of South Mitchell Street to intersect on the East and West line located 150 feet South of the North line of Block 15, G.A. Mitchell's Plat of the Northwest Quarter of Section 3, Township 21 North, Range 9 West; 
    Thence East on said line to East line of said Block 15; 
    Thence North to Ann Arbor Railroad right-of-way; 
    Thence Northwesterly along Ann Arbor Railroad right-of-way to the centerline of South Mitchell Street; 
    Thence North on the centerline of South Mitchell Street to its intersection with a point being an extension of the line lying between Lot 1 and 2, Block 8 of the Mitchell's Revised Plat; 
    Thence along said line to the centerline of the north-south alley of Block 8 of Mitchell's Revised Plat; 
    Thence North along the centerline of the alley to its intersection at centerline of Chapin Street; 
    Thence East along the centerline of Chapin Street to South Shelby Street; 
    Thence North on Shelby Street to centerline of East Harris Street; 
    Thence East on East Harris Street to the point of beginning. 
    A parcel commencing at the intersection of the East right-of-way line of the Penn-Central Railroad and the centerline of the East/West alley in Block 101 of Cummer and Gerrish Addition, if extended; 
    Thence West along said centerline to its intersection with the West right-of-way line of Lake Street; 
    Thence North along the right-of-way line of Lake Street to a point 380 feet South of the South line of West North Street; 
    Thence West 80 feet; 
    Thence North parallel with Lake Street, 140 feet; 
    Thence West parallel with North Street, 20 feet; 
    Thence North parallel with Lake Street, 240 feet; 
    Thence West parallel with North Street to the West right-of-way line of the Ann Arbor Railroad; 
    Thence Southerly along the Ann Arbor Railroad right-of-way to its intersection with the centerline of Lake Street; 
    Thence North along the centerline of Lake Street to the centerline of West Pine Street; 
    Thence East along the centerline of West Pine Street to the East right-of-way line of the Penn-Central Railroad right-of-way; 
    Thence North to the point of beginning, being part of Section 4, Township 21; 
    North, Range 9 West, and Section 33, Township 22 North, Range 9 West; 
    City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(Prior Code, § 1.205; Ord. No. 91-04, 2-4-1991; Ord. No. 2006-23, § 2, 4-16-2007) 
Sec. 12-100. - Board of trustees. 
    The authority shall be under supervision and control of a board of trustees consisting of the chief executive officer of the city and ten members as provided by Act 197. The members shall be appointed by the chief executive officer subject to approval by the council and shall hold office for the terms provided in Act 197. All members shall hold office until the member's successor is appointed. 
(Prior Code, § 1.206; Ord. No. 87-12, 6-15-1987) 
Sec. 12-101. - Powers of the authority. 
    Except as specifically otherwise provided in this article, the authority shall have all powers provided by law subject to the limitations imposed by law and herein. 
(Prior Code, § 1.207) 
Sec. 12-102. - Fiscal year; adoption of budget. 
(a)  The fiscal year of the authority shall begin July 1 of each year and end on June 30 of the following year, or such other fiscal year as may hereafter be adopted by the city. 
(b)  The board shall annually prepare a budget and shall submit it to the council on the same date that the proposed budget for the city is required by the city Charter to be submitted to the council. The board shall not finally adopt a budget for any fiscal year until the budget has been approved by the city council. The board may, however, temporarily adopt a budget in connection with the operation of any improvements which have been financed by revenue bonds where required to do so by ordinance authorizing the revenue bonds. 
(c)  The authority shall submit financial reports to the council at the same time and on the same basis as departments of the city are required to submit reports. The authority shall be audited annually by the same independent auditors auditing the city and copies of the audit report shall be filed with the council. 
(Prior Code, § 1.208) 
Sec. 12-103. - Downtown development tax. 
(a)  The authority is hereby authorized by the city to impose an ad valorem tax on all taxable property in the downtown district for the purposes provided by Act 197. The tax shall not exceed two mills on the value of taxable property in the downtown district as finally equalized. 
(b)  In order to impose the tax, the board shall include in its budget each year an estimate of the amount necessary to be raised from the downtown development tax. The amount of tax imposed shall not exceed the amount necessary as estimated in the budget and approved by the city council. The board shall certify to the proper tax assessing official of the city the amount so determined in the same manner and at the same time as general city taxes are certified for collection. 
(c)  The city shall collect the downtown development tax at the same time and in the same manner as other city taxes are collected. The tax shall be paid to the treasurer of the authority and credited to the general fund of the authority for the purpose provided by Act 197. 
(Prior Code, § 1.209) 
Secs. 12-104-12-121. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TAX INCREMENT FINANCING AND DEVELOPMENT PLAN 

Sec. 12-122. - Findings. 
(a)  The plan amendment meets the requirements set forth in the act. 
(b)  The proposed method of financing the development is feasible and the authority has the ability to arrange the financing. 
(c)  The development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes of the act. 
(d)  The land included within the development area to be acquired, if any, is reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of the plan amendment and the purposes of the act in an efficient and economically satisfactory manner. 
(e)  The development plan portion of the plan, as amended by the plan amendment, is in reasonable accord with the master plan of the city. 
(f)  Public services, such as fire and police protection and utilities, are or will be adequate to service the project area. 
(g)  Changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections, and utilities, to the extent required by the plan amendment, are reasonably necessary for the project and for the city. 
(Prior Code, § 1.210(1); Ord. No. 93-03, 1-18-1993; Ord. No. 2006-22, § 1, 4-16-2007) 
Sec. 12-123. - Public purpose. 
    The city council hereby determines that the plan amendment and the plan, as amended, constitute a public purpose. 
(Prior Code, § 1.210(2); Ord. No. 93-03, 1-18-1993; Ord. No. 2006-22, § 2, 4-16-2007) 
Sec. 12-124. - Best interest of the public. 
    The city council hereby determines that it is in the best interests of the public to proceed with the plan amendment in order to halt property value deterioration, to increase property tax valuation, to eliminate the causes of the deterioration in property values, and to promote growth in the downtown district. 
(Prior Code, § 1.210(3); Ord. No. 93-03, 1-18-1993; Ord. No. 2006-22, § 3, 4-16-2007) 
Sec. 12-125. - Approval and adoption of plan amendment. 
    The plan amendment is hereby approved and adopted. A copy of the plan amendment and all later amendments thereto shall be maintained on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Prior Code, § 1.210(4); Ord. No. 93-03, 1-18-1993; Ord. No. 2006-22, § 4, 4-16-2007) 
Sec. 12-126. - Preparation-Base year assessment roll. 
(a)  Within 60 days of the publication of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the city assessor shall prepare the initial base year assessment roll. The base year assessment roll shall list each taxing jurisdiction in the development area on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the initial assessed value of each parcel of property within the development area, and the amount of tax revenue derived by each taxing jurisdiction from ad valorem taxes on property in the development area. 
(b)  The city assessor shall transmit copies of the base year assessment roll to the city treasurer, county treasurer, the authority and each taxing jurisdiction, together with a notice that the base year assessment roll has been prepared in accordance with this article and the tax increment financing plan contained in the plan approved by this article. 
(Prior Code, § 1.210(5); Ord. No. 93-03, 1-18-1993) 
Sec. 12-127. - Same-Annual tax increment assessment roll. 
    Each year within 15 days following the final equalization of property in the development area, the city assessor shall prepare the tax increment assessment roll. The tax increment assessment roll shall show the initial assessed value of each parcel of property within the development area, the amount by which the current assessed value is finally equalized for all taxable property in the development area exceeds the initial assessed value of the property as shown on the base year assessment roll, the captured assessed value. Copies of the annual tax increment assessment roll shall be transmitted by the assessor to the city treasurer, the county treasurer, the authority and the treasurer of each taxing jurisdiction within the development area, together with a notice that it has been prepared in accordance with this article and the plan. 
(Prior Code, § 1.210(6); Ord. No. 93-03, 1-18-1993) 
Sec. 12-128. - Establishment of project fund; approval of depository. 
    The treasurer of the authority shall establish a separate fund which shall be kept in a depository bank account in a bank approved by the treasurer of the city, to be designated the downtown development authority project fund. All moneys received by the authority pursuant to the plan as amended by the plan amendments, shall be deposited in the project fund. All moneys in the project fund and earnings thereon shall be used only in accordance with the plan. 
(Prior Code, § 1.210(7); Ord. No. 93-03, 1-18-1993) 
Sec. 12-129. - Payment of tax increments to authority. 
    The city treasurer, and the county treasurer shall, as ad valorem and specific taxes are collected on the property in the development area, pay that proportion of the taxes, except for penalties and collection fees, that the captured assessed value bears to the initial assessed value to the treasurer of the authority for deposit in the project fund. The payments shall be made on the date on which the city treasurer and the county treasurer are required to remit taxes to each of the taxing jurisdictions. 
(Prior Code, § 1.210(8); Ord. No. 93-03, 1-18-1993) 
Sec. 12-130. - Use of moneys in the project fund. 
    The moneys credited to the project fund and on hand therein from time to time shall be used annually in the following manner and in the following order of priority: 
(1)  To pay into the debt retirement fund, or funds, for all outstanding series of bonds issued pursuant to the plan, an amount equal to the interest and principal coming due, in the case of the principal whether by maturity or mandatory redemption, prior to the next collection of taxes, less any credit for sums on hand in the debt retirement fund. 
(2)  To establish a reserve account for payment of the principal of and interest on bonds issued pursuant to the plan to the extent required by any resolution authorizing bonds. 
(3)  To pay the administrative, auditing and operating costs of the authority and the city pertaining to the downtown district, including planning and promotion, to the extent provided in the annual budget of the authority. 
(4)  To repay amounts advanced by the city for project costs, including costs of preliminary plans, and fees for other professional services. 
(5)  To pay the cost of completing the remaining public improvements, if any, as set forth in the plan to the extent those costs are not financed from other sources. 
(6)  To pay the cost of any additional improvements to the plan that are determined necessary by the authority and approved by the city council in accordance with the act. 
(Prior Code, § 1.210(9); Ord. No. 93-03, 1-18-1993) 
Sec. 12-131. - Annual report. 
    Within 90 days after the end of each fiscal year, the authority shall submit to the city council, with copies to each taxing jurisdiction, a report on the status of the project fund. The report shall include the amount and source of revenue in the account, the amount and purpose of expenditures from the account, the amount of principal and interest on any outstanding indebtedness, the amount in any bond reserve account, the initial assessed value of the development area, the captured assessed value of the development area and the amount of captured assessed value retained by the authority, the tax increments received and the amount of any surplus from the prior year, and any additional information requested by the city council or deemed appropriate by the authority. The secretary of the authority shall cause a copy of the report to be published once in full in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Prior Code, § 1.210(10); Ord. No. 93-03, 1-18-1993) 
Sec. 12-132. - Refund of surplus tax increments. 
    Any surplus money in the project fund at the end of a year, as shown by the annual report of the authority, shall be paid by the authority to the city treasurer, or the county treasurer, as shown by the annual report of the authority, as the case may be, and rebated by each to the appropriate taxing jurisdiction. 
(Prior Code, § 1.210(11); Ord. No. 93-03, 1-18-1993) 
Secs. 12-133-12-162. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HISTORIC DISTRICTS 

Sec. 12-163. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alteration means work that changes the details of a resource but does not change its basic size or shape. 
    Certificate of appropriateness means the written approval of a permit application for work that is appropriate and that does not adversely affect a resource. 
    Commission means the Cadillac Historic Districts Commission created by section 12-167 pursuant to the local historic districts act, Public Act No. 169 of 1970 (MCL 399.201 et seq.). 
    Demolition means the razing or destruction, whether entirely or in part, of a resource and includes, but is not limited to demolition by neglect. 
    Demolition by neglect means neglect in maintaining, repairing or securing a resource that results in deterioration of an exterior feature of the resource or the loss of structural integrity of the resource. 
    Denial means the written rejection of a permit application for work that is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource. 
    Historic district means an area, or group of areas not necessarily having contiguous boundaries, that contains one resource or a group of resources that are related by history, architecture, archeology, engineering or culture. The Courthouse Hill Historic District shall initially include the parcels reflected on appendix A, on file in the office of the city clerk. The Cobbs and Mitchell Historic Building District shall initially include the parcel identified in section 12-166(b) of this article. 
    Historic preservation means the identification, evaluation, establishment and protection of resources significant in history, architecture, archeology, engineering or culture. 
    Historic resource means a publicly or privately owned building, structure, site, object, feature or open space that is significant in the history, architecture, archeology, engineering or culture of the city, the state or the United States. 
    Notice to proceed means the written permission to issue a permit for work that is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource, pursuant to a finding under section 12-174. 
    Open space means undeveloped land, a naturally landscaped area or a formal or manmade landscaped area that provides a connective link or a buffer between other resources. 
    Ordinary maintenance means keeping a resource unimpaired and in good condition through ongoing minor intervention, undertaken from time to time. Ordinary maintenance does not change the external appearance of the resource except through the elimination of the usual and expected effects of weathering. Ordinary maintenance does not constitute work for purposes of this article. 
    Proposed historic district means an area, or group of areas not necessarily having contiguous boundaries, that has delineated boundaries and that is under review by a committee or a standing committee for the purpose of making a recommendation as to whether it should be established as a historic district or added to an established historic district. 
    Rehabilitation is defined as the act or process of making possible a compatible use for a property through repair, alterations and additions while preserving those portions or features which convey its historical, cultural or architectural values, or as defined in the Secretary of the Interior's Guidelines, as amended, and hereby adopted by reference thereto. 
    Repair means to restore a decayed or damaged resource to a good or sound condition by any process. A repair that changes the external appearance of a resource constitutes work for purposes of Public Act No. 169 of 1970 (MCL 399.201 et seq.). 
    Resource means one or more publicly or privately owned historic or nonhistoric buildings, structures, sites, objects, features or open spaces located within the historic district. 
    Work means construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation or demolition. 
(Prior Code, § 5.600; Ord. No. 2005-06, 4-18-2005; Ord. No. 2011-05, § 3, 6-20-2011) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, MCL 399.201a. 
Sec. 12-164. - Purpose. 
    Historic preservation is hereby declared to be a public purpose and the city council of the City of Cadillac may hereby regulate the construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation, and demolition of resources in historic districts within the city limits. The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Safeguard the heritage of the city by preserving districts within the city that reflect elements of its cultural, social, economic, political or architectural history; 
(2)  Stabilize and improve property values in any such historic district; 
(3)  Foster civic beauty; 
(4)  Strengthen the local economy; 
(5)  Promote the use of historic districts for the education, pleasure and welfare of the citizens of the city and the state; and 
(6)  Satisfy all other purposes, expressed or implied, contained in Public Act No. 169 of 1970 (MCL 399.201 et seq.). 
(Prior Code, § 5.601; Ord. No. 2005-06, 4-18-2005; Ord. No. 2013-12, § 2, 11-4-2013) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 399.202. 
Sec. 12-165. - Article does not prevent ordinary maintenance and repair of structures. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance of any structure within a historic district. 
(Prior Code, § 5.602; Ord. No. 2005-06, 4-18-2005) 
Sec. 12-166. - Historic districts. 
(a)  The Courthouse Hill Historic District. The legal description of the initial boundary of the Courthouse Hill Historic District are shown on the following map of the district and legally described as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of East Cass Street and South Simons Street; thence Southeast to the alley in Block 23, Mitchell's Revised Plat of the Village of Clam Lake; thence Northeast on the centerline of said alley to the centerline of South Park Street; thence Southeast on the centerline of South Park Street to the centerline of East Chapin Street; thence Northeast on the centerline of East Chapin Street to the centerline of Rush Street; thence Northwest on the centerline of Rush Street to the centerline of East Cass Street; thence Northeast on the centerline of East Cass to the centerline of East Division Street; thence East on the centerline of East Division Street to a point South of the East line of the West 80 feet of Lot 4, Block "A," Cummer & Son's Addition to the City of Cadillac; thence North on said line 189 feet to a point 156 feet North of the South line of said Lot 4; thence West to the East line of Lot 3, Block "A"; thence South 12 feet; thence West to the East line of Lot 2, Block "A"; thence North to a point on the East line of said Lot 2, 175 feet North of the South line of said Lot 2; thence West 50 feet; thence South 25 feet; thence West to the East line of Lot 1; thence North 10 feet; thence West 66 feet; thence South 12 feet; thence West to the West line of said Lot 1, Block "A"; thence South to a point 50 feet South of the North line of Lot 1, Block 4, May & Mitchell's Addition to the City of Cadillac; Thence West to the centerline of Blodgett Street; thence South on Blodgett Street to the centerline of East Division Street; thence West on the centerline of East Division Street to the alley in Block "43," G. A. Mitchell's Plat of the N. W. Quarter of Section 3; thence Southwest on the centerline of said alley in Block "43" to the East line of Lot 1, Block "43" projected; thence Southeast along the East line of said Lot 1, Block "43" to a point 54 feet South of the North line of said Lot 1; thence Southwest parallel to said alley in Block "43" to the centerline of North Park Street; thence North 10 feet along the centerline of North Park Street; thence Southwest parallel to the North line of Lot 2, Block "25," Mitchell's Revised Plat of the Village of Clam Lake to the West line of the East 3.83 feet of the West 1/2 of said Lot 2, Block "25"; thence Northwest parallel to the West line of said Lot 2 to the centerline of said alley in Block "25"; thence Southwest on the centerline of said alley to the centerline of North Simons Street; thence Northwest on the centerline of North Simons to the centerline of East Mason Street; thence Southwest on the centerline of East Mason Street to the centerline of North Shelby Street; thence South along the centerline of North Shelby Street to the alley in Block "F," J. Cummer & Son's Subdivision of Block "F"; thence westerly along said alley in Block "F" to the Westerly line of Lot 16, Block "F"; thence Southeast along the Westerly line of Lot 16 projected to the centerline of Beech Street; thence Northeast on the centerline of Beech Street to the centerline of North Shelby Street; thence Southeast on the centerline of North Shelby Street to the centerline of East Harris Street; thence Northeast on the centerline of East Harris Street to the centerline of North Simons Street; thence Southeast on the centerline of Simons Street to the Point of beginning. 

(b)  The Cobbs & Mitchell Building Historic District. The legal description of the boundary of the Cobbs & Mitchell Building Historic District are shown on the following map of the district and legally described as follows: 
The northwest end of lots 2-6 of Block 8 of Mitchell's Revised Plot of the Village of Clam Lake (now the City of Cadillac), located in Section 3, Town 21 North, Range 9 West in Wexford County, Michigan. 

(Prior Code, § 5.603; Ord. No. 2005-06, 4-18-2005; Ord. No. 2011-05, § 2, 6-20-2011; Ord. No. 2013-12, § 3, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 12-167. - Commission created. 
    Pursuant to Public Act No. 169 of 1970 (MCL 399.201 et seq.), a commission, to be known as the Cadillac Historic Districts Commission, is hereby created. 
(Prior Code, § 5.610; Ord. No. 2005-06, 4-18-2005) 
State Law reference- Authority to establish the commission, MCL 399.204. 
Sec. 12-168. - Composition; appointment and terms of members. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of seven members residing in the city, one of whom shall be a graduate of an accredited school of architecture who has two years of architectural experience or who is a duly registered architect registered in the state, if such a qualified person is available for appointment. A majority of the members shall have a clearly demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic preservation. 
(b)  Commissioners shall be appointed by the city council, on a volunteer basis. Any compensation of commissioners shall be established by the city council. Appointments shall be for three-year terms, except the initial appointments shall provide for three three-year terms, two two-year terms and two one-year terms so that subsequent appointments shall not recur at the same time. Two of the initial three-year term appointments shall be made from a list of citizens submitted by a duly organized and existing preservation society. Each term shall commence on January 1 of the year of the appointment. Members shall be eligible for reappointment. Any vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the city council, within 60 calendar days, for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(c)  A member may be removed from the commission due to acts or omissions contrary to the purpose of the commission or for the absence from three consecutive meetings without justifiable cause. The member may be removed by a majority vote of the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 5.611; Ord. No. 2005-06, 4-18-2005) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 399.204. 
Sec. 12-169. - Election and terms of officers. 
    The commission shall elect from its membership a chair and a vice-chair. The terms of the officers shall begin January 1 and be for one year. Said officers shall be eligible for reelection. 
(Prior Code, § 5.612; Ord. No. 2005-06, 4-18-2005) 
Sec. 12-170. - Quorum; number of members required for action. 
(a)  A majority of the members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. A majority of the members shall be required to take action on all matters not of an administrative nature, but a majority of a quorum shall be required to take action on administrative matters. 
(b)  Administrative matters shall refer to such commission activities, but not by way of limitation, as conducting meetings, approval of agendas and minutes, establishing meeting dates and times, reviewing and responding to general correspondence and public inquires, and other activities of a general ministerial matter. 
(Prior Code, § 5.613; Ord. No. 2005-06, 4-18-2005) 
Sec. 12-171. - Rules of procedure. 
    The commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall adopt design review standards and guidelines for resource treatment to carry out its duties under Public Act No. 169 of 1970 (MCL 399.201 et seq.), which shall be approved by the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 5.614; Ord. No. 2005-06, 4-18-2005) 
Sec. 12-172. - Meetings to be open to public; right to be heard. 
(a)  All meetings of the commission shall be open to the public and operate in compliance with the open meetings act, Public Act No. 267 of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq.). Public notice of the time, date and place of the meetings, along with the agenda and list of permit applications, shall be given in the manner required by the open meetings act. 
(b)  All meetings of the commission shall be held at the call of the chair and at such time and frequency as the commission determines, provided the commission meets quarterly. 
(Prior Code, § 5.615; Ord. No. 2005-06, 4-18-2005) 
Sec. 12-173. - Commission responsibilities. 
    Historical preservation is a public purpose. To serve that purpose, the historic district commission is hereby charged with the following responsibilities: 
(1)  The historic districts commission is empowered to review work on historic resources and nonhistoric resources in historic districts in the city and shall otherwise have all powers invested in historic district commissions pursuant to the local historic districts act, Public Act No. 169 of 1970 (MCL 399.201 et seq.). 
(2)  To review work on resources, which, by city ordinance, are historic or nonhistoric resources, located within historic districts including, but not by way of limitation, the moving of any structure into or out of, or the building of any structure in, a historic district. 
(3)  In those instances where efforts of the commission to preserve a historic resource in the historic district or districts fail, or it is deemed that public ownership is most suitable, the commission may recommend that the city council acquire such property. 
(4)  To establish local design standards and guidelines based upon and minimally equivalent to the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings. 
a.  These guidelines may take the form of definitions, written descriptions, supplementary sheets, graphic displays, standards, and/or maps. 
b.  The historic design standards and guidelines shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(5)  The commission may: 
a.  Maintain public historic resources in the local historic district or districts using its own funds, if not specifically earmarked for other purposes, or those public funds committed to this use by the city council. 
b.  Act as the agent of the city council to accept and administer grants and gifts for historical preservation purposes in the historic district or districts. 
c.  Authorize the zoning administrator or his or her designee to issue certificates of appropriateness for specified minor classes of work. 
1.  The commission shall provide written standards to the zoning administrator for issuing certificates of appropriateness under this subsection. 
2.  In all instances, the zoning administrator or his or her designee may, at their discretion, after review of the application, consider any of the proposed changes to represent an alteration or modification of the resource or to be work requiring review and approval of the commission. 
3.  The zoning administrator or his or her designee shall report any certificates of appropriateness issued under this subsection to the commission at regularly scheduled meetings. 
(Prior Code, § 5.616; Ord. No. 2005-06, 4-18-2005; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 7, 8-2-2010) 
State Law reference- Authority to prescribe powers and duties, MCL 399.213. 
Sec. 12-174. - Application required; standards; exemptions. 
(a)  An application for a permit shall be filed with the zoning department prior to any work on a resource within a historic district. 
(b)  The zoning administrator or his or her designee shall refer each application for a permit for any work that is not minor as specified in section 12-173(5)c. together with all required supporting materials that make the application complete to the commission. In reviewing plans, the commission shall consider and apply relevant design standards established by the historic districts commission and adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(c)  When reviewing plans, the commission shall follow the Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings. The commission shall also consider: 
(1)  Local design guidelines, as they are adopted; 
(2)  The historical or architectural value and significance of the resource and its relationship to the historical value of the surrounding area; 
(3)  The relationship of the exterior architectural features of such resource to the rest of the structure resource and to the surrounding area; 
(4)  The general compatibility of exterior design, arrangement, texture and materials proposed to be used; and 
(5)  Any other factor, including aesthetic, which it deems to be pertinent. 
(6)  Whether the applicant has certified in the application that the property where work will be undertaken has, or will have before the proposed project completion date, a fire alarm system or a smoke alarm complying with the requirements of the Stille-DeRossett-Hale single state construction code act, Public Act No. 230 of 1972, MCL 12.1501 to 125.1531. 
(d)  The historic districts commission shall review only the exterior features of a resource and shall not consider interior alterations or work unless specifically authorized to do so by the city council or unless interior work will cause visible change to the exterior of the resource. 
(e)  When reviewing applications, the commission shall make its determination based on the considerations set forth in subsection (c)(3) of this section. 
(f)  Inappropriate work within a historic district shall be permitted if a notice to proceed is issued by the commission where any of the following conditions prevail and if the historic district commission finds the proposed work to be necessary to substantially improve or correct any of the following conditions: 
(1)  The resource constitutes a hazard to the safety of the public or the occupants; 
(2)  The resource is a deterrent to a major public or private improvement program that will be of substantial benefit to the community and the applicant proposing the work has obtained all necessary planning and zoning approvals, financing and environmental clearances; 
(3)  Retaining the resource would cause undue financial hardship to the owner when a governmental action, an act of God, or other events beyond the owner's control created the hardship, and all feasible alternatives to eliminate the financial hardship, which may include offering the resource for sale at its fair market value or moving the resource to a vacant site within the historic district have been attempted and exhausted by the owner; and/or 
(4)  Retaining the resource would not be in the best interest of the majority of the community. 
(g)  The commission shall file with the zoning administrator or his or her designee its certificate of appropriateness, notice to proceed or notice of denial for plans submitted to it for review. 
(h)  No work shall begin until a certificate of appropriateness or a notice to proceed is filed. 
(i)  The zoning administrator or his or her designee shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the actions of the commission. 
(j)  A certificate of appropriateness, notice to proceed or notice of denial is binding on the zoning administrator or his or her designee and the applicant. No permit shall be issued and no work shall be done contrary to any certificate of appropriateness, notice to proceed or notice of denial issued. In all cases the historic integrity and historic character of the historic resource shall be maintained to the maximum extent possible. 
(k)  The failure of the commission to act within 60 calendar days after the date a complete application is filed with the commission, unless the applicant and the commission mutually agree upon an extension of time, in writing, shall be deemed to constitute approval. 
(l)  A notice of denial shall be accompanied by a written explanation from the commission, including: 
(1)  The reason for denial citing the Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings and relevant standards from the historic district commission standards and guidelines; 
(2)  A proposal for a remedy; 
(3)  A notice that an application may be resubmitted for commission review when suggested changes have been made; and 
(4)  Notification of the applicant's rights or appeal to the state historic preservation review board and to the circuit court. 
(m)  A commission shall not issue a certificate of appropriateness unless the applicant certifies in the application that the property where work will be undertaken has, or will have before the proposed project completion date, a fire alarm system or a smoke alarm complying with the requirements of the Stille-DeRossett-Hale single state construction code act, Public Act No. 230 of 1972, MCL 125.1501 to 125.1531. 
(Prior Code, § 5.617; Ord. No. 2005-06, 4-18-2005; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 8, 8-2-2010; Ord. No. 2013-12, §§ 4-6, 11-4-2013) 
State Law reference- Permit procedure, MCL 399.205. 
Sec. 12-175. - Plans for preservation of resources. 
    In the case of an application for a permit for work affecting the exterior appearance of a resource or for the moving or demolition of a resource, which the commission deems so valuable to the city, state or nation, that the loss thereof will adversely affect the public purpose of the city, state or nation, the commission shall endeavor to negotiate with the owner an economically feasible plan for preservation of the resource. 
(Prior Code, § 5.618; Ord. No. 2005-06, 4-18-2005) 
Sec. 12-176. - Records. 
    The commission shall keep a record of its resolutions, proceedings and actions. A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by the commission in the performance of an official action shall be made available to the public in compliance with the freedom of information act, Public Act No. 442 of 1976 (MCL 15.231 et seq.). Such record shall be maintained in the city clerk's office and shall be open to the public view. 
(Prior Code, § 5.619; Ord. No. 2005-06, 4-18-2005) 
Sec. 12-177. - Appeals from commission. 
(a)  Any persons jointly or severally aggrieved by a decision of the commission may file an appeal with the state historic preservation review board of the Michigan Historical Center of the Department of History, Arts and Libraries. The appeal shall be filed within 60 calendar days after the decision is furnished to the applicant. A permit applicant aggrieved by a decision of the state historic preservation review board may appeal the decision to the circuit court having jurisdiction. 
(b)  Any citizen or duly organized historic preservation organization in the local unit, as well as resource property owners, jointly or severally aggrieved by the decision of the commission may appeal the decision to the circuit court except that a permit applicant under section 12-174 may not appeal to the court without first exhausting the right to appeal to the state historic preservation review board as specified in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 5.620; Ord. No. 2005-06, 4-18-2005) 
State Law reference- Appeal of decisions, MCL 399.211. 
Sec. 12-178. - Failure to comply with certificates of appropriateness. 
(a)  Failure to begin the work within one year following the issuance of the certificate of appropriateness or notice to proceed, or failure to complete the work within the time frame established by the validity of a building permit shall constitute abandonment by the applicant, and the certificate of appropriateness or notice to proceed shall expire. 
(b)  If the work is not commenced or there is no activity on the resource for one year or is otherwise not in accordance with the certificate of appropriateness or the notice to proceed, the applicant shall be notified by the building official and given a reasonable period of time in which to correct said work to conform to the certificate of appropriateness or the notice to proceed. 
(c)  When work has been done on a resource without a permit, and the commission finds that the work does not qualify for a certificate of appropriateness, the commission may require the owner to restore the resource to the condition it was in before the inappropriate work or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness. If the owner does not comply with the restoration or modification requirements within a reasonable time, the commission may seek an order from the circuit court having jurisdiction to require the owner to restore the resource to its former condition or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness. If the owner does not comply or cannot comply with the order of the court, the commission or its agents may enter the property and conduct work necessary to restore the resource to its former condition or modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness in accordance with the court's order. The costs of the work shall be charged to the owner of the resource and may be levied by the city as a special assessment against the property. When acting pursuant to an order of the circuit court, the commission or its agents may enter the property for the purposes of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 5.621; Ord. No. 2005-06, 4-18-2005) 
Sec. 12-179. - Demolition by neglect. 
    Upon a finding by the commission that a historic resource within the local historic district or a proposed historic district, subject to its review and approval is threatened with demolition by neglect, the commission may do either of the following: 
(1)  Require the owner of the resource to repair all conditions contributing to demolition by neglect. 
(2)  If the owner does not make the necessary repairs within a reasonable time, the commission or its agents may enter the property and make such repairs as are necessary to prevent demolition by neglect. The costs of the work shall be charged to the owner of the resource and may be levied by the city as a special assessment against the property. The commission or its agents may enter the property for purposes of this section upon obtaining an order from the circuit court. 
(Prior Code, § 5.622; Ord. No. 2005-06, 4-18-2005) 
Sec. 12-180. - Violation; payment of costs. 
(1)  A person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization, institution, or agency of government that violates this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and may be fined not more than $5,000.00. 
(2)  A person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization, institution, or agency of government that violates this article may be ordered by the court to pay the costs to restore or replicate a resource unlawfully constructed, added to, altered, repaired, moved, excavated or demolished. 
(Prior Code, § 5.623; Ord. No. 2005-06, 4-18-2005; Ord. No. 2013-12, § 7, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 12-181. - Review of applications within proposed historic district; emergency moratorium. 
(a)  Upon receipt of substantial evidence showing the presence of historic, architectural, archeological, or cultural significance in a proposed historic district, the city council may, at its discretion, adopt a resolution requiring that all applications for permits within the proposed historic district be referred to the commission as described in section 12-174. The commission shall review applications with the same powers it would apply if the proposed local historic district were an established historic district. The review may continue in the proposed historic district for not more than one year or until the city council approves or rejects the establishment of the historic district by ordinance, whichever comes first. 
(b)  If the city council determines that pending work will cause irreparable harm to resources located within an established historic district or a proposed historic district, the city council may, by resolution, declare an emergency moratorium of all such work for a period not to exceed six months. The city council may extend the emergency moratorium for an additional period not to exceed six months upon finding that the threat of irreparable harm to resources is still present. Any pending permit application concerning a resource subject to an emergency moratorium may be summarily denied. 
(Prior Code, § 5.624; Ord. No. 2005-06, 4-18-2005) 
Sec. 12-182. - Establishing additional, modifying or eliminating historic districts. 
(1)  The city council may at any time establish by ordinance additional historic districts, including proposed districts previously considered and rejected, may modify boundaries of an existing historic district, or may eliminate an existing historic district. Before establishing, modifying, or eliminating a historic district, a historic district study committee appointed by the city council shall follow the procedures as stated in Section 399.203(1-3) of Public Act No. 169 of 1970, as amended. To conduct these activities, the city council may retain the initial committee, establish a standing committee, or establish a committee to consider only specific proposed districts and then be dissolved. The committee shall consider any previously written committee reports pertinent to the proposed action. 
(2)  In considering elimination of a historic district, a committee shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 399.203(1-3) of Public Act No. 169 of 1970, as amended, for the issuance of a preliminary report, holding a public hearing, and issuing a final report but with the intent of showing one or more of the following: 
(a)  The historic district has lost those physical characteristics that enabled the establishment of the district. 
(b)  The historic district was not significant in the way previously defined. 
(c)  The historic district was established pursuant to defective procedures. 
(Prior Code, § 5.625; Ord. No. 2005-06, 4-18-2005; Ord. No. 2013-12, § 8, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 12-183. - Fee. 
    The commission may establish a fee to administer the requirements of this article. Said fee shall be reviewed yearly and set by ordinance. 
(Prior Code, § 5.626; Ord. No. 2005-06, 4-18-2005; Ord. No. 2013-12, § 9, 11-4-2013) 
Sec. 12-184. - Historic district study committee and the study committee report. 
    Before establishing a historic district(s), the city council shall appoint a historic district study committee. A majority of the persons appointed to the study committee shall have a clearly demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic preservation. The study committee shall contain representation of at least one member appointed from one or more duly organized local historic preservation organizations. The study committee shall do all of the following: 
(a)  Conduct a photographic inventory of resources within each proposed historic district following procedures established by the State Historic Preservation Office of the Michigan Historical Center. 
(b)  Conduct basic research of each proposed historic district and historic resources located within that district. 
(c)  Determine the total number of historic and non-historic resources within a proposed historic district and the percentage of historic resources of that total. In evaluating the significance of historic resources, the committee shall be guided by the selection criteria for evaluation issued by the United States Secretary of the Interior for inclusion of resources in the National Register of Historic Places, as set forth in 36 CFR 60, and criteria established or approved by the State Historic Preservation Office of the Michigan Historical Center. 
(d)  Prepare a preliminary historic district study committee report that addresses at a minimum all of the following: 
(1)  The charge of the committee. 
(2)  The composition of committee membership. 
(3)  The historic district(s) studied. 
(4)  The boundaries of each proposed historic district in writing and on maps. 
(5)  The history of each proposed historic district. 
(6)  The significance of each district as a whole, as well as a sufficient number of its individual resources to fully represent the variety of resources found within the district, relative to the evaluation criteria. 
(7)  Transmit copies of the preliminary report for review and recommendations to the local planning body, the State Historic Preservation Office of the Michigan Historical Center, the Michigan Historical Commission, and the State Historic Preservation Review Board. 
(8)  Make copies of the preliminary report available to the public pursuant to Section 399.203(4) of Public Act No. 169 of 1970, as amended. 
(e)  Not less than 60 calendar days after the transmittal of the preliminary report, the historic district study committee shall hold a public hearing in compliance with Public Act No. 267 of 1976, as amended. Public notice of the time, date and place of the hearing shall be given in the manner required by Public Act No. 267. Written notice shall be mailed by first class mail not less than 14 calendar days prior to the hearing to the owners of properties within the proposed historic district, as listed on the most current tax rolls. The report shall be made available to the public in compliance with Public Act No. 442 of 1976, as amended. 
(f)  After the date of the public hearing, the committee and the city council have not more than one year, unless otherwise authorized by the city council, to take the following actions: 
(1)  The committee shall prepare and submit a final report with its recommendations and the recommendations, if any, of the local planning body to the city council as to the establishment of a historic district(s). If the recommendation is to establish a historic district(s), the final report shall include a draft of the proposed ordinance(s). 
(2)  After receiving a final report that recommends the establishment of a historic district(s), the city council, at its discretion, may introduce and pass or reject an ordinance(s). If the city council passes an ordinance(s) establishing one or more historic districts, the city shall file a copy of the ordinance(s), including a legal description of the property or properties located within the historic district(s) with the register of deeds. The city council shall not pass an ordinance establishing a contiguous historic district less than 60 days after a majority of the property owners within the proposed historic district, as listed on the tax rolls of the local unit, have approved the establishment of the historic district pursuant to a written petition. 
(g)  A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by a committee in the performance of an official function of the historic district commission should be made available to the public in compliance with Public Act No. 442 of 1976, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 10, 11-4-2013) 
Chapter 14 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency medical services, MCL 333.20901 et seq.; private security guard act of 1968, MCL 338.1051 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1-14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS 

Sec. 14-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm notification form. At the direction of the police chief, an alarm notification form shall be designed and used as required by this article. 
    Alarm system means a device or assembly of equipment and devices arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which police officers are expected to respond. In this article, the term "alarm system" shall include but not be limited to the terms "automatic holdup alarm system," "burglar alarm system," "intrusion alarm system," "holdup alarm system," and "manual holdup alarm system." Alarm systems employing audible signals, commonly referred to as local alarms, shall be equipped with shutoff devices that automatically silence the audible signal after 15 minutes. 
    Alarm user means any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained within the city, except for alarm systems on motor vehicles. If, however, an alarm system on a motor vehicle is connected with an alarm system at a premises, the person using such system is an alarm user. Also excluded from the term "alarm user" and from the coverage of this article are persons who use alarm systems to alert or signal persons within the premises in which the alarm system is located, of an attempted unauthorized intrusion or holdup attempt. If such a system, however, employs an audible signal emitting sounds or flashing light or beacon designed to signal persons outside the premises, such system shall be within the definition of an alarm system and shall be subject to this article. 
    False alarm means any alarm condition which is registered at the police department or elsewhere not resulting from criminal activity for which the alarm was intended. 
(Prior Code, § 9.294; Ord. No. 86-04, 6-2-1986) 
Sec. 14-20. - False alarm fee. 
(a)  The alarm user shall be required to pay to the city the sum as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time in any given calendar quarter. No alarm user shall be required to pay said fee on the first occasion of a false alarm during any one calendar quarter, but shall be advised, in writing, of said false alarm and of the existence of this article. 
(b)  Alarm conditions caused by the following extenuating circumstances shall not constitute a false alarm and no false alarm fee shall be charged by the city: 
(1)  Alarm system malfunctions, if corrective measures have been instituted with 96 hours of notification by the police department; provided that the alarm user presents documentation of repair service having been performed by the alarm company to remedy a malfunction. 
(2)  Storm conditions. 
(3)  Alarm conditions being activated by persons working on the alarm system with prior notification to the police department. 
(4)  Alarms activated by disruption or disturbance of telephone or other communication systems. 
(5)  In subsection (b)(1), (2) and (4) of this section, it shall be the responsibility of the alarm user to notify the police department by filling out the alarm notification form and returning it to the police department within ten days of receipt of the alarm notification form. Failure to notify the police department will result in an automatic billing to the user. 
(c)  Upon the response of a police officer to an alarm call, a representative of the police department shall mail an alarm notification form to the alarm user. 
(d)  Within ten days of the date of receipt of the alarm notification form, the alarm user shall return the completed form to the police department. Failure by the alarm user to return the form shall cause an automatic billing of the false alarm fee to be sent to the alarm user. 
(e)  If, upon receiving a false alarm fee notice, the alarm user wishes to request a waiver of the assessment of the fee due to extenuating circumstances, he may do so in writing within ten days of the assessment date. The notice to the police department shall contain documentation of the extenuating circumstances involved. Within ten days of the receipt of the waiver request by the police department, the police chief or his designee shall make a determination on the waiver request and shall notify the alarm user of the decision. 
(Prior Code, § 9.295; Ord. No. 86-04, 6-2-1986) 
Chapter 16 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, MCL 324.101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1-16-17. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Trees and shrubs, MCL 247.241 et seq.; municipal forests, MCL 324.52701 et seq. 

Sec. 16-18. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Department means the department of public works of the city. 
    Director, when used herein, means the director of public works of the city or his representative designated for the purposes of direction, regulation, control, and enforcement of this article. 
    Park means and includes all public parks having individual names within and without the city and which are owned by the city. 
    Prohibited species in street right-of-way means any tree of the species of Box Elder (Acer negundo), Silver Maple (Acer succharinum), Horse Chestnut (Aesculus hippocastanum), Tree of Heaven (Ailabthus altissima), White Birch (Betual paperifera), Catalpa (Catalpa species), White Mulberry (Morus alba), Poplar (Populus species including Cottonwood), Black Locust (Robinia pseudoacacis), Willow (Salix species), Siberian Elm (Ulmus pumila), American Elm (Ulmus americana). 
    Public places means and includes all other grounds or property owned by the city or under its control or supervision whether owned, leased, or under contract of the city. 
    Street rights-of-way means all land lying between the so-called property lines on either side of all public streets, roads, boulevards, alleys, or parts thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 4.93; Ord. No. 81-01, 2-16-1981) 
Sec. 16-19. - Purpose and intent. 
    Whereas trees moderate the effects of sun and wind; whereas they provide buffers and screens against noise and air pollution; whereas humans and animal life depend upon the capacity of trees to absorb carbon dioxide and supply oxygen in our atmosphere; whereas trees filter out pollutants from the air; whereas trees serve to reduce the hazards of flooding; whereas trees assist in the stabilization of soil and in the prevention of erosion; whereas trees help decrease the storm runoff and replenish groundwater supplies; whereas trees act to moderate extremes of temperature and provide shade; whereas trees provide a haven for birds which in turn assist in the control of insects; whereas trees are physiologically, sociologically and aesthetically necessary counter points to the manmade urban setting; whereas trees tend to conserve and increase property values; whereas there is an organized body of knowledge concerning tree planting and preservation known as arboriculture; whereas there is an established art of landscape architecture; whereas it is the policy of the city, to conserve, develop and utilize its natural resources; whereas it is the policy of the city to protect its atmosphere, lands and waters from pollution, impairment, or destruction for the benefit, enjoyment and general welfare of its people; it is therefore, the purpose of this article to regulate the removal of trees from public and private property within the city in order to preserve, protect and enhance a most valuable natural resource entrusted to the city and to protect the health, safety and welfare of its citizens. It is the purpose and intent of this article to establish standards limiting the removal of, and ensuring the replacement of trees, sufficient to safeguard the ecological and aesthetic environment necessary for a healthy and happy community. It is further intended that this article serve to dissuade the unnecessary clearing and disturbing of land so as to preserve insofar as is practicable, the natural and existing growth of vegetation; and to replace, when necessary, the removed foliage with new foliage indigenous to the area. 
(Prior Code, § 4.94; Ord. No. 81-01, 2-16-1981) 
Sec. 16-20. - Authority. 
    The department shall have full power and authority over all trees, plants, and shrubs planted or hereafter planted in the street rights-of-way, parks, and public grounds of the city. Furthermore, the maintenance of such trees, plants and shrubs, shall be the subject to such rules and regulations as the department may adopt and such department shall have the right to add or revise the rules and regulations from time to time as may be required for the proper care of such trees and shrubs. 
(Prior Code, § 4.95; Ord. No. 81-01, 2-16-1981) 
Sec. 16-21. - Permits required; time limit. 
    It shall be unlawful to violate or fail to comply with the ordinances included in this article without first filing an application for and procuring a permit from the director of the department or his designated agent. Every permit granted shall specifically describe the location and work to be done under it, and shall expire in 30 days, unless a later date is agreed and specified, from its date and shall be considered void at any time when the terms or intent of such permit are violated. No charge shall be made for any permit, unless it may be determined to be necessary to assign an inspector to supervise the provisions of the permit and in such case, the department shall determine the charge for the services leased on actual cost and such cost shall be charged to the person obtaining the permit. 
(Prior Code, § 4.96; Ord. No. 81-01, 2-16-1981) 
Sec. 16-22. - Protection of trees and shrubs. 
    Except to abate a nuisance, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Fasten any sign, card, poster, wire, rope or other material to, around or through, any tree or shrub or its guard, without a permit, except in emergencies such as storms or accidents. 
(2)  Break, injure, mutilate, kill or destroy any tree or shrub, or permit any fire to burn where such fire will injure any portion of any tree or shrub. 
(3)  Permit any toxic chemical or material to seep, drain, or to be emptied on or about any tree or shrub. 
(4)  Deposit, store, place or maintain, on any street, highway, or other public place, any brick, sand, stone, concrete or other material which may impede free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any tree or shrub growing therein. 
(5)  Fail to erect a suitable protective barrier around trees or shrubs apt to be injured during any building operation. 
(6)  Knowingly permit any electrical wires to come into contact with any tree or shrub. 
(7)  Excavate any ditches, tunnels, trenches, or lay any drive within a radius of 15 feet from any tree or shrub, without first having obtained a permit therefor. 
(Prior Code, § 4.97(a)-(g); Ord. No. 81-01, 2-16-1981) 
Sec. 16-23. - Permit required to move buildings or other objects; bond requirements. 
    No person shall move any building or other large object along any street without obtaining a permit at least seven days in advance of the move and, if deemed necessary, furnish a bond or cash sufficient to cover damage as a result of moving. 
(Prior Code, § 4.97(h); Ord. No. 81-01, 2-16-1981) 
Sec. 16-24. - Planting restrictions in rights-of-way; approval required. 
    No shade or ornamental tree or shrub shall be planted in any of the street rights-of-way, parks, or public places of the city until the director shall have first approved the kind, size and variety of the same, designated the location therefor and granted a permit for the planting of the same; provided further, no prohibited species shall be set out, nor any other tree, unless it be free from infectious disease. 
(Prior Code, § 4.98; Ord. No. 81-01, 2-16-1981) 
Sec. 16-25. - Subdivision and site condominium planting requirements. 
    In residential subdivisions and residential site condominiums developed after February 16, 1981, at least one street tree, as defined in section 16-24, shall be provided for each lot of 75 feet frontage or less, and at least two trees for every lot in excess of 75 feet frontage. For corner lots, and site condominium developments, at least one tree shall be provided for each 75 feet of street frontage. The public works department shall furnish the developer a list of acceptable trees and a copy of the department's regulations and policy regarding the planting of trees. The developer shall be responsible for fulfilling the planting requirements, but suitable arrangements for the same may be made between the developer and those who occupy the development or between the developer and the city. 
(Prior Code, § 4.99; Ord. No. 81-01, 2-16-1981; Ord. No. 95-16, 7-17-1995) 
Sec. 16-26. - Tree care in public places; permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful to cut, trim, prune, spray, brace, fertilize, do surgery, disturb, alter, remove, or replace any tree or shrub from any street, highway, or other public place, without first obtaining a permit. 
(Prior Code, § 4.100; Ord. No. 81-01, 2-16-1981) 
Sec. 16-27. - Public nuisance. 
    Any tree or shrub, or parts thereof, growing upon private property but overhanging, or interfering with the use of any street, park, public improvement, street lighting, or public place of the city, that in the opinion of the director endangers the life, health, safety, or property of the public, shall be declared a public nuisance. Any tree growing on private property within the city, afflicted with any dangerous and infectious insect infestation or tree disease shall be declared a public nuisance. 
(Prior Code, § 4.101; Ord. No. 81-01, 2-16-1981) 
State Law reference- Insect pests and plant diseases, MCL 286.251 et seq. 
Sec. 16-28. - Notice to remove. 
    Whenever any public nuisance exists, contrary to the provisions of the sections in this article, the director shall give notice to the owner, or his agent, or the occupant of the property, describing the tree, its location and the nature of the nuisance and ordering the owner, agent, or occupant to take such measure as may be reasonable necessary to correct or cease such nuisance specifying the measures required to be taken. 
(Prior Code, § 4.102; Ord. No. 81-01, 2-16-1981) 
Sec. 16-29. - Failure to comply with notice. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit, cause or suffer the existence of a public nuisance from and after 15 days following the date of the notice provided for. 
(Prior Code, § 4.103; Ord. No. 81-01, 2-16-1981) 
Sec. 16-30. - Removal; cost incurred; duty to pay; collection. 
(a)  In case any notice given shall not be complied with, the director is hereby authorized and empowered to order the removal or abatement of said public nuisance, and shall have authority to call the necessary assistance therefor. Contracted work shall be submitted for bids and approved by the director. 
(b)  Upon completion of the abatement or removal of said public nuisance, the director shall certify to the cost of said removal of the public nuisance. The owner, or other person to whom the notice was directed shall be notified by mail of the removal or abatement, and the cost incurred for such work, together with a statement that the cost of the work must be paid within 30 days or cost incurred will be assessed against the owner's property at a regular meeting of the council to be held not sooner than 30 days after the date of the notice. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the owner of the property, or other person to whom notice was directed, to pay the cost of such removal within 30 days after the date of mailing of the notice of completion, and in case of failure to do so, the city shall have the right to assess the cost by resolution against any property for the purpose of collection in the same manner as general taxes are collected. 
(Prior Code, § 4.104; Ord. No. 81-01, 2-16-1981) 
Sec. 16-31. - Inspection interference. 
    No person shall prevent, delay, or interfere with the director in the execution or enforcement of this article; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be constructed as an attempt to prohibit a public hearing or the taking of any legal remedy in any court of competent jurisdiction for the protection of property rights by the owner of any property within the city. 
(Prior Code, § 4.105; Ord. No. 81-01, 2-16-1981) 
Secs. 16-32-16-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOIL REMOVAL AND EROSION CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Soil erosion and sedimentation control, MCL 324.9101 et seq.; soil conservation districts law, MCL 324.9301 et seq. 

Sec. 16-51. - Soil defined. 
    The term "soil," as used in this article, means topsoil, subsoil, sand, gravel, rock, stone, and heavy aggregate, earth, or any other material proposed to be removed from or deposited on land. 
(Prior Code, § 5.401; Ord. No. 92-06, 2-3-1992) 
Sec. 16-52. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city and preserve the natural resources, and to prevent the creation of nuisances and hazards to the public welfare, health, safety, morals and well-being and general welfare, to control soil erosion and protect the waters within the city by enforcing the provisions of part 91 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.9101 et seq.), and promulgated administrative rules, commonly known as the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, along with any rules promulgated by the department of environmental quality. 
(Prior Code, § 5.402; Ord. No. 92-06, 2-3-1992; Ord. No. 2004-02, 2-2-2004) 
Sec. 16-53. - Permit-Required. 
    A permit will be required where soil is removed from a site or development and taken to another site or development; or when there is an earth change which disturbs one or more acres of land; or if the earth change is within 500 feet of a lake, stream or river, exception: plowing and tilling of soil for the purpose of crop production, beach nourishment permitted under part 325 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.32501 et seq.), normal road and driveway maintenance, an earth of a minor nature that is stabilized within 24 hours; provided that these activities do not contribute sediment to lakes or streams. An application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time for each anticipated inspection. 
(Prior Code, § 5.403; Ord. No. 92-06, 2-3-1992; Ord. No. 2004-02, 2-2-2004) 
Sec. 16-54. - Same-Application. 
(a)  The application for any permit referred to in section 16-53 shall be filed with the city engineer and shall set forth the following information and shall be accompanied by the following data: 
(1)  A full identification and address of the applicant and all persons to be directly or indirectly interested in the permit if granted. 
(2)  The property owner's name and address. 
(3)  The location of the property on which the work is proposed to be done, including a site plan, at a scale of not more than 200 feet to the inch. 
(4)  The exact nature of the proposed excavation or earth change, and soil to be removed or deposited and an estimate of the approximate number of cubic yards to be removed or deposited. 
(5)  A statement of the manner in which it is proposed to fill or excavate and remove the soil or other materials, including the slope of the sides, the level of the floor and/or the height of finished grade, and the kind of equipment proposed to be employed in making such excavation and removing such materials, including the timing and sequence of each proposed earth change and a description, location, and timing of all proposed temporary and/or permanent soil erosion control measures with a program of maintenance of these control measures. 
(6)  The route which the applicant proposes to use over the public streets and over private property in transporting such materials. 
(7)  The past experience of the applicant in the manner to which the permit pertains and the name, address and past experience of the person to be in charge of the proposed operation. 
(8)  Whether or not any permit of the applicant has been revoked and if so, the circumstances of such revocation. 
(9)  Such further information as the city manager, city assessor, or city council may require, including a description and location of all proposed soil erosion control measures, and a soil survey. 
(b)  The application for a permit shall be approved by the city engineer if all requirements of this Code are met. 
(Prior Code, § 5.404; Ord. No. 92-06, 2-3-1992; Ord. No. 2004-02, 2-2-2004) 
Sec. 16-55. - Other conditions required of applicant. 
    Every person to whom any permit is issued to make an earth change, if granted under this article, shall comply with the following: 
(1)  As to excavations. 
a.  All vehicles transporting soil or other materials from such excavation over the public streets of the city shall travel over a route which will be the least dangerous to public safety, cause the least interference with general traffic and cause the least damage to the public streets. 
b.  The floor of any such excavation or height of finished grading shall not be made higher or lower than the level thereof as set forth in the application provided for in section 16-54. 
c.  If, in the opinion of the city engineer, any such excavation will present a dangerous condition if left open, such excavation shall be enclosed by a chainlink or wire mesh fence completely surrounding the portion of the site where the excavation exists, said fence to be not less than five feet in height, complete with gates. Gates shall be kept locked when operations are not being carried on. Barbed wire shall not be used. 
d.  Any soil or other materials that may be deposited on any public street or place from any vehicle transporting such materials from any such excavation shall be immediately removed in a manner satisfactory to the city engineer at the expense of the person to whom the permit to excavate was issued. 
e.  Any roads used for the purpose of ingress and egress to said excavation site, which are located within 100 feet of an occupied residence, shall be kept dust free. 
f.  The slopes of the banks of the excavation shall in no event exceed a slope of one foot (one foot horizontal to one foot vertical) and where ponded water results from the operation (more than 24 inches deep), this slope must be maintained and extended into the water to a depth of three feet. 
g.  Where excavation operations result in a body of water more than 24 inches deep, the owner or operator shall place appropriate "Keep Out-Danger" signs around said premises not more than 100 feet apart. 
h.  No cut or excavation shall be made closer than 50 feet from the nearest street or highway right-of-way nor nearer than 40 feet to the nearest property line unless approved by the city engineer; provided, however, that the city engineer may prescribe more strict requirements in order to give sublateral support to surrounding property where soil or geographic conditions warrant it. 
i.  During the period in which an excavation is being made or a pit is being operated, no person, firm, or corporation shall allow pools or puddles of water to form and become stagnant. Any person operating a pit shall, at least once each month, spray any pools or ponds which may exist in conjunction with such operations to keep such from becoming breeding places for mosquitoes or otherwise creating an unhealthy condition. 
j.  In all cases wherein a lake, pool, or pond is constructed in connection with the operation of a pit and the same is within 1,000 feet of any residence, reasonable protection shall be provided by posting or fencing such body of water adequately to prevent children from entering. 
Exception: bodies of water less than 24 inches deep. 
(2)  As to filling operations. 
a.  Fill materials shall be clean and in conformance with all requirements of the state department of environmental quality. 
b.  Fill materials shall not be deposited in a lake, stream or river without a permit from the department of environmental quality. 
c.  The finished grade of any fill operation shall not be higher than the level as set forth in the application provided for in section 16-54, and in no case higher than one foot above the crown of the abutting street. 
(3)  General provisions. 
a.  The premises shall at all times be graded so that normal surface water drainage is not interfered with and no greater amount of drainage occurs to the neighboring properties than occurred before the grading. 
b.  When stripping, excavation and/or filling operations are completed, the replacement of topsoil and grass seed for cover shall be made within five calendar days. If permanent stabilization is not possible, temporary control measures must be maintained until the area is permanently stabilized. 
c.  The city engineer or building inspector shall impose such other and further requirements as is deemed necessary in the interest of the public health safety and welfare of the citizens of the city, and to preserve and protect its natural resources. 
(Prior Code, § 5.405; Ord. No. 92-06, 2-3-1992; Ord. No. 2004-02, 2-2-2004; Ord. No. 2004-03, 2-2-2004; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 9, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 16-56. - Excavations. 
(a)  No person may create or allow the existence of unprotected, unbarricaded, open or dangerous excavations, holes, pits, or wells, or of any excavations, which constitute or are reasonably likely to threaten the public health, safety, morals and preservation of natural resources. These conditions are prohibited public nuisances unless permitted under subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  A person may maintain one of the conditions described above if they obtain a permit from the city engineer. Before granting a permit, the city manager may require the installation of warning signs, lights, and any other protections necessary to make the site safe. 
(c)  When the city manager determines that one of the above-described nuisances exists, he shall notify the owner shown on the latest tax rolls in writing of the finding and require that the owner to abate the nuisance within 30 days. 
(d)  If the property owner does not appeal the city manager's determination and fails to abate the nuisance within 30 days of receiving notice, the city manager may order its abatement. The cost or reasonable value of such work shall be placed as an assessment against the property on the next assessment roll, in accordance with chapter 34. 
(Prior Code, § 5.406; Ord. No. 92-06, 2-3-1992) 
Sec. 16-57. - Nuisance; emergency abatement. 
    The city manager may abate any such public nuisance, if the public safety requires immediate action, without the time limits outlined in section 16-56, with any abatement costs to be assessed as described in section 16-56. 
(Prior Code, § 5.407; Ord. No. 92-06, 2-3-1992) 
Sec. 16-58. - Revocation and suspension of permit. 
    Any permit granted pursuant to this article may be revoked or suspended for failure to comply with any of the provisions of part 91 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.9101 et seq.), department rules, or this article. 
(Prior Code, § 5.408; Ord. No. 92-06, 2-3-1992; Ord. No. 2004-02, 2-2-2004) 
Sec. 16-59. - Expiration of permit. 
    In the event that any work for which a permit has been granted under this article is not commenced within three months from the date of granting of said permit, said permit shall automatically expire by limitation and cease to be valid for any purpose. 
(Prior Code, § 5.409; Ord. No. 92-06, 2-3-1992; Ord. No. 2004-02, 2-2-2004) 
Sec. 16-60. - Enforcement agency. 
    The office of the city engineer, or his designee, shall be responsible for enforcement of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 5.410; Ord. No. 92-06, 2-3-1992) 
Sec. 16-61. - Penalty. 
    Failure to comply with this article shall constitute a municipal civil infraction, with a $2,500.00 civil fine. 
(Prior Code, § 5.411; Ord. No. 92-06, 2-3-1992; Ord. No. 2004-02, 2-2-2004) 
Sec. 16-62. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    A certificate of occupancy for any building or structure shall not be issued if located on property which is not in full compliance with this Code. 
(Prior Code, § 5.412; Ord. No. 92-06, 2-3-1992) 
Secs. 16-63-16-82. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NUISANCES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Public nuisances and abatement, MCL 600.3801 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-83. - Public nuisance defined. 
    Whatever annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, comfort or repose of the public; offends public decency; interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous any street, highway, navigable lake or stream; or in any way renders the public insecure in life or property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. The term "public nuisance" means and shall include, but not be limited to, whatever is forbidden by any provision of this article. No person shall commit, create, or maintain any nuisance. 
(Prior Code, § 9.1) 
Sec. 16-84. - Nuisances per se. 
    The following acts, services, apparatus and structures are hereby declared to be public nuisances: 
(1)  The maintenance of any pond, pool of water, or vessel holding stagnant water. 
(2)  The throwing, placing, depositing or leaving in any street, highway, lane, alley, public place, square or sidewalk, or in any private place or premises where such throwing, placing, depositing or leaving is in the opinion of the health officer dangerous or detrimental to public health, or likely to cause sickness or attract flies, insects, rodents and/or vermin, by any person, of any animal or vegetable substance, dead animal, fish, shell, tin cans, bottles, glass, or other rubbish, dirt, excrement, filth, rot, unclean or nauseous water, liquid or gaseous fluids, hay, straw, soot, garbage, swill, animal bones, hides or horns, rotten soap, grease or tallow, offal or any other offensive article or substance whatever. 
(3)  The pollution of any stream, lake or body of water by or the depositing into or upon any highway, street, lane, alley, public street or square, or into any adjacent lot or grounds of, or depositing or permitting to be deposited any refuse, foul, or nauseous liquid or water, creamery or industrial waste, or forcing or discharging into any public or private sewer or drain any stream, vapor or gas. 
(4)  The emission of noxious fumes or gas in such quantities as to render occupancy of property uncomfortable to a person of ordinary sensibilities. 
(5)  Any vehicle used for any illegal purpose. 
(6)  Betting, bookmaking, prize fighting and all apparatus used in such occupations. 
(7)  All gambling devices, slot machines, and punchboards. 
(8)  All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses. 
(9)  The distribution of samples of medicines or drugs unless such samples are placed in the hands of an adult person. 
(10)  All explosives, inflammable liquids and other dangerous substances stored in any manner or in any amount contrary to the provisions of this Code, or statute of the state. 
(11)  Any use of the public streets and/or sidewalks, which causes large crowds to gather, obstructing the free use of the streets and/or sidewalks. 
(12)  All buildings, walls and other structures which have been damaged by fire, decay, or otherwise and all excavations remaining unfilled or uncovered for a period of 90 days or longer, and which are so situated as to endanger the safety of the public. 
(13)  All dangerous, unguarded excavations or machinery in any public place, or so situated, left or operated on private property as to attract the public. 
(14)  The owning, driving or moving upon the public streets and alleys of trucks or other motor vehicles which are constructed or loaded so as to permit any part of its load or contents to blow, fall, or be deposited upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public or private place, or which deposits from its wheels, tires, or other parts onto the street, alley, sidewalk or other public or private place dirt, grease, sticky substances or foreign matter of any kind; provided, however, that under circumstances determined by the city manager to be in the public interest, he may grant persons temporary exemption from the provisions of this subsection conditioned upon cleaning and correcting the violating condition at least once daily and execution of an agreement by such person to reimburse the city for any extraordinary maintenance expense incurred by the city in connection with such violation. 
(Prior Code, § 9.7) 
Secs. 16-85-16-111. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DANGEROUS STRUCTURES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, adopted Jan. 20, 2015, amended div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 2, §§ 16-112-16-115, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Prior Code §§ 9.2-9.5. 
State Law reference- Dangerous buildings, MCL 125.538 et seq. 

Sec. 16-112. - Prohibited. 
    No person shall maintain any structure which is a dangerous building as defined in this division, or in violation of the dangerous building provisions of MCL 125.538 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 16-113. - Definitions. 
    As used in this division: 
    "Dangerous building" shall mean any building or structure which has one or more of the following defects or is in one or more of the following conditions: 
(1)  Any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit does not conform to the approved fire code of the city. 
(2)  Any portion of the building or structure is damaged by fire, wind, flood, or by any other cause so that its structural strength or stability is appreciably less than it was before such catastrophe and does not meet the minimum requirements of the Housing Law of the State of Michigan, Act No. 167 of the Public Acts of 1917, as amended. 
(3)  Any part of the building or structure is likely to fall or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and injure persons or damage property. 
(4)  Any portion of the building or structure has settled to such an extent that its walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to wind than is required in the case of new construction by the Housing Law of the State of Michigan, Act No. 167 of the Public Acts of 1917, as amended. 
(5)  The building or structure or any part of the building or structure, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, or the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the support or for other reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse or some portion of the foundation or underpinning of the building or structure is likely to fall or give away. 
(6)  The building structure, or any part of the building or structure is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used. 
(7)  The building or structure is damaged by fire, wind or flood, or is dilapidated or deteriorated and becomes an attractive nuisance to children who might play in the building or structure to their danger, or becomes a harbor for vagrants, criminals, or immoral persons, or enables persons to resort to the building or structure for committing a nuisance or an unlawful or immoral act. 
(8)  A building or structure used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, including the adjoining grounds, which because of dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, or otherwise, is unsanitary or unfit for human habitation, or is in a condition that the city ordinance enforcement officer or health officer of the state or county determines is likely to cause sickness or disease or is likely to injure the health, safety or general welfare of the people living in the dwelling. 
(9)  A building or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and open at door or window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or accessible to entrance by trespassers. 
(10)  A building or structure remains unoccupied for a period of 180 consecutive days or longer, and is not listed as being available for sale, lease or rent with a real estate broker licensed under Article 25 of the Occupational Code, Act 299 of the Public Acts of 1980, as amended, being MCL 339.2501 to 339.2515. For purposes of this subsection "building or structure" includes, but is not limited to, a commercial building or structure. This subsection does not apply to either of the following: 
a.  A building or structure as to which the owner or agent does both of the following: 
1.  Notifies the City of Cadillac Police Department that the building or structure will remain unoccupied for a period of 180 consecutive days. The notice shall be given to the local law enforcement by the owner or agent not more than 30 days after the building or structure becomes unoccupied. 
2.  Maintains the exterior of the building or structure and adjoining grounds in accordance with this division, the Housing Law of the State of Michigan, Act No. 167 of the Public Acts of 1917, as amended. 
b.  A secondary dwelling of the owner that is regularly unoccupied for a period of 180 days or longer each year, if the owner notifies the City of Cadillac Police Department that the dwelling will remain unoccupied for a period of 180 consecutive days or more each year. 
An owner who has given the notice prescribed by this subsection shall notify the City of Cadillac Police Department not more than 30 days after the dwelling no longer qualifies for this exception. As used in this subsection, "secondary dwelling" means a dwelling such as a vacation home, hunting cabin, or summer home, that is occupied by the owner or a member of the owner's family during part of a year. 
    "Enforcing agency" and "city" shall mean the City of Cadillac. 
    "Ordinance" shall mean chapter 16, article IV, division 2 of this Code of Ordinances, "Dangerous Structures." 
    "Ordinance enforcement officer" shall mean an employee of the city as described in section 1-16 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 16-114. - Notice; hearing. 
(a)  Notice requirement. Whenever the city, through its ordinance enforcement officer, determines that the whole or any part of any building or structure is a dangerous building, as defined in section 16-113, the ordinance enforcement officer shall issue a notice that the building or structure is a dangerous building to each owner of or party in interest in the building or structure in whose name the property appears on the last local tax assessment records. 
(b)  Contents of notice. The notice shall specify the time and place of a hearing to be held before a hearing officer concerning whether the building or structure is a dangerous building, at which time and place the person to whom the notice is directed shall have the opportunity to show cause why the hearing officer should not order the building or structure to be demolished or otherwise made safe, or properly maintained. 
(c)  Service of notice. The notice shall be in writing and shall be served upon the person to whom the notice is directed personally, or by certified mail with return receipt requested, and addressed to the owner or party in interest at the address shown on the tax records, at least ten days before the date of the hearing described in the notice. If any person to whom a notice is directed is not personally served, in addition to mailing the notice, a copy thereof shall be posted upon a conspicuous part of the building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 16-115. - Hearing officer. 
    The hearing officer shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. The hearing officer may be removed at the discretion of the city council. The hearing officer shall be a person who has expertise in housing matters including, but not limited to, an engineer, architect, building contractor, building inspector, or member of a community housing organization. An elected official or employee of the city shall not be appointed as a hearing officer. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 16-116. - Hearing; testimony; decision; order; nonappearance or noncompliance; review; order to show cause; cost. 
(a)  The city shall file a copy of the notice that the building or structure is a dangerous building with the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall take testimony of the ordinance enforcement officer or other person requested by the enforcing agency, the owner of the property, and any interested party. Not more than five days after completion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall render his/her decision either closing the proceedings or ordering the building or structure to be demolished, otherwise made safe, or properly maintained. 
(b)  If it is determined by the hearing officer that the building or structure should be demolished or otherwise made safe or properly maintained, the hearing officer shall so order, fixing a time in the order for the owner or party in interest to comply therewith. If the building or structure is a dangerous building under section 16-112 of this division, the order may require the owner or agent to maintain the exterior or the building and adjoining grounds owned by the owner of the building, including but not limited to, the maintenance of lawns, trees and shrubs. 
(c)  If the owner or party in interest fails to appear or neglects or refuses to comply with the order issued, the hearing officer shall file a report of the findings and a copy of the order with the city council not more than five days after noncompliance by the owner, and request that the necessary action be taken to enforce the order. A copy of the findings and order of the hearing officer shall be served on the owner or party in interest in the manner prescribed in section 16-114 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 16-117. - Enforcement hearing. 
    The city council shall fix a date, not less than 30 days after the hearing prescribed in section 16-116 for a hearing on the findings and order of the hearing officer and shall give notice to the owner or party in interest in the manner prescribed in section 16-114 of the time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner or party in interest shall be given the opportunity to show cause why the order should not be enforced. The city council shall either approve, disapprove, or modify the order. If the city council approves or modifies the order, the city council shall take all necessary action to enforce the order. If the order is approved or modified, the owner or party in interest shall comply with the order within 60 days after the date of the hearing under this section 16-117. In the case of an order of demolition, if the city council determines that the building or structure has been substantially destroyed by fire, wind, flood, or other natural disaster, and the cost of repair of the building or structure is greater than the state equalized valuation of the building or structure, the owner or party in interest shall comply with the order of demolition within 21 days after the date of the hearing under this section 16-117. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 16-118. - Implementation and enforcement of remedies. 
(a)  Implementation of order by city. In the event that the owner or party in interest does not comply with the decision of the city council, the city council may in its discretion, contract for the demolition, making safe, or maintaining the exterior of the building or structure or grounds adjoining the building or structure. 
(b)  Reimbursement of costs. The cost of the demolition, of making the building safe, or of maintaining the exterior of the building, structure or grounds adjoining the building or structure, incurred by the city to bring the property into conformance with this division shall be reimbursed to the city by the owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears. 
(c)  Notification of costs; lien for unpaid costs. The owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears on the last local tax assessment records shall be notified by the assessor of the amount of the cost of the demolition, of making the building safe, or maintaining the exterior of the building, structure or grounds adjoining the building or structure, by first class mail at the address shown on the records. If the owner or party in interest fails to pay the cost within 30 days after mailing by the assessor of the notice of the amount of the cost, the city shall have a lien for the cost incurred by the city to bring the property into conformance with this division. The lien shall not take effect until notice of the lien is filed or recorded as provided by law. A lien provided for in this subsection does not have priority over previously filed or recorded liens or encumbrances. The lien for the cost shall be collected and treated in the same manner as provided for property tax liens under the General Property Tax Act, Act 206 of the Michigan Public Acts of 1893, as amended, being MCL 211.1 to 211.157. 
(d)  Court judgment for unpaid costs; lien. In addition to other remedies under this division, the city may bring an action against the owner of the building or structure for the full cost of the demolition, of making the building safe, or of maintaining the exterior of the building, structure or grounds adjoining the building or structure. The city shall have a lien on the property for the amount of the judgment obtained pursuant to this subsection 16-118(d). The lien provided for in this subsection shall not take effect until notice of the lien is filed or recorded as provided by law. The lien does not have priority over previously filed or recorded liens and encumbrances. The lien provided for in this subsection shall be collected and treated in the same manner as provided for property tax liens under the General Property Tax Act, Act 206 of the Michigan Public Acts of 1893, as amended, being MCL 211.1 to 211.157. 
(e)  Enforcement of judgment. A judgment in an action brought pursuant to subsection (d) of this section may be enforced against any assets of the owner including, but not limited to, the building or structure. 
(f)  Lien for judgment amount. The city shall have a lien for the amount of a judgment obtained pursuant to subsection (d) of this section against the owner's interest in all real property located in this state that is owned in whole or in part by the owner of the building or structure against whom the judgment is obtained. A lien provided for in this subsection does not take effect until notice of the lien is filed or recorded as provided by law and the lien does not have priority over previously filed or recorded liens and encumbrances. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 16-119. - Penalties. 
    Violations of the provisions of this division shall constitute a municipal civil infraction. Any person who is found responsible or admits responsibility for a municipal civil infraction shall be subject to a civil fine and costs. The judge or district court magistrate shall summarily tax and determine the costs of the action, which are not limited to the costs taxable in ordinary civil actions and may include all expenses, direct and indirect, including attorney fees, to which the plaintiff has been put in connection with the municipal civil infraction, up to the entry of judgment. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 1-20-2015) 
Secs. 16-120-16-143. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - NOISE CONTROL[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Motor vehicle mufflers, MCL 257.707 et seq. 

Sec. 16-144. - Excessive noise declared nuisance. 
(a)  All loud or unusual noises or sounds and annoying vibrations which offend the peace and quiet of persons of ordinary sensibilities are hereby declared to be public nuisances. 
(b)  This section is punishable as a municipal civil infraction, except as provided in section 16-145 and chapter 22, which are punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(Prior Code, § 9.20; Ord. No. 95-21, 8-7-1995; Ord. No. 2004-14, 6-21-2004) 
Sec. 16-145. - Specific offenses. 
(a)  Each of the following acts is a public nuisance and is prohibited. This list does not exclude other activities from the definition of "public nuisance." 
(1)  Animal and bird noises. The keeping of any animal or bird, which by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person. 
(2)  Construction noises. The erection, including excavating therefor, demolition, alteration or repair of any building, and the excavation of streets and highways, except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., unless a permit is first obtained from the city manager. 
(3)  Sound amplifiers. Use of any loud speaker, amplifier or other instrument or device, whether stationary or mounted on a vehicle for any purpose except one which is noncommercial in character and when so used shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  The only sounds permitted are music or human speech. 
b.  Operations are permitted for four hours each day, except on Sundays and legal holidays when no operations shall be authorized. The permitted four hours of operation shall be as designated by the chief of police. 
c.  Sound amplifying equipment mounted on vehicles shall not be operated unless the sound truck upon which such equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of at least ten miles per hour except when said truck is stopped or impeded by traffic, and except when used in a city park or other place with permission of the chief of police. 
d.  Sound shall not be issued within 100 yards of hospitals, schools or churches. 
e.  The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be audible for a distance in excess of 100 feet from the sound amplifying equipment and so that the volume is not unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing, or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility. 
(4)  Engine exhaust. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle, motorboat, snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle, except through a muffler or other device, which effectively prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(5)  Handling merchandise. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(6)  Blowers. The discharge into the open air of noise from a compressor, blower or power fan unless the noise from such compressor, blower or fan is muffled sufficiently to deaden such noise. 
(7)  Hawking. The hawking of goods, merchandise, or newspapers in a loud and boisterous manner. 
(8)  Horns and signal devices. The sounding of any horns or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching, apparently out of control, or to give warning of intent to get under motion, or if in motion, only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. 
(9)  Radio and musical instruments. The playing of any radio, television set, phonograph, or any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(10)  Shouting and whistling. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing or the making of any other loud noise on the public streets between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or the making of any such noise at any time so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any school, place of worship, or office, or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(11)  Whistle or siren. The blowing of any whistle or siren, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger. 
(b)  This section is punishable as a municipal civil infraction, except for subsections (a)(3), (8), (9), (10) and (11) of this section, which are punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(Prior Code, § 9.21; Ord. No. 87-08, 5-4-1987; Ord. No. 95-21, 8-7-1995; Ord. No. 2004-14, 6-21-2004) 
Sec. 16-146. - Exceptions. 
    None of the terms or prohibitions of section 16-145 shall apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  Emergency vehicles. Any police or fire vehicle or any ambulance, while engaged upon emergency business. 
(2)  Highway maintenance and construction. Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets, or highways by or on behalf of the city or the state, during the night, when the public safety, welfare, and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day. 
(Prior Code, § 9.22) 
Secs. 16-147-16-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BILL POSTING 

Sec. 16-176. - In streets. 
(a)  No person shall attach, place, paint, write, stamp or paste any sign, advertisement, or any other matter upon any lamp post, electric light, railway, telegraph, or telephone pole, shade tree, fire hydrant; or on anything within any park. Public officers posting any notice required or permitted by law shall be excepted from the provisions of this section. 
(b)  This section is punishable as a municipal civil infraction. 
(Prior Code, § 9.28; Ord. No. 95-21, 8-7-1995) 
Sec. 16-177. - Private trees. 
    No person shall attach, place, paint, write, stamp or paste any sign, advertisement, or other matter upon any house, wall, fence, gate, post or tree without first having obtained the written permission of the owner, or occupants of the premises and having complied with all provisions of this Code pertaining thereto. 
(Prior Code, § 9.29) 
Secs. 16-178-16-207. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - BLIGHT PREVENTION 

Sec. 16-208. - Determination; definitions. 
(a)  Purpose. It is determined that the unregulated storage or accumulation on private property of junk, rubbish or trash, garbage, building materials, abandoned or inoperable vehicles or the dismantling of vehicles or machinery on private property is detrimental to the general welfare of the public. Such practices cause or contribute to the deterioration of neighborhoods and promote neighborhood blight. Such practices also result in the reduction of the value, merchantability and maximum use and development of other properties in proximity thereto and are aesthetically offensive to the owners or occupants of other properties and to the city at large. Further, certain of such practices are hazardous to the public health and safety in that they create harborage for vermin and other pests, cause or contribute to the spread of diseases and constitute fire hazards. Public good requires that such practices be prohibited. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building materials means materials or remnants of materials used in the construction, improvement, renovation or demolition of buildings or structures, including but not limited to lumber, plywood, metal, stone or brick, glass, wiring, or other electrical materials or equipment, heating or air conditioning components or equipment, plumbing fixtures or equipment, shingles or other roofing materials, mortar, concrete, cement or plastics. 
    Code enforcement officer means an employee of the city as described in section 1-16. 
    Garbage means organic refuse or food wastes in the form of animal, poultry, fish, fruit or vegetable wastes, resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of foods, including animal, poultry or fish carcasses or parts thereof. 
    Junk means discarded materials of any kind, whether or not the materials could be put to any reasonable use, or materials which are incapable of performing the function for which they were manufactured or intended, including but not limited to parts of vehicles, machinery or parts of machines, broken or unusable furniture, furnishings, recreational equipment, stoves, air conditioners, refrigerators or other appliances or parts thereof. 
    Person means a natural person or any firm, copartnership, corporation, association of natural persons, incorporated or unincorporated, whether acting individually or by a servant, agent or employee. A person in violation of any of the provisions of this article, whether as owner or vendee of the premises or as an agent, servant or employee of an owner or vendee and any tenant or occupant of the premises shall be equally liable as principals, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
    Rubbish or trash means solid waste, consisting of either combustible or noncombustible materials, of the following types: 
(1)  Ashes means the residue left from the burning of paper, leaves, wood, coal or other combustible materials. 
(2)  Household means materials used or accumulated in the operation or maintenance of a household which are customarily discarded after use, including but not limited to newspapers, magazines, books, wrappings, cartons, boxes, crates, rags or sweepings or materials which are customarily discarded after becoming unusable due to wear or damage, such as clothing, bedding, floor coverings, wallpaper or articles of metal, plastic, cloth or leather. 
(3)  Kitchen means food containers or wrappings, whether damaged or undamaged, including but not limited to cans, bottles, jars, glass crockery, bags, sacks or plastics, or paper, plastic, wood or metal cartons or boxes or other similar or like articles or materials. 
(4)  Personal means articles or materials used for medical or hygienic purposes or for infant care. 
(5)  Yard means the products of vegetation grown on a property or which are brought onto a property, including but not limited to grass clippings, weeds, leaves, plants, tree branches, clippings from shrubs, bushes or hedges or roots or stumps. 
(Prior Code, § 9.41; Ord. No. 2006-08, 5-15-2006; Ord. No. 2018-05, § 3, 4-2-2018) 
Sec. 16-209. - Storage, accumulation, etc. 
    Subject to the provisions of this article, it shall be unlawful for a person to place, store, accumulate, maintain or allow to be placed, stored, accumulated, or maintained on any property within the city, the following: 
(1)  Building materials, except in a completely enclosed building or in instances where the material are being used or are awaiting use in the construction of a structure on the property to be completed within a reasonable time and in accordance with a valid building permit issued by the city, and except building materials which constitute a part of the stock in trade of a business located on a property which is zoned for such business or use. 
(2)  Ashes, household or yard rubbish or trash and garbage, except for such reasonable periods of time as such await regular, systematic removal and disposal in accordance with law. Such materials while awaiting removal and disposal shall be temporarily stored in a completely enclosed building, or at a location on the property where it is as much concealed from public view as practicable. If stored outside, household, yard, rubbish and trash, ashes and garbage must be stored in approved containers. Approved containers are defined as metal or plastic containers manufactured for the temporary storage of garbage, rubbish or trash. The containers must include a lid. Yard rubbish may be stored in commercially available biodegradable paper bags manufactured for such purpose. 
(3)  Junk, except within a completely enclosed building and except as provided by law upon the premises of a duly licensed junk dealer, junk buyer, dealer in new or used automobiles or automobile parts or dealer in secondhand goods on a property which is zoned for such use or activity. 
(4)  The existence of any structure or damaged partial structure which, because of fire, wind or other natural disaster or physical deterioration is no longer habitable if a dwelling, nor useful for any purpose for which it may have been intended. 
(5)  The existence of any vacant building, garage or other outbuilding, unless such buildings are kept securely locked, or otherwise protected to prevent illegal entry. 
(6)  The existence of any incomplete structure unless such structure is in the course of construction in accordance with a valid and subsisting building permit issued by the city, and unless such construction is completed within a reasonable time. 
(Prior Code, § 9.42; Ord. No. 2006-08, 5-15-2006; Ord. No. 2018-05, § 4, 4-2-2018) 
Sec. 16-210. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-05, § 5, adopted April 2, 2018, repealed § 16-210, which pertained to dismantling of vehicles, machinery or appliances prohibited; exceptions and derived from Prior Code, § 9.43; Ord. No. 2006-08, 5-15-2006. 
Sec. 16-211. - Garbage, personal rubbish or trash violations. 
    The storage or accumulation on private property of garbage or personal rubbish of trash, except in a completely enclosed building and contained in metal or plastic containers manufactured for the temporary storage of such materials for reasonable periods of time as the materials await regular, systematic removal and disposal in accordance with law, is determined to constitute a nuisance per se and to pose a hazard to the public health and safety so as to require either immediate or prompt removal and disposition. 
(Prior Code, § 9.44; Ord. No. 2006-08, 5-15-2006) 
Sec. 16-212. - Abandonment of refrigerators and other airtight containers. 
    Except for storage associated with normal and systematic removal by a waste hauler, it shall be unlawful for any person to store outside of any building or dwelling or in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator, washer, dryer, or any other container of any kind which has an airtight door or lock which may not be released for opening from the inside of said icebox, refrigerator, washer, dryer or container. Containers or appliances of this type that are placed outside for normal systematic removal by a waste hauler shall have the doors and locks removed. 
(Prior Code, § 9.45; Ord. No. 2006-08, 5-15-2006) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.493d. 
Sec. 16-213. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-05, § 5, adopted April 2, 2018, repealed § 16-213, which pertained to storage of recreational vehicles, etc.; time limits and derived from Prior Code, § 9.46; Ord. No. 2006-08, 5-15-2006. 
Sec. 16-214. - Remedy to dangerous conditions. 
    The code enforcement officer shall determine if a situation merits immediate remedy due to a dangerous condition or health hazard. In this case, the code enforcement officer may require that the property owner or responsible person take immediate action to mitigate the dangerous condition or health hazard. If compliance is not achieved, the city may take whatever mitigating action necessary to make the situation safe. 
(Prior Code, § 9.47; Ord. No. 2006-08, 5-15-2006) 
Sec. 16-215. - Penalties. 
    Violations of the blight prevent provisions contained in sections 16-208 through 16-214 shall be punishable as a misdemeanor as prescribed in section 1-14, and, in addition, action to abate the condition may be taken as herein authorized. 
(Prior Code, § 9.48; Ord. No. 2006-08, 5-15-2006) 
Sec. 16-216. - Enforcement. 
    If any person shall fail to comply with the provisions of this article, the city manager shall, through the department of public works, cause such violation to be removed from the lands of the person in noncompliance with this article. The superintendent of the department of public works shall keep an accurate account of all expenses incurred with respect to the removal of any such blight and shall make a sworn statement of said account and present the same to the city manager. 
(Prior Code, § 9.49; Ord. No. 2006-08, 5-15-2006) 
Sec. 16-217. - Collection from owner. 
    A copy of said sworn statement, including an account of costs incurred in each incident shall be transmitted to the city treasurer. The city treasurer shall add to the account of each parcel involved in such removal, ten percent of the amount of such expenditures, and collect the total amount as an assessment against the property as provided in section 34-30. 
(Prior Code, § 9.50; Ord. No. 2006-08, 5-15-2006) 
Secs. 16-218-16-242. - Reserved. 
Article V. - Reserved 

Secs. 16-243-16-274. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-05, § 6, adopted April 2, 2018, repealed Article V, §§ 16-243-16-274 in their entirety, which pertained to weed control and derived from Prior Code, §§ 9.61-9.64, 9.66, 9.67; Ord. No. 95-21, 8-7-1995; Ord. No. 2003-14, 5-19-2003; Ord. No. 2006-20, § 1, 12-18-2006; Ord. No. 2012-05, § 1, 5-21-2012; Ord. No. 2013-02, § 1, 3-4-2013. 
ARTICLE VI. - FEEDING OF BIRDS AND WATERFOWL 

Sec. 16-275. - Purpose. 
    It has been determined that the presence of large numbers of certain species of birds and waterfowl cause a public health nuisance by contaminating beaches and nearby public swimming areas, shorelines, parks, buildings in the core downtown, and sidewalks and pathways used by the public. Accordingly, this article is adopted to prevent such conduct as may attract and concentrate certain species on and around Lake Cadillac, the Lake Cadillac shoreline, city parks, and the core downtown in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-2, § 1(9.500), 4-16-2007) 
Sec. 16-276. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Core downtown means that area of the city central business district described as coinciding with the official boundaries of the downtown development authority district. 
    Domestic waterfowl means nonnative ducks, geese and swans not retained in agricultural operations. 
    Feed or feeding means the act of feeding or the furnishing of food or other sustenance to any form of bird and/or waterfowl species regulated by this article. 
    Migratory waterfowl means ducks, geese and swans native to North America. 
    Pigeon means any of the various birds of the widely distributed family Columbidae, characteristically having plump bodies, small heads and short legs, especially the rock dove or any of its domesticated varieties. 
    Shoreline and city parks means on and around Lake Cadillac, lands within 100 feet of the Lake Cadillac shoreline, and any city park intersected by a public roadway abutting a shoreline parcel. 
(Ord. No. 2007-2, § 1(9.501), 4-16-2007) 
Sec. 16-277. - Prohibition on feeding. 
(a)  Migratory and domestic waterfowl. 
(1)  No person shall feed, cause to be fed or provide food for domestic or migratory waterfowl located on Lake Cadillac, on lands within 100 feet of the Lake Cadillac shoreline, either privately or publicly owned, and in any city park intersected by a public roadway abutting a shoreline parcel. 
(2)  No person shall create or foster any condition, or allow any condition to exist or continue, which results in a congregation or congestion of domestic or migratory waterfowl on Lake Cadillac, on lands within 100 feet of the Lake Cadillac shoreline, or in any city park intersected by a public roadway abutting a shoreline parcel. 
(b)  Pigeons. 
(1)  No person shall feed, cause to be fed or provide food for pigeons located in the core downtown. 
(2)  No person shall create or foster any condition, or allow any condition to exist or continue, which results in a congregation or congestion of pigeons within the core downtown. 
(Ord. No. 2007-2, § 1(9.502), 4-16-2007) 
Sec. 16-278. - Song bird feeders. 
    Within the boundaries of those areas identified above, in which the feeding of waterfowl and pigeons is prohibited, birdfeeders may be erected and maintained for other avian species. 
(Ord. No. 2007-2, § 1(9.503), 4-16-2007) 
Sec. 16-279. - Enforcement. 
    The city police department and other city staff as designated by the city manager are hereby authorized and directed to enforce this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-2, § 1(9.504), 4-16-2007) 
Sec. 16-280. - Penalties. 
    Violation of this article shall be punishable as a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 2007-2, § 1(9.505), 4-16-2007) 
Chapter 18 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State Fire Prevention Code, MCL 29.1 et seq.; crimes related to fires, MCL 750.240 et seq.; crimes related to explosives and bombs, MCL 750.200 et seq.; Explosives Act, MCL 29.41 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE CODE 

Sec. 18-19. - Adoption of 2015 International Fire Code. 
    The city hereby adopts by reference the 2015 International Fire Code issued by International Code Council, Inc., except those sections herein deleted or amended. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 10-17-2011; Ord. No. 2015-12, § 2, 8-3-2015; Ord. No. 2018-05, § 2, 4-2-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-05, § 2, adopted April 2, 2018, amended § 18-19 and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Adoption of 2012 International Fire Code" to "Adoption of 2015 International Fire Code," as set out herein. 
Sec. 18-20. - Purpose. 
    The city adopts the 2015 International Fire Code for the purpose of regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises in the city; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and repealing all other ordinances and parts of the ordinances in conflict therewith. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 10-17-2011; Ord. No. 2015-12, § 2, 8-3-2015; Special Instruction of 1-2-2019) 
Sec. 18-21. - Additional definitions. 
    In addition to the definitions set forth in the 2015 International Fire Code, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Fire code official means the City of Cadillac's fire chief or his/her designee who shall serve as an at will employee unless there is an applicable collective bargaining agreement, in which case the collective bargaining agreement will control. 
    Jurisdiction means the City of Cadillac. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 10-17-2011; Ord. No. 2014-09, § 1, 8-18-2014; Ord. No. 2015-12, § 2, 8-3-2015; Special Instruction of 1-2-2019) 
Sec. 18-22. - Amendments. 
Section 101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Fire Code of the City of Cadillac," hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Section 103.2. Appointment. This section is deleted in its entirety. 
Section 108. 1. Board of appeals established. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the fire code official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the governing body and shall hold office at its pleasure. The fire code official shall be an ex officio member of said board but shall not have a vote on any matter before the board. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the fire code official. 
Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the right to a hearing before the city's Construction Code Board of Appeals as established in Article II of the Cadillac City Code. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Construction Code Board of Appeals may appeal said decision to the circuit court. 
Section 109.3. Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be responsible for a civil infraction, unless otherwise specified. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. Notwithstanding the foregoing, violations of the following sections of the 2015 International Fire Code shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than five-hundred dollars ($500) or imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days: 
 Section 107, Maintenance; and 
 Section 1031, Maintenance of the Means of Egress. 
Section 111.4. Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than one hundred ($100.00), plus costs, for the first offense, not less than two-hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), plus costs, for the second offense, and not less than five-hundred dollars ($500.00), plus costs, for each repeat offense thereafter. 
Section 113.3. Work commencing before registered contractor status or permit issuance. A person, company, and/or building owner who commences or authorizes any work, activity or operation regulated by this code without first registering with the Authority Having Jurisdiction where required by this code or before obtaining the necessary permits may be subject to an additional fee established by resolution of the City Council which shall be in addition to the required permit fees. 
Section 901.11: Registered Fire Protection Contractor. All fire protection system contractors performing inspection, testing, maintenance, repair, modification, or installation activities of any fire protection system shall be required to register with the Authority Having Jurisdiction. Mandatory registration shall be a one-time requirement and shall be completed prior to commencing work on any fire protection system. The penalty for violation of this provision shall be in accordance with Section 113.3. 
Section 903.2 Where Required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be provided in the locations described in the Michigan Building Code, Michigan Residential Code, and Michigan Rehabilitation Code for Existing Buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 10-17-2011; Ord. No. 2014-09, § 2, 8-18-2014; Ord. No. 2015-12, § 2, 8-3-2015; Ord. No. 2018-05, § 2, 4-2-2018) 
Sec. 18-23. - Geographical limits. 
    The geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the 2015 International Fire Code are hereby established as follows: 
(1)  Section 5704.2.9.6.1 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited. Storage of class I and II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited within R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-T, RM-1, RM-2, RMH, MH, OS-1, OS-2, B-1, B-2, B-3, TS-1, TS-2, and POS zoning districts. 
(2)  Section 5706.2.4.4 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited . The storage of class I and class II liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited within R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-T, RM-1, RM-2, RMH, MH, OS-1, OS-2, B-1, B-2, B-3, TS-1, TS-2, and POS zoning districts. 
(3)  Section 5806.2 Limitations. Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside of buildings is prohibited within R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-T, RM-1, RM-2, RMH, MH, OS-1, OS-2, B-1, B-2, B-3, TS-1, TS-2, and POS zoning districts. 
(4)  Section 6104.2 Maximum capacity within established limits . Within R-1, R-2, R-3, R- 4, R-T, RM-1, RM-2, RMH, MH, OS-1, OS-2, B-1, B-2, B-3, TS-1, TS-2, and POS zoning districts , the aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not exceed a water capacity of 2,000 gallons (7570 L). 
Exception: In particular installations, this capacity limit shall be determined by the fire code official, after consideration of special features such as topographical conditions, nature of occupancy, and proximity to buildings, capacity of proposed LP-gas containers, degree of fire protection to be provided and capabilities of the local fire department. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 10-17-2011; Ord. No. 2015-12, § 2, 8-3-2015; Special Instruction of 1-2-2019) 
Sec. 18-24. - Copies available. 
    Complete printed copies of the 2015 International Fire Code shall be kept in the office of the city clerk and shall be available for inspection by and distribution to the public in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 10-17-2011; Ord. No. 2015-12, § 2, 8-3-2015; Special Instruction of 1-2-2019) 
Sec. 18-25. - Conflicts. 
    If a provision of the 2015 International Fire Code conflicts with a provision of any charter provision or ordinance of the city, the provision that establishes the higher standard for promotion or protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 10-17-2011; Ord. No. 2015-12, § 2, 8-3-2015; Special Instruction of 1-2-2019) 
Sec. 18-26. - Violations. 
    Any violation of Sections 901 "General" and 1030 "Maintenance of the Means of Egress" of the 2015 International Fire Code shall be punishable as a misdemeanor. All other violations of this article or the 2015 International Fire Code, unless specifically stated, shall be punishable as a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, § 3, 3-20-2017; Special Instruction of 1-2-2019) 
Secs. 18-27-18-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIREWORKS SAFETY ACT 

Sec. 18-41. - Purpose. 
    The purpose and intent of this article is to regulate the discharge, ignition and use of certain fireworks within the city boundaries consistent with the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Act No. 256 of 2011, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, § 1, 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 18-42. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
    Act means the Michigan fireworks safety act, Public Act No. 256 of 2011, MCL 28.451-28.471, as amended. 
    Agricultural and wildlife fireworks means firework devices distributed to farmers, ranchers, and growers through a wildlife management program administered by the United States Department of Interior or the Michigan Department of Natural Resources. 
    APA means American Pyrotechnics Association. 
    Articles pyrotechnic means pyrotechnic devices for professional use that are similar to consumer fireworks in chemical composition and construction but not intended for consumer use, that meet the weight limits for consumer fireworks but are not labeled as such, and that are classified as UN0431 or UN0432 under 49 CFR 172.101. 
    Commercial fireworks includes display fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, special effects and agricultural and wildlife fireworks. 
    Consumer fireworks means fireworks devices that are designed to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CFR Parts 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA standards 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 3.5. Consumer fireworks do not include low-impact fireworks. 
    Display fireworks means large fireworks devices that are explosive materials intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, as provided in 27 CFR 555.11, 49 CFR 172, and APA standard 87-1, 4.1. 
    Firework or fireworks means any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare gun, or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. Fireworks consist of consumer fireworks, low-impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks, and special effects. 
    Low-impact fireworks means ground and handheld sparkling devices as that phrase is defined under APA standards 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8, and 3.5. 
    Minor means an individual who is less than 18 years of age. 
    National holiday means a national holiday is defined in 5 USC 6103 and includes the following: 
(a)  New Year's Day (January 1). 
(b)  Martin Luther King Jr. Day (third Monday in January). 
(c)  Washington's Birthday (third Monday in February). 
(d)  Memorial Day (last Monday in May). 
(e)  Independence Day (July 4, and on the date selected by the City of Cadillac to celebrate Independence Day, if different). 
(f)  Labor Day (first Monday in September). 
(g)  Columbus Day (second Monday in October). 
(h)  Veterans Day (November 11). 
(i)  Thanksgiving Day (fourth Thursday in November). 
(j)  Christmas Day (December 25). 
(k)  NFPA means National Fire Protection Association. 
    Novelty fireworks means that term as defined under APA standards 87-1, 3.2, 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.2.4, and 3.2.5 and all of the following: 
(a)  Toy plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in sheets, strips, rolls, or individual caps containing not more than 0.25 of a grain of explosive content per cap, in packages labeled to indicate the maximum explosive content per cap. 
(b)  Toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy trick noisemakers, and toy guns in which toy caps as described in subsection (a) are used, that are constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion, and that are not designed to break apart or be separated so as to form a missile by the explosion. 
(c)  Flitter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding one-eighth-inch in diameter. 
(d)  Toy snakes not containing mercury, if packed in cardboard boxes with not more than 12 pieces per box for retail sale and if the manufacturer's name and the quantity contained in each box are printed on the box; and toy smoke devices. 
    Special effects means a combination of chemical elements or chemical compounds designed and intended to produce an audible, visual, mechanical, or thermal effect as an integral part of a motion picture, radio, television, theatrical or opera production or live entertainment. 
    State fire marshal means the Michigan State Fire Marshal appointed under section 1b of the Michigan Fire Prevention Code, Public Act No. 207 of 1941, MCL 29.1b. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, § 2, 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 18-43. - Prohibitions. 
(1)  Fireworks generally. 
(a)  Fireworks shall not be ignited, discharged or used by: (a) a minor; (b) a person under the influence of alcohol or controlled substances; or (c) on public property, school property, church property, or property of another person, without that organization's or person's written authorization to do so. 
(b)  Any unmanned free-floating device (sky lanterns) which requires fire underneath to propel it and is not moored to the ground while aloft, have an uncontrolled and unpredictable flight path and descent are so as to pose a potential fire risk and are therefore prohibited. 
(2)  Consumer fireworks. No person shall ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks in the City of Cadillac; except on the day preceding, the day of, or the day after a national holiday, and in accordance with the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Public Act No. 256 of 2011, as amended. The ignition, discharge or use of consumer fireworks on these holiday dates is permitted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m., and only in accordance with the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Public Act No. 256 of 2011, as amended. 
(3)  Commercial fireworks. Commercial fireworks shall not be discharged in the City of Cadillac without a permit as required by this article. 
(4)  Low impact or novelty fireworks. The display of low impact or novelty fireworks are regulated by state law and are not regulated by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, § 3, 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 18-44. - Permits. 
    A permit is required for the discharge of commercial fireworks. 
(1)  Permit application. A person seeking a permit to discharge commercial fireworks shall complete an application for a permit, which shall be submitted to the clerk's office at least 45 days in advance of the proposed discharge date. The application shall include: 
a.  Proof that the applicant is over 18 years in age; 
b.  A license or permit to operate commercial fireworks from the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives; 
c.  A scale drawing of the site, including, but not limited to, surrounding buildings, the display site as described by NFPA 1123, the spectator viewing area and the parking areas; 
d.  Proof of insurance as set forth in this section; 
e.  Information as to the competency and qualifications of the fireworks display operators as required by NFPA 1123; 
f.  A completed application for fireworks display permit from the State of Michigan; 
g.  A description of the display, including the type and number of fireworks to be discharged; 
h.  Proof to the city fire marshal or his designee, that the applicant is knowledgeable of the recommended safety requirements outlined in NFPA 1123; 
i.  A nonresident applicant shall appoint in writing a resident member of the bar of this state or a resident agent to be the legal representative upon whom all process in an action or proceeding against the person, firm or corporation may be served; and 
j.  Payment of a fee as set forth in chapter 48 of the City Code. 
(2)  Permit approval process. 
a.  The city clerk or his designee shall review the application for completeness. 
b.  The city fire marshal or his designee shall review the application and make a written recommendation to the city council. 
c.  The city council shall review the application and issue a permit if it finds that the following standards have been satisfied: 
1.  The permit application is complete and conforms to the requirements of this article. 
2.  The proposed discharge of fireworks shall not have an adverse effect upon public safety. 
3.  The time, duration and location of the fireworks will not unreasonably disturb the peace of neighboring property owners. 
(3)  Requirements of permit holders. 
a.  A permit holder shall be responsible for the discharge of fireworks which shall conform to the approved permit and this article. 
b.  A permit holder shall be responsible for all shells being fired. In the event one or more shells do not explode, the permit holder shall take appropriate measures to locate and properly dispose of the unexploded shell(s). 
(4)  Transfers. Permits cannot be transferred or assigned without prior review and approval of the city. 
(5)  Revocation. Permits shall be revoked and inventory seized if at any time during the term of the permit the terms and conditions of this article are violated. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, § 4, 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 18-45. - Insurance. 
    To protect the public, the applicant shall provide proof of financial responsibility by insurance to satisfy claims for damages to property or personal injuries arising out of an act or omission on the part of the applicant. At a minimum, the applicant shall maintain: (a) worker's compensation and employers liability coverage covering the statutory requirements of the State of Michigan and insuring the applicant with an employer's liability limit of at least $500,000.00, if applicable; and (b) occurrence based commercial general liability coverage covering liability arising out of the operations of the applicant, with limits of at least $3,000,000.00 per occurrence; and (c) automobile liability with a limit of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence CSL covering all owned, non-owned, and hired automobiles, and shall comply with all requirements of Michigan No-Fault Law. The general liability and automobile liability policies shall be issued by an insurer licensed to do business in the State of Michigan with an A.M. Best rating of "A-" or better. If the applicant utilizes city owned property during the display, the City of Cadillac shall be named as additional insured on the general liability and automobile liability policies, and coverage shall be considered primary over any other insurance held by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, § 5, 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 18-46. - Penalty. 
    A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction, and the penalties described in section 1-14 of this Code shall apply, except that the fine for any violation of this article that occurs on public property shall be in the amount of $500.00 for each offense, plus costs, damages, expenses, and any other relief allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-08, § 6, 9-3-2013) 
ARTICLE IV. - FIRE DEPARTMENT COST RECOVERY 

Sec. 18-47. - Purpose. 
    The purpose and intent of this article is to provide a method for recovering the costs and expenses of response by the fire department to dangerous equipment and/or systems owned by a public or private utility and pose a danger to the safety and/or health of the community. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16, § 1, 10-5-2015) 
Sec. 18-48. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
    City shall mean the local unit of government. 
    City of Cadillac shall mean the physical boundaries of the City of Cadillac. 
    Danger to the public health, safety or welfare shall mean a condition that, in the eyes of the commanding officer, is likely to harm the health, safety or welfare of the public and requires fire department intervention. 
    Equipment and/or system shall mean any physical object that is part of the service system and owned by the utility. 
    Expense of response shall mean charges, costs, and fees incurred by the fire department and individuals operating at the request or direction of the city as a result of making an emergency response. 
    Fire department shall mean the City of Cadillac Fire Department. 
    Response shall mean a request for the fire department to respond to assess a potentially hazardous condition involving a utility. The request can be but shall not be limited from central dispatch, direct call to the fire department, or passerby. 
    Utility provider shall mean a public, private, or co-op that provides gas, electric, water, or sewer service to the City of Cadillac. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16, § 1, 10-5-2015) 
Sec. 18-49. - Charges. 
(a)  Authority to charge. The fire department is hereby authorized to charge all persons or entities who directly receive the benefit of the fire protection services set forth in subsection (2) below, provided that such services were rendered within the boundaries of the city. 
(b)  Services for which charges may be levied. Charges may be levied for responses to equipment and/or systems owned by a public or private utility that pose a danger to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(c)  Amount of charges. The fire department may recover an appropriate fee in an amount established by the city council by resolution to recover the cost of providing such fire protection services within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16, § 1, 10-5-2015) 
Sec. 18-50. - Exemptions. 
    The following shall not constitute a charge to the utility: 
(1)  The first hour of the response; 
(2)  False alarms; 
(3)  Fire services performed outside the jurisdiction of the city or under a mutual aid contract with an adjoining municipality. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16, § 1, 10-5-2015) 
Sec. 18-51. - Time for payment. 
    All charges established by this article or set by resolution of the city council are due and payable within 30 days from the date the services are billed. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16, § 1, 10-5-2015) 
Sec. 18-52. - Collection of charges. 
    The charges set forth in this article constitute a lien on the property for which the service charges were incurred, including both real and personal property, and if not paid within 30 days after the same is due, the official in charge of the collection thereof shall, prior to May 1 of each year, certify to the tax assessing officer of the city the facts of such delinquency. The tax assessing officer shall enter such delinquent charges affecting the property within the city's jurisdiction upon the next general tax roll as a charge against the premises and the liens thereupon shall be enforced in the same manner as provided by law for delinquent and unpaid taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16, § 1, 10-5-2015) 
Sec. 18-53. - Appeal. 
    Any party aggrieved by a charge under this article may appeal the charges as follows: 
(1)  Within the time period for which a bill is payable, such party shall file a written request with the fire marshal setting forth specific reasons why the charge is improper. 
(2)  The fire marshal shall notify the aggrieved party, in writing, of the time, place, and date that the city council will hold a hearing on the appeal. 
(3)  The city council may grant relief on appeal if it finds good cause and sufficient proof to satisfy the city council that the charge is not warranted. 
(4)  The city council may extend the time for payment for a reasonable time, not to exceed one year. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16, § 1, 10-5-2015) 
Sec. 18-54. - Non-exclusive charge. 
    The rates and charges set forth in this article shall not be exclusive of the charges that may be made by the city for the costs and expenses of maintaining a fire department, but shall only be supplemental thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16, § 1, 10-5-2015) 
Sec. 18-55. - Multiple property protection. 
    When the fire department renders a service that directly benefits more than one person or property, the owner of each property and each person so benefitted where property protection is not involved is liable for the payment of the full charge for such services. This section is to be administered so that charges are only collected from the recipients of the service. 
(Ord. No. 2015-16, § 1, 10-5-2015) 
Chapter 20 - LAND DIVISIONS AND SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Land division act, MCL 560.101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Authority. 
    The regulations of this chapter are adopted pursuant to the authority of Public Act No. 285 of 1931 (MCL 125.31 et seq.), Public Act No. 222 of 1943 (MCL 125.51 et seq.) and Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(Prior Code, § 5.501; Ord. No. 98-09, 7-20-1998) 
Sec. 20-2. - Scope and purpose. 
(a)  The approvals and requirements of this chapter shall be satisfied prior to any construction or division of land, including redivision or replatting of any land within the city. 
(b)  The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the division and platting of land. Land division should only occur under conditions that will not be detrimental to the state's natural resources and will further promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the people of the city by providing for orderly development within the city. The city wishes to discourage inefficient urban sprawl and encourage the flexible land use of areas served by adequate city services and utilities. This chapter will promote the accurate titling and conveyance of land with more accurate legal descriptions resulting from proper surveying and establish uniform procedures for the submission, approval and enforcement of the act. All plats, land divisions, lot splits, subdivisions and site condominiums must comply with the requirements of this chapter as well as all other applicable laws and ordinances. 
(Prior Code, § 5.502; Ord. No. 98-09, 7-20-1998; Ord. No. 2000-01, 2-21-2000) 
Sec. 20-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessible, in reference to a parcel, means that the parcel meets one or both of the following requirements: 
(1)  Has an area where a driveway provides vehicular access to an existing road or street and meets all applicable location standards of the state transportation department or county road commission under Public Act No. 200 of 1969 (MCL 247.321 et seq.), and of the city, or has an area where a driveway can provide vehicular access to an existing road or street and meet all such applicable location standards. 
(2)  Is served by an existing easement that provides vehicular access to an existing road or street and that meets all applicable location standards of the state transportation department or county road commission under Public Act No. 200 of 1969 (MCL 247.321 et seq.), and of the city, or can be served by a proposed easement that will provide vehicular access to an existing road or street and that will meet all such applicable location standards. 
    Act means Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.), and as further regulated by Public Act 285 of 1931 (MCL 125.31 et seq.) and Public Act No. 222 of 1943 (MCL 125.51 et seq.). 
    Adjacent parcels means parcels which have a common boundary of at least 20 feet. 
    Alley means a public or private right-of-way shown on a plat which provides secondary access to a lot, block, or parcel of land. 
    Applicant means the proprietor/owner. 
    As-built plans means construction plans which have been drawn to reflect the location and manner of actual construction. Said construction shall be based on plans which have been subject to city review and approval. 
    Block. See definition in section 46-4. 
    Board means the city planning commission. 
    Caption means the name by which the plat is legally and commonly known. 
    Condominium. See definition in section 46-4. 
    Contiguous means parcels or tracts of land that touch each other at a minimum of one point and are not separated by a street, railroad, river, lake or other such feature; provided, however, parcels or tracts separated by a public alley or a private easement shall be considered contiguous parcels or tracts. 
    County plat board means the duly authorized board of county officials authorized by state and local law to act on matters associated with the platting of land. 
    Development site means any parcel or lot on which exists or which is intended for building development other than the following: 
(1)  Agricultural use involving the production of plants and animals useful to humans, including forages and sod crops; grains, feed crops, and field crops; dairy and dairy products; poultry and poultry products; livestock, including breeding and grazing of cattle, swine, and similar animals; berries, herbs, flowers, seeds, grasses, nursery stock, fruits, vegetables, Christmas trees and other similar uses and activities. 
(2)  Forestry use involving the planting, management, or harvesting of timber. 
    Division means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel, or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns for the purpose of sale or lease of more than one year, or of a building development that results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and that satisfies the requirements of MCL 560.108 and 560.109. The term "division" does not include a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel; and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of MCL 560.101 et seq., or the requirements of this chapter. 
    Division of rights transfer means the right to make divisions exempt from the platting requirements of the land division act that can be transferred, but only from a parent parcel or parent tract to a parcel created from the parent parcel or parent tract. A proprietor transferring the right to make a division pursuant to this chapter shall within 45 days give written notice of the transfer to the city zoning administrator. 
    Easement means a grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation or specific persons, use of a strip of land for specific purposes. 
    Engineer means a civil engineer who is a professional engineer licensed under art. 20 of the occupational code, Public Act No. 299 of 1980 (MCL 339.2001 et seq.). 
    Exempt split means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns that does not result in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres, or the equivalent. For a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of MCL 560.108 and 560.109, or the requirements of this chapter. 
    Floodplain means that area of land adjoining the channel of a river, stream, watercourse, lake, or other similar body of water which will be inundated by a flood which can reasonably be expected for that region. 
    Forty acres or the equivalent means 40 acres, a quarter of a quarter-section containing not less than 30 acres, or a government lot containing not less than 30 acres. 
    Government survey means the land surveyed, subdivided and monumented by the United States Public Land Survey. 
    Improvements means grading, street surfacing, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, sanitary sewers, storm drainage systems, culverts, bridges, utilities and other additions to or construction on the natural state of land which increases its value, utility or habitability. The term "improvements" does not include maintenance such as street resurfacing. 
    Land means areas of the earth's surface. 
    Lot means a measured portion of a parcel or tract of land, which is described and fixed in a recorded plat. 
    Master plan means the City of Cadillac Master Plan, also known as the long range comprehensive plan. 
    Michigan Coordinate System means the system defined in Public Act No. 9 of 1964 (MCL 54.231 et seq.). 
    Natural features and amenities means, but is not limited to, lakes, ponds, watercourses, floodplains, wetlands, woodlands and topography of the land. 
    Outlot , when included within the boundary of a recorded plat, means a lot set aside for purposes other than a development site, such as a park, commons or other public or private use. An outlot is often set aside for future roadway and/or utility expansion purposes. 
    Parcel means a continuous area or acreage of land which can be described as provided for in this chapter. 
    Parent parcel or parent tract means an undivided parcel or tract, lawfully in existence on March 31, 1997, which may be divided or otherwise split in order to create multiple parcels or tracts subject to the provisions of this chapter and chapter 46, pertaining to zoning. 
    Plat means a map or chart of a subdivision of land. 
    Preliminary plat means a map showing the salient features of a proposed subdivision submitted to an approving authority for purposes of preliminary consideration. 
    Proprietor means a natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or combination thereof that holds an ownership interest in land whether recorded or not. 
    Public sewer means a sewerage system as defined in section 4101 of part 41 (sewerage systems) of the natural resources and environmental protection act, Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.4101). 
    Public utility means all persons, firms, corporations, copartnerships or municipal or other public authority providing gas, electricity, water, steam, telephone, sewer or other services of a similar nature. 
    Public water means a system of pipes and structures through which water is obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and structures, intakes, cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended for use for the purpose of furnishing water to the public for household drinking purposes. 
    Replat means the process of changing the map or plat which changes the boundaries of a recorded subdivision plat or part thereof. The legal dividing of a lot or outlot within a recorded subdivision plat without changing the exterior boundaries of the plat is not a replat. 
    Sidewalk means a pathway for nonmotorized pedestrian access and movement constructed within a public right-of-way, public easement or comparable location and which is designated and built to the city sidewalk construction standards. 
    Site condominium. See definition for condominium in section 46-4. 
    Soil erosion and sedimentation control act means part 91 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.9101 et seq.). 
    Storm sewer means a system of conduits and structures through which surface water runoff is collected and routed to temporary retention or permanent water body. 
    Street means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct, highway or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway; or a street or way shown in a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law or approved by official action; or a street or way on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the county register of deeds. The term "street" includes a right-of-way dedicated to public use. 
    Subdivide or subdivision means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns for the purpose of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building development that results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and that is not exempted from the platting requirements of MCL 560.108 and 560.109. Subdivide or subdivision does not include a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel; and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of MCL 560.101 et seq., or the requirements of this chapter. 
    Surveyor means a professional surveyor licensed under article 20 of the occupational code, Public Act No. 299 of 1980 (MCL 339.2001 et seq.). 
    Topographical map means a map showing existing physical characteristics with contour lines at sufficient intervals to permit determination of proposed grades and drainage. 
    Tract means two or more parcels that share a common property line and are under the same ownership. 
    Underlying zone district means the city zoning ordinance zoning classification of land which is proposed for division or other reconfiguration. All land divisions and reconfigurations shall comply with underlying zone district requirements. 
    Use approval means the land use that may be placed on or occupy a property after meeting the requirements of chapter 46, pertaining to zoning. 
(Prior Code, §§ 5.503, 5.504; Ord. No. 98-09, 7-20-1998; Ord. No. 2000-01, 2-21-2000) 
Sec. 20-4. - Plat amendments. 
(a)  City council, after recommendation from the city planning commission, may, by resolution or ordinance, open or vacate a street or alley, or a portion of a street or alley, or may extend, widen or change the name of an existing street or alley or approve the division of platted lots. Exempt splits need only be reviewed and approved by the zoning administrator. 
(b)  The city clerk, within 30 days of any council action allowed in this section, shall record a certified copy with the register of deeds and shall send a copy to the state treasurer. 
(c)  When the city council determines it is necessary to discontinue an existing street, alley or other public land shown on a plat, the city may reserve an easement for public utility purposes and other public purposes. 
(d)  Application, review and approval procedures are the same as for a new plat. 
(Prior Code, § 5.530; Ord. No. 98-09, 7-20-1998) 
Sec. 20-5. - Administration. 
(a)  This chapter shall be administered by the planning commission, zoning administrator and city council, with the assistance of city staff and professional consulting personnel. The rules, regulations and standards imposed by this chapter shall be considered to be the minimum requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city, and in interpreting and applying them, primary consideration shall be given to these factors. 
(b)  The city council may establish by ordinance inspection fees, inspection requirements, specification standards and administrative procedures as provided by law and such shall be deemed to be requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  Every plat, site condominium, subdivision or land division that complies with this chapter, by virtue of such approval, shall be deemed to be an amendment of or an addition to the municipal plan and part thereof. 
(d)  Approval shall not be deemed to constitute or affect an acceptance by the public or constitute the opening, maintenance, establishment, taking or acceptance of any street, alley, park, easement or other open space shown upon the plat, site condominium or subdivision. 
(Prior Code, § 5.540; Ord. No. 98-09, 7-20-1998) 
Sec. 20-6. - Consequences of noncompliance with approval requirements. 
(a)  Any division of land in violation of any provision of this chapter shall not be recognized as a land division on the city's tax roll and no construction thereon which requires the prior issuance of a construction or building permit shall be allowed. The city shall further have the authority to initiate injunctive or other relief to prevent any violation or continuance of any violation of this chapter. 
(b)  An unlawful division or split shall also be voidable at the option of the purchaser and shall subject the seller to the forfeiture of all consideration received or pledged therefor, together with damages sustained by the purchaser recoverable in an action at law. 
(Prior Code, § 5.542; Ord. No. 98-09, 7-20-1998) 
Sec. 20-7. - Penalties. 
    Any violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se. A violation of this chapter is a municipal civil infraction, for which the fine shall be not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 for the first offense and not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for subsequent offenses, in the discretion of the court, and in addition to all other costs, damages and expenses provided by law. For the purposes of this section, the term "subsequent offense" means a violation of the provisions of this chapter committed by the same person within 12 months of a previous violation of the same provision of this chapter for which said person admitted responsibility or was adjudicated to be responsible; provided, however, that offenses committed on subsequent days within a period of one week following the issuance of a citation for a first offense shall all be considered separate first offenses. Each day during which any violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, § 5.543; Ord. No. 98-09, 7-20-1998) 
Sec. 20-8. - Controlling provisions and repeal of prior ordinances. 
    In the event of any conflict between this chapter and other city ordinances, this chapter shall control. All previous subdivision ordinances affecting platted and unplatted land divisions in conflict with this chapter are hereby repealed. However, this chapter shall not be construed to repeal any provision in any applicable zoning ordinances, state construction codes or other ordinances of the city, which shall remain in full force and effect notwithstanding any land division approval hereunder. 
(Prior Code, § 5.544; Ord. No. 98-09, 7-20-1998) 
Secs. 20-9-20-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NONPLATTED LAND DIVISIONS AND EXEMPT SPLITS 

Sec. 20-35. - Land divisions not subject to platting or replatting. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.), certain land divisions are permitted which are not subject to the platting or replatting requirements of said acts and amendments, but are subject to local review and approval by the zoning administrator. 
(1)  A lot or outlot in a recorded plat proposed to be divided in accordance with the state land division act and this chapter. See section 20-4, pertaining to plat amendments. 
(2)  An exempt split as defined in section 20-3. 
(Prior Code, § 5.505; Ord. No. 98-09, 7-20-1998; Ord. No. 2000-01, 2-21-2000) 
Sec. 20-36. - Application. 
    Prior to making any land division either by deed, land contract, lease for more than one year or for building development, an applicant shall file an application packet which consists of all the following with the zoning administrator: 
(1)  A completed application form as provided by the city zoning administrator. 
(2)  Proof of ownership interest of the land proposed to be divided back to March 31, 1997. 
(3)  A tentative parcel map, prepared by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer, drawn to scale, including an accurate legal description of each proposed division, and showing the boundary lines, property dimensions and the accessibility of each division for vehicular traffic and public utilities. The location and size of road and utility easements shall be provided. The city zoning administrator may waive the survey map requirement where the foregoing tentative parcel map is deemed to contain adequate information to approve a proposed land division considering the size, simple nature of the divisions and the undeveloped character of the territory within which the proposed divisions are located. An accurate legal description of all the proposed divisions, however, shall be required at all times. 
(4)  Proof that all parcels to be created by the proposed land division fully comply with the applicable lot, yard and area requirements of the applicable zoning ordinance, including, but not limited to, minimum lot frontage/width, minimum road frontage, minimum lot area (parcel), minimum lot width to depth ratio, and maximum lot coverage (parcel), and minimum setbacks for existing buildings/structures. 
(5)  A legal description and construction design detail for new or improved streets or easements which will provide access to each proposed division. 
(6)  The legal description of the parent parcel from which the new divisions will be created. 
(7)  If a transfer of division rights is proposed in the land transfer, detailed information about the terms and availability of the proposed division rights transfer. A person shall not sell a parcel of unplatted land unless the deed contains a statement as to whether the right to make further divisions exempt from the platting requirements of the land division act is proposed to be conveyed. 
(8)  An application fee of $50.00. This fee may be revised by the city council by ordinance. 
(Prior Code, § 5.506; Ord. No. 98-09, 7-20-1998; Ord. No. 2000-01, 2-21-2000) 
Sec. 20-37. - Review and approval process. 
    Upon submission of a complete application packet, the zoning administrator shall, within 45 days, review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the land division application. The applicant shall be notified of the decision, and if approved with conditions or denied, the reasons for said conditions or denial. 
(Prior Code, § 5.507; Ord. No. 98-09, 7-20-1998; Ord. No. 2000-01, 2-21-2000) 
Sec. 20-38. - Standards for approval. 
    Approval of a nonplatted land division shall be based on the following: 
(1)  All parcels shall comply with underlying zone district standards. 
(2)  The ratio of depth to width of any parcel created by the division does not exceed a 3:1 ratio. The lot width and depth of a parcel created by a land division shall be measured pursuant to the standards of chapter 46, pertaining to zoning. 
(3)  All parcels created and remaining have existing adequate accessibility or an area available therefor, for public utilities and emergency and other vehicles. Permanent easements for said accessibility and utilities have been or will be provided. 
(4)  The proposed land division shall comply with all requirements of the land division act and this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 5.508; Ord. No. 98-09, 7-20-1998) 
Sec. 20-39. - Land use approval and denial of building permit. 
(a)  The approval of a nonplatted land division does not convey use approval pursuant to the provisions of chapter 46, pertaining to zoning. The receipt of use approval shall be as required by said chapter 46. 
(b)  The city and its officers, employees and professional consultants shall not be liable for approving a land division if building permits for construction on the parcels are subsequently denied because of inadequate water supply, sewage disposal facilities, access, improper land use or otherwise, and any notice of approval shall include a statement to this effect. 
(Prior Code, § 5.509; Ord. No. 98-09, 7-20-1998) 
Secs. 20-40-20-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PRELIMINARY PLAT REVIEW AND APPROVAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Preliminary plats, MCL 560.111 et seq. 

Sec. 20-67. - Preapplication review meeting. 
    The proprietor may request that a preapplication review meeting take place by submitting a written request to the chairperson of the county plat board and submitting copies of a concept plan for the preliminary plat to the city and to each officer or agency entitled to review the preliminary plat under sections 113 to 118 of the land division act (MCL 560.113-560.118). A preapplication review meeting shall take place not later than 30 days after the written request and concept plan are received. The meeting shall be attended by the proprietor, representatives of each officer or agency entitled to review the preliminary plat under sections 113, 114, and 118 of the land division act (MCL 560.113, 560.114, 560.118), and a representative of the city. Representatives of each agency entitled to review the preliminary plat under sections 115 to 117 of the land division act (MCL 560.115-560.117) shall be informed of the meeting and may attend. The purpose of the meeting is to conduct an informal review of the proprietor's concept plan for the preliminary plat. 
Sec. 20-68. - Application. 
(a)  Submission. An application for a preliminary plat approval shall be submitted to the clerk for placement on the agenda for the next regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission. 
(b)  Requirements. The application shall consist of the following materials: 
(1)  Form. A completed application form, supplied by the city. 
(2)  Fee. An application fee of $200.00. This fee may be revised from time to time by the council by ordinance. 
(3)  Plat drawing. Fifteen copies of a proposed preliminary plat drawing at a scale of not more than one inch equals 100 feet that complies with the act and shows, at a minimum, the following: 
a.  Location map. A small scaled location map showing the location of the proposed preliminary plat within the city relative to streets, section lines, watercourses and other land divisions within 1,320 feet of the proposed plat. 
b.  Zoning. The zoning classification of the subject site and adjoining lands. 
c.  Streets. The names, location, right-of-way width and pavement widths of adjoining and proposed streets, sidewalks, street lighting, street trees and the location of all public and private driveways on adjoining streets within 100 feet for the proposed plat. 
d.  Dimensions. Exterior dimensions of the parcel or parcels being subdivided. 
e.  Easements. The location, type and dimension of any easements, alleys, driveways or other public or private ways crossing the parcels or parcels being subdivided. 
f.  Natural features. The location and type of any natural features and amenities located on the subject site. This includes, but is not limited to, wetlands, stands of trees, water features, historic features, buildable soils and the like. 
g.  Lots. The location, size and dimensions of proposed lots. 
h.  Set aside lands. The location, dimension and use of any land set aside for public or private use, if any. This includes, but is not limited to, common areas, open space areas, outlots, natural feature areas, recreation areas and the like. 
i.  Drainage and utilities. The location and dimensions of proper drainage and utility easements and the location and size of all existing and proposed drainageways and underground or above ground utilities. 
j.  Topography. Site topography at two-foot intervals. 
k.  Plat name. Proposed name of the plat. 
l.  Date. The date of preparation. 
m.  Owner and professional seal. The name and address of the applicant and the firm or individual preparing the plat. The plat drawing shall also contain the seal of the registered professional surveyor or engineer responsible for preparing the plan. 
n.  Directional marks and descriptive information. Scale, north arrow, legal description and permanent parcel number. 
o.  Buildable area. The buildable area of each lot, defined by the required front, side and rear yard setbacks. 
(c)  Requirements for processing. Applications which do not have all of the materials noted in subsection (b) of this section shall be considered incomplete and shall not be accepted for processing: 
(Prior Code, § 5.515; Ord. No. 98-09, 7-20-1998; Ord. No. 2000-01, 2-21-2000) 
Sec. 20-69. - Review process. 
(a)  Zoning administrator review. 
(1)  The zoning administrator shall receive and check for completeness of the preliminary plat as required in section 20-68(b). If complete and substantially in conformance with applicable municipal requirements, the zoning administrator shall place the proposal on the agenda of the next available regular commission meeting. 
(2)  The zoning administrator shall transmit a copy of the preliminary plat to the city manager, city engineer, city attorney and the city planner for their technical review and recommendation. Staff review shall be based on the standards listed in article V of this chapter. 
(b)  Planning commission review. 
(1)  The commission shall conduct at least one public hearing for the purpose of receiving comment on the proposed plat. Notification of the public hearing shall be sent to the owners of land immediately adjoining the plat, ten to 15 days before the public hearing. 
(2)  The commission shall have the power to agree with the applicant upon use, height, area, bulk requirements or restrictions governing buildings and premises within the subdivision, plat or site condominium, provided such requirements or restrictions do not authorize the violation of the current zoning ordinance. Such requirements or restrictions shall be stated upon the plat prior to its recording thereof, and shall have the same force of law and be enforceable in the same manner and with the same sanctions and penalties and subject to the same power of amendment or repeal as though set out as part of the zoning ordinance or map of the city. 
(3)  Following the public hearing, the commission shall recommend to the council either approval, approval with conditions or denial of the preliminary plat within 30 days after submission to the planning commission if a preapplication review meeting was conducted or within 60 days after the submission to the planning commission if such meeting was not conducted. The commission shall state its reasons for such recommendation. The minutes containing the record of the public hearing and the commission's recommendation shall be forwarded to the council and to the applicant prior to the council's consideration of the plat. In the case of denial, the legislative body shall have the power to overrule such disapproval by a recorded vote of not less the two-thirds of its entire membership. 
(4)  Failure by the commission to act within the 30 or 60, days as the case may be, on the request shall be deemed to have been an approval of the plat and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the commission upon demand; provided, however, that the applicant may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of such period. 
(c)  Council review. 
(1)  The council shall not consider the preliminary plat until receiving the recommendations of the commission. 
(2)  The council shall consider the preliminary plat at its next regularly scheduled meeting after receiving the recommendation of the commission. 
(3)  The council shall either, approve, approve with conditions or deny the preliminary plat, stating its reasons in writing for such approval, approval with conditions, or denial. Such reasons shall be based upon the standards of article V of the chapter and shall be provided to the applicant. 
(d)  Approval; expiration, extension and agency submission. 
(1)  Preliminary plat approval by the council shall confer upon the applicant approval of the lot sizes, orientation and street layout of the proposed plat for a period of two years. 
(2)  A preliminary plat approval may be extended by the city council if such extension is applied for, in writing, prior to the expiration of the preliminary plat approval period and is supported by reasonable evidence justifying the extension. 
(3)  Following approval of the preliminary plat, the applicant shall submit copies of such preliminary plat for the approval of the local and state agencies and authorities noted in the land division act. 
(4)  Construction activities such as brushing, timbering, grading, utilities, streets, curb and gutter and sidewalks that are in complete conformance with this Code may be started at this time with the proper permits. 
(Prior Code, § 5.516; Ord. No. 98-09, 7-20-1998; Ord. No. 2000-01, 2-21-2000) 
Secs. 20-70-20-96. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINAL PLAT REVIEW AND APPROVAL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Final plats, MCL 560.131 et seq. 

Sec. 20-97. - Application. 
(a)  An application for a final plat approval shall be submitted to the city clerk within 20 days prior to the council meeting. 
(b)  Applications which do not have all of the materials stated in this subsection shall be considered incomplete and shall not be accepted. Said application shall consist of the following materials: 
(1)  Ten copies of the plat drawing that substantially conforms to the preliminary plat approval, including any conditions placed on such approval. 
(2)  The requirements of section 20-68(b). 
(3)  Proof of approval of the final plat from each of the authorities having jurisdiction as required by the land division act, sections 112 through 119 (MCL 560.112-560.119). These proofs of approval shall include copies of all permits as may be required and issued by these authorities. 
(4)  Cost estimates for any improvements that have not been completed. 
(Prior Code, § 5.520; Ord. No. 98-09, 7-20-1998) 
Sec. 20-98. - Review and approval. 
(a)  The council shall consider the final plat within 20 days after the filing of the application. 
(b)  A minimum of five days notice of the time and place the final plat shall be considered shall be sent by mail to the record owners of land located within or adjoining the plat. 
(c)  The council shall, by resolution, approve, approve with conditions, or deny the final plat, stating in writing its reasons for such approval, approval with conditions, or denial. Such reasons shall be based on the standards in article V of this chapter and conditioned on compliance with the requirements in subsection (e) of this section. 
(d)  Council may deny approval of the plat only if all the provisions of this Code have not been met. 
(e)  In lieu of completing all or a portion of all improvements, final plat approval may be granted with the specific consent of the council; provided that as a condition of such approval, the applicant shall deposit with the city a true copy of an agreement showing that the applicant has deposited with a bank or other agent acceptable to the city, cash, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, bond or other form of surety, such as a special assessment approved by council in an amount sufficient to guaranty the city the satisfactory construction, installation, completion and dedication of required improvements. 
(1)  The amount of such deposit shall represent 100 percent of the estimated construction costs of completion of the required improvements, as determined by the city engineer. The applicant shall be responsible for providing a cost estimate to the city engineer for review. Said cost to include necessary design costs, permitting fees, construction costs, contingencies and other such customary project costs. 
(2)  Such deposit shall comply with all statutory requirements and shall be satisfactory to the city attorney as to form, sufficiency and manner of execution as set forth in this chapter. 
(3)  The city shall not accept dedication of required improvements, nor release or reduce the guaranty or surety until: 
a.  The applicant has certified in a manner approved by the city attorney that the improvements have been completed and are free and clear of all liens and encumbrances; 
b.  The city engineer has certified that the required improvements have been satisfactorily completed as required by this chapter; and 
c.  The applicant shall have provided certification indicating that construction of required improvements has been satisfactorily completed. This certification shall include evidence of inspections as required by the land division act and by the city. 
(4)  The guaranty or surety shall be reduced and refunded upon actual completion of required improvements and then only to the ratio that the completed improvement bears to the total improvements for the plat. In no event shall the surety be reduced below ten percent of the principal amount before final acceptance of all improvements by the council. 
(5)  Building permits shall not be issued for construction of buildings or structures as regulated by the state construction code, except for signs permitted by chapter 46, pertaining to zoning, or structures authorized by the city council, prior to the completion and acceptance of the requirement improvements. 
(6)  One Mylar copy, after state approval, and three paper copies of the final plat shall be provided to the city. 
(7)  Two paper copies of as-built plans for all completed improvements shall be provided to the city. 
(f)  A certificate shall be signed by the city clerk signifying approval by the city council of any plat, subdivision or site condominium. The certificate shall show the date of the meeting at which the approval was made and the date the certificate was signed by the city clerk. The certificate shall also include a statement that the plat was reviewed by the city council and that the plat, subdivision or site condominium is in conformance with all applicable provisions of the act. 
(g)  If the plat, subdivision or site condominium is rejected, the clerk shall give the reasons, in writing, as set forth in the minutes of the meeting, to the proprietor. 
(Prior Code, § 5.521; Ord. No. 98-09, 7-20-1998; Ord. No. 2000-01, 2-21-2000; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 10, 8-2-2010) 
Secs. 20-99-20-124. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - REVIEW STANDARDS 

Sec. 20-125. - Preliminary plat approval. 
    The commission shall recommend, and the council shall grant, preliminary plat approval upon making the following findings: 
(1)  The proposed lots comply with the requirements of chapter 46, pertaining to zoning. 
(2)  The streets within the plat provide adequate and safe circulation and sufficient consideration has been given to providing access to adjacent streets and parcels within the same or compatible zoning district. 
(3)  The streets are designed and lots are oriented based on section 20-127 to: 
a.  Ensure safety of access to any street; 
b.  Provide the most efficient and safe traffic flow; 
c.  Take best advantage of existing topography; and 
d.  Preserve existing natural features and amenities. 
(4)  The plat conforms to the requirements of this chapter and any other applicable federal, state or local laws or ordinances. 
(Prior Code, § 5.525; Ord. No. 98-09, 7-20-1998) 
Sec. 20-126. - Final plat approval. 
    The council shall grant final plat approval upon making the following findings: 
(1)  The final plat substantially conforms to the preliminary plat approval, including any conditions placed on such approval. 
(2)  All required reviews have been completed and appropriate documentation of such approvals has been provided. 
(3)  The plat conforms to the requirements of this chapter and any other applicable federal, state or local laws or ordinances. Approval of the plat, subdivision or site condominium shall not relieve the applicant from complying with applicable state or federal laws. 
(4)  All monuments have been installed by the surveyor in compliance with section 125 of Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.125). 
(5)  Construction of all improvements as required by this chapter has been completed and financed, or a satisfactory form of surety submitted in accordance with the provisions of section 20-98(e). 
(Prior Code, § 5.526; Ord. No. 98-09, 7-20-1998) 
Sec. 20-127. - Required improvements; engineering and design. 
(a)  Streets and access. 
(1)  Street requirements. All streets within the plat must be paved if intersecting other paved streets, or within 300 feet of a paved street, and improvements to streets adjoining the plat shall be constructed to the standards required by the city. Streets under the jurisdiction of the city shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Rights-of-way. 
Street Type Right-of-Way Width 
(in feet) Local and collector 66 Arterial 
and industrial 100 Cul-de-sac 60 
(Radius)  
b.  Minimum pavement width. 
Pavement 
Location Pavement Width 
(in feet) Curb face to curb face 28 Cul-de-sac 40 
(Radius)  
c.  Pavement. Pavement construction shall comply with the street design and construction requirements of the city for the appropriate classification of street. Street standards may be varied by the city engineer based on traffic studies. 
d.  Intersection angles. Intersections shall be constructed as close to 90-degree angles as possible, but in no case shall be less than 45 degrees. 
e.  Centerline radii minimums. 
Street Type Radii 
Minimums 
(in feet) Major (collector and arterial) 300 Local 100  
f.  Street grade. Street grades shall be not less than 0.4 percent or greater than six percent. 
g.  Curbing. Standard six-inch curbs shall be required for all streets and shall not be less than 24 inches in width. 
Exception: streets classified by the city engineer as rural streets. 
(2)  Offsetting streets. Offsetting streets that are not offset a minimum of 125 feet must be approved by the city engineer. 
(3)  Block and cul-de-sac length. Block lengths shall not exceed 1,320 feet in length and culs-de-sac shall not exceed 800 feet in length unless waived by the city council, after receiving a recommendation from the planning commission and city engineer, based on a finding that at least one of the following conditions exists: 
a.  Natural features preclude. That topography or other significant natural features preclude access to any other public street or adjoining property on which a public street may be constructed. Such significant natural features shall be clearly identified and marked on the proposed plat. 
b.  Inefficient use of land. That not allowing a longer block or cul-de-sac would result in inefficient use of land. Alternate development plans demonstrating that no other development is feasible shall be submitted by the applicant and reviewed by the planning commission and city council prior to confirming this finding. 
(b)  Utilities. 
(1)  Public sanitary sewer and water shall be requested in accordance with articles III and IV of chapter 42 by the applicant to serve the proposed plat where an appropriate connection is available. Cost of utility extensions and method of payment shall be determined by the city council. 
(2)  Where such connections are not available, the applicant may either pay for the extension of such utilities or provide suitable private utility systems, subject to the approval of the city or other appropriate agency. 
(3)  Public sanitary sewer and water and all other utilities shall be installed underground at the applicant's expense. All such utilities shall be placed within private easements provided to such utility agencies, or within dedicated public rights-of-way, as permitted by the agencies governing such rights-of-way. 
(4)  All utilities shall conform to the construction standards of the city and be buried. 
(c)  Sidewalks. 
(1)  Sidewalks shall be required along all street frontage unless the council determines that sidewalks are impractical due to physical or location limitations of the property. 
(2)  Sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet wide, one foot from the private property line, and shall be constructed according to the standards of the city. 
(d)  Storm drainage. 
(1)  All storm drainage systems shall be designed, constructed and maintained to the standards required by the city and any applicable city ordinance. 
(2)  The applicant shall comply with the soil erosion and sedimentation control act and provide a general description of the manner in which they intend to meet the requirements of the act. 
(e)  Existing natural features and amenities. 
(1)  To the extent possible, existing natural features and amenities shall be preserved within the plat. 
(2)  Where such features are required to be removed or altered as part of the plat design, the applicant shall certify to the council that: 
a.  The properties of the land which is part of the plat are such that no practical alternative design is possible that would preserve such features. 
b.  The removal or alteration of such features will not have an adverse effect on adjacent properties with respect to drainage, views or other significant environmental effect. 
c.  The removal or alteration of such features complies with all applicable federal, state and local laws and ordinances. 
d.  Financial considerations alone are not used to justify the removal or alteration of such features. 
(3)  Street trees must be planted and maintained in conformance with section 16-25. 
(f)  Street lighting. Street lighting shall be installed in accordance with the standards of the city engineer. 
(g)  Lots. 
(1)  Every lot shall have frontage on a public, dedicated street with the exception of lots complying with section 46-670, and each lot shall meet the requirements of chapter 46, as to lot width and area. 
(2)  Every lot shall contain sufficient buildable area to permit construction of a principal building in compliance with the requirements of chapter 46, pertaining to zoning. 
(3)  Where, after receiving an opinion from the city manager, city engineer, city planner or zoning administrator, there is a question about sufficient buildable area due to factors such as soil formations, flood conditions, high-water table or similar conditions, the planning commission shall withhold approval of such lots until a sufficient buildable area is provided. 
(4)  Corner lots in land divisions located within any residential zoning district shall be platted at least ten feet wider than the minimum width required by chapter 46. 
(5)  Excessive lot depth in relation to width shall be avoided. A depth-to-depth ratio not to exceed 3:1 shall be the maximum allowance. 
(6)  Through lots as defined in section 46-4 shall be discouraged. 
(Prior Code, § 5.527; Ord. No. 98-09, 7-20-1998; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 11, 8-2-2010) 
Chapter 22 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan Penal Code, MCL 750.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Public place defined. 
    The term "public place," as used in this chapter, shall mean any street, alley, park, public building, any place of business or assembly open to or frequented by the public and any other place which is open to the public view, or to which the public has access. 
(Prior Code, § 9.101) 
Sec. 22-2. - Disorderly persons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in an illegal occupation or business. 
(Prior Code, § 9.102(4); Ord. No. 2000-17, 1-15-2001; Ord. No. 2004-14, 6-21-2004) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.167(1)(d). 
Sec. 22-3. - Loitering-Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly loiter in or about a place where an illegal occupation or business is being conducted. 
(Prior Code, § 9.102(10); Ord. No. 2000-17, 1-15-2001; Ord. No. 2004-14, 6-21-2004) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.167(1)(j). 
Sec. 22-4. - Same-To solicit employment of legal services at public buildings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in or about a police station, police headquarters building, county jail, hospital, court building, or other public building or place for the purpose of soliciting employment of legal services or the services of sureties upon criminal recognizances. 
(Prior Code, § 9.102(11); Ord. No. 2000-17, 1-15-2001; Ord. No. 2004-14, 6-21-2004) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.167(1)(k). 
Sec. 22-5. - Same-About public buildings, entrances, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to linger, loiter, sit or stand in any public room on any hotel, motel, office or business establishment in the city, or any courthouse corridor, or any bus or railroad station, or the hallways or entrances of any public building, or to use any public room for business or social purposes, or to obstruct the entrance to any business establishment, without so doing for some lawful purpose, or if contrary to the expressed wish of the owner, lessee, managing agent, or person in control or charge of the building or premises. The term "public rooms," for the purpose of this section, includes any basement, attic, building entrance or doorway, lobby, hallway, stairway, mezzanine, elevator, foyer, public rest room, sitting room, or any other place used in common by the public, tenants, occupants, guests or customers, and situated in a hotel, motel, office building, public building or business establishment in the city. 
(b)  This section is punishable as a municipal civil infraction. 
(Prior Code, § 9.109; Ord. No. 95-21, 8-7-1995) 
Secs. 22-6-22-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AFFECTING GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS 

Sec. 22-29. - Establishing a police line or clear zone. 
    When any fire, accident, explosion, parade, calamity, public disturbance or other occasion causes or may cause persons to collect on the public streets, sidewalks, parks or other areas of the city, any public safety official, either police or fire, may establish a police line or clear zone as may be necessary for the purpose of affording a clearing for: 
(1)  The protection of persons and property; 
(2)  Police officers, firefighters, emergency medical personnel and other personnel performing operations in accordance with their duties; 
(3)  The exclusion of the public from the vicinity of a fire, accident, explosion, calamity or other emergency or public disturbance; 
(4)  The passage of a parade; 
(5)  The movement of traffic; 
(6)  The security of any scene and the protection of evidence; or 
(7)  The maintenance of public peace and safety at any event or disturbance. 
(Prior Code, § 9.220; Ord. No. 2005-11, 6-6-2005) 
Sec. 22-30. - Violating a police line or clear zone. 
    Any person who shall knowingly cross any such line, knowingly enter into any such zone, or remain in any such zone after being requested to leave, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Residents of the zone and other persons may be authorized to cross such lines or be within such zones by public safety officials, so long as their safety is not jeopardized and their presence does not interfere in the performance of duties by emergency personnel and public safety officials. 
(Prior Code, § 9.221; Ord. No. 2005-11, 6-6-2005) 
Secs. 22-31-22-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 

Sec. 22-49. - Window peeping. 
    No person shall be found looking into the windows or doors of any house, apartment or other residence in the city in such a manner as would be likely to interfere with the occupant's reasonable expectation of privacy and without the occupant's express or implied consent. 
(Prior Code, § 9.102(3); Ord. No. 2000-17, 1-15-2001; Ord. No. 2004-14, 6-21-2004) 
State Law reference- Such person deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(c). 
Secs. 22-50-22-71. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 

Sec. 22-72. - Vandalism. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, injure or deface, or in any manner interfere with or hinder the use of, any public building or any public property whatsoever. 
(Prior Code, § 9.108) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief generally, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 22-73. - Tampering with CATV system. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to connect to, or disconnect from, or otherwise tamper in any manner with, any transmission cable or service connection thereof, of any community antenna television (CATV) system in order to obtain signals or impulses therefrom, without the express prior approval of the operator of the CATV system; or to make any increase in the number of individual service outlets above the num 
ber previously contracted for with the operator of the CATV system; without the express prior approval of the operator of the CATV system. 
(Prior Code, § 9.110) 
Sec. 22-74. - Trespass generally. 
    Any person who shall willfully enter upon the lands or premises of another without lawful authority, after having been forbidden so to do by the owner or occupant, agent or servant of the owner or occupant, or any person being upon the land or premises of another, upon being notified to depart therefrom by the owner or occupant, the agent or servant of either, who without lawful authority neglects or refuses to depart therefrom, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Prior Code, § 9.122) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.522. 
Sec. 22-75. - Cemetery hours. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be in Maple Hill Cemetery during the nighttime, except by permission of the superintendent of the cemetery. 
(Prior Code, § 9.111) 
Secs. 22-76-22-93. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 

Sec. 22-94. - Disorderly persons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be guilty of disorderly conduct or of any conduct tending toward a breach of the peace. The causing or making of any unnecessary loud noise or shouting or yelling shall be considered disorderly conduct. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any violent, tumultuous, offensive or disorderly conduct by threatening, traducing, quarreling, challenging to fight, fighting, or by using obscene, offensive profane or unseemly language likely to cause annoyance, disturbance or vexation of a person of ordinary sensibilities, or likely to provoke another to fight. 
(Prior Code, § 9.102; Ord. No. 2000-17, 1-15-2001; Ord. No. 2004-14, 6-21-2004) 
Sec. 22-95. - Intoxication in public place; public disturbance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who is intoxicated in a public place, to either endanger directly the safety of another person or of property or act in a manner that causes a public disturbance. 
(Prior Code, § 9.102(5); Ord. No. 2000-17, 1-15-2001; Ord. No. 2004-14, 6-21-2004) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.167(1)(e). 
Sec. 22-96. - Begging, panhandling and soliciting alms by accosting or forcing oneself upon the company of another. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accosting means approaching or speaking to a person in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon the person or property in his immediate possession. 
    Ask, beg or solicit means, without limitation, the spoken, written or printed word or such other acts as are conducted in furtherance of the purpose of obtaining alms. 
    Forcing oneself upon the company of another means continuing to request, beg or solicit alms from a person after that person has made a negative response, blocking the passage of the individual addressed, touching the solicited person without their consent, following behind, ahead or alongside a person who walks away from a beggar after being solicited, begging in a group of two or more, using profane or abusive language, or otherwise engaging in conduct which could reasonably be construed as intended to compel or force a person to accede to demands. 
    Panhandling/panhandle means any solicitation made in in person upon any street, public place or park in the city, in which a person requests an immediate donation of money or other gratuity from another person and includes, but is not limited to seeking donations by vocal appeal or for music, singing or other street performance; and where the person being solicited receives an item of little or no monetary value in exchange for a donation, under circumstances where a reasonable person would understand that the transaction is in substance a donation. However, panhandling shall not include the act of passively standing or sitting nor performing music, singing or other street performance with a sign or other indication that a donation is being sought, without any vocal request other than in response to an inquiry by another person. 
(b)  Exceptions. Except when performed in the manner, time and locations set forth in subsections (c), (d) and (e) of this section, it shall not be unlawful to ask, beg, solicit or panhandle money or other things of value. 
(c)  Location. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or panhandle money or other things of value: 
(1)  On private property if the owner, tenant or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; 
(2)  Within 20 feet of the entrance to, or exit from, any public toilet facility; 
(3)  Within 20 feet of an automatic teller machine; provided that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance to, or exit from, the automated teller machine facility; 
(4)  In any public transportation vehicle or bus, or within 20 feet of any bus stop or taxi stand; 
(5)  From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic or parked on a public street or alley; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the owner or passenger of such vehicle; 
(6)  From any person who is waiting in line for entry to any building, public or private, including any residence, business or athletic facility; 
(7)  Within 20 feet of the entrance to, or exit from, a building, public or private, including any residence, business or athletic facility; 
(8)  Within 20 feet of an outdoor eating area; 
(9)  On a street or within an area that has been closed by city council resolution for a parade, street fair or other special event; 
(10)  Within 20 feet of any persons engaged in a recreational activity in any city park, including but not limited to fishing and picnicking; or 
(11)  Any clear vision area as defined under MCL 257.674a. 
(d)  Time. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or panhandle money or other things of value on any day after sunset, or before sunrise. 
(e)  Manner. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or panhandle money or other things of value by: 
(1)  Accosting another; or 
(2)  Forcing oneself upon the company of another. 
(Prior Code, § 9.102(8); Ord. No. 2000-17, 1-15-2001; Ord. No. 2004-14, 6-21-2004; Ord. No. 2016-02, § 1, 3-21-2016) 
State Law reference- A person found begging is deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(h). 
Sec. 22-97. - Jostling or roughly crowding people prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be found jostling or roughly crowding people unnecessarily in a public place. 
(Prior Code, § 9.102(12); Ord. No. 2000-17, 1-15-2001; Ord. No. 2004-14, 6-21-2004) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.167(1)(l). 
Sec. 22-98. - Peace and tranquility to be maintained. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make, or cause, permit or allow to be made, upon a public way, or in close proximity to a public way so as to be distinctly and loudly audible upon such public way, any noise of any kind by crying, calling or shouting, or by means of any whistle, rattle, bell, gong, clapper, hammer, drum, horn, hand organ, mechanically operated piano, other musical instrument, wind instrument, mechanical device, radio, phonograph, sound amplifying or other similar electronic device in such manner as to destroy the peace and tranquility of the surrounding neighborhood; provided, that this prohibition does not apply to bands and orchestras or similar musical bodies utilized as part of a parade or similar authorized musical production. 
(Prior Code, § 9.102(13); Ord. No. 2000-17, 1-15-2001; Ord. No. 2004-14, 6-21-2004) 
Sec. 22-99. - Assemblage of noisy or riotous persons prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any noise or riotous persons to assemble in any house owned, occupied or controlled by him, to the annoyance or disturbance of the neighborhood and the public peace. 
(b)  This section is punishable as a municipal civil infraction. 
(Prior Code, § 9.103; Ord. No. 95-21, 8-7-1995) 
Sec. 22-100. - Disturbing the peace. 
    Any person who shall make or excite any disturbance or contention in any tavern, store or grocery, manufacturing establishment or any other business place or in any street, lane, alley, highway, public building, grounds or park, or at any election or other public meeting where citizens are peaceably and lawfully assembled, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Prior Code, § 3.7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.170. 
Sec. 22-101. - Religious worship; disturbance prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or disquiet any congregation or assembly met for religious worship by making any noise or making any profane discourse or engaging in any indecent behavior in or near the place of worship as to disturb the solemnity of the meeting. 
(b)  This section is punishable as a municipal civil infraction. 
(Prior Code, § 9.104; Ord. No. 95-21, 8-7-1995) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.169, 752.525. 
Sec. 22-102. - Public peace; disturbance prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to act in a violent, boisterous, turbulent, quarrelsome, indecent, or disorderly manner, or to commit any act, or to do anything to disturb the good order, peace and dignity of the city, its inhabitants or other persons. 
(b)  This section is punishable as a municipal civil infraction. 
(Prior Code, § 9.105; Ord. No. 95-21, 8-7-1995) 
Sec. 22-103. - Language or gestures causing public disorder. 
    A person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor if, with the purpose of causing public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, or if his conduct is likely to cause public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, such person willfully uses abusive or obscene language or makes an obscene gesture to any other person when such words, by their very utterance, inflict injury or tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace and invade the right of others to pursue their lawful activities. 
(Prior Code, § 9.105; Ord. No. 95-21, 8-7-1995) 
Sec. 22-104. - Loitering on public property. 
    Any person who shall loiter, wander, stand or remain idle in a public street, sidewalk, park or public place so as to hinder or impede or attempt to hinder or impede the passage of pedestrians or vehicles shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. For purposes of this section, the term "loiter" shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concept of spending time idly; to be dilatory; to linger; to stay; to saunter; to delay; or to stand around. For purposes of this section, the term "public place" shall mean any place to which the general public has access and a right of resort for business, entertainment or for lawful purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2013-09, § 2, 9-3-2013) 
Secs. 22-105-22-134. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS 

Sec. 22-135. - Indecent conduct prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in indecent or obscene conduct in a public place. 
(Prior Code, § 9.102(6); Ord. No. 2000-17, 1-15-2001; Ord. No. 2004-14, 6-21-2004) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.167(1)(f). 
Sec. 22-136. - Prostitution. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any act of prostitution. 
(Prior Code, § 9.102(2); Ord. No. 2000-17, 1-15-2001; Ord. No. 2004-14, 6-21-2004) 
Sec. 22-137. - Knowingly loitering. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to be found loitering knowingly in a house of ill fame or prostitution or place where prostitution or lewdness is practiced, encouraged or allowed. 
(Prior Code, § 9.102(9); Ord. No. 2000-17, 1-15-2001; Ord. No. 2004-14, 6-21-2004) 
Sec. 22-138. - Gambling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any common gambling house, or gaming room, or to permit on any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him apparatus or a device used for gaming or gambling, or to use such apparatus or device or to assist any other person to use the same for gaming or gambling purposes. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession any policy or pool slips, tickets, checks, or any paper which is marked additionally with any kind of notation indicating any form of gambling, and the possession of such writing or device shall constitute prima facie evidence of intention to use the same for gambling. 
(Prior Code, § 9.107) 
State Law reference- Gambling, MCL 750.301 et seq. 
Secs. 22-139-22-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY 

Sec. 22-160. - Weapons; use restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm, gun, pistol, revolver, airgun, air pistol, or any other instrument producing a like effect and noise, or shoot a bow and arrow within the city limits, except in lawful defense of his person or property. 
(b)  This prohibition shall not apply to the discharge of firearms at a firing range, approved by the chief of the city police department, by members of the city police department, and any other persons approved by the chief of the city police department; provided the times and restrictions pertaining to the use of the firing range as set forth by the chief of the city police department are complied with. 
(Prior Code, § 9.106) 
State Law reference- Authority to prohibit discharge of firearms, MCL 123.1104. 
Secs. 22-161-22-188. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES ON SCHOOL PROPERTY 

Sec. 22-189. - District properties closing hours. 
    All school properties, buildings, beaches, playgrounds, and recreational areas and all other places owned by the city school district shall be closed every day from 12:00 midnight until 7:00 a.m., and it shall be unlawful for any person to enter or use said premises for any purpose during such times unless duly authorized by the city area public schools. This section shall not apply to any activity conducted by the city school district. 
(Prior Code, § 9.116) 
Sec. 22-190. - Unauthorized uses. 
    No properties, buildings, beaches, playgrounds, recreational areas or any other lands owned by the school district shall be used for camping, sleeping or other unauthorized activity except that use as would be necessary in general operation of the district. 
(Prior Code, § 9.117) 
Sec. 22-191. - Motor vehicles. 
    Unauthorized operation of motor vehicles of any type, on school properties, is prohibited unless specifically allowed by action of the city board of education. 
(Prior Code, § 9.118) 
Sec. 22-192. - Trespass on school property. 
    Any person, not being a student in good standing or a person attending a forum or program open to the general public, who shall be on any property or land owned or operated by the city area public schools, or any agency thereof, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code, unless said person is on school business or there at the request of the school or on behalf of a student sponsored program or educational curriculum or other legitimate school business. 
(Prior Code, § 9.119) 
Secs. 22-193-22-222. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - OFFENSES PERTAINING TO UNDERAGE PERSONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 22-223-22-252. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CURFEW[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Curfew for minors, MCL 722.751 et seq. 

Sec. 22-253. - Under 16; schedule and times. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 16 years to loiter in or on any of the streets, alleys or parks in the city after the hour of 9:15 p.m. from September 1 to June 1, inclusive, of each year, and from June 2 to August 31, inclusive, of each year after the hour of 10:15 p.m. 
(Prior Code, § 9.211) 
Sec. 22-254. - Exceptions. 
    The following activities shall be exempt from the curfew requirements of this division where the minor is: 
(1)  Accompanied by his parent, guardian or any other person 21 years of age or older who is authorized by a parent as the caretaker for the minor; 
(2)  On an errand, without any detour or stop, at the direction of his parent, guardian or caretaker; 
(3)  In a vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)  Engaged in a certain employment activity, or going to or from employment, without any detour or stop; 
(5)  Involved in an emergency; 
(6)  On the sidewalk that abuts the minor's or the next door neighbor's residence, if the neighbor has not complained to the police; 
(7)  In attendance at an official school, religious or other recreational activity sponsored by the city, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or from such an activity, without any detour or stop, and supervised by adults; 
(8)  Exercising First Amendment rights, including free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly. 
Sec. 22-255. - Parental responsibility. 
    It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having custody, care or control of any minor under 16 years of age to allow or permit any such child, ward or other person under such age while in his control and custody to loiter upon any street, alley or park in said city during the time prohibited in section 22-253. 
(Prior Code, § 9.212) 
Sec. 22-256. - Juvenile arrest procedure. 
    Any person under the age of 17 years who shall violate any of the provisions of this division shall, upon apprehension, be taken to the juvenile division of the probate court and dealt with in such manner as prescribed by the laws of this state. 
(Prior Code, § 9.213) 
Sec. 22-257. - Penalty. 
    Any violation of this division by persons 17 years of age or older shall be punishable as a municipal civil infraction. 
(Prior Code, § 9.214; Ord. No. 95-21, 8-7-1995) 
Secs. 22-258-22-277. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - USE OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES BY MINORS AT OPEN HOUSE PARTIES 

Sec. 22-278. - Purpose. 
(a)  The city council finds that the unregulated use of alcoholic liquors and controlled substances by minors creates social problems in many communities throughout the United States, including the city. 
(b)  The use of alcoholic liquors and controlled substances by minors can have devastating effects on not only the minors but on the public at large, including, but not limited to, injuries caused by vehicles operated by persons under the influence of alcoholic liquors and controlled substances. 
(c)  The city council further finds that adults could significantly alleviate alcoholic liquor and controlled substance problems by assuming the responsibility for open house parties which occur at their residences. 
(Prior Code, § 9.123; Ord. No. 85-18, 12-16-1985) 
Sec. 22-279. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult means a person 17 years of age or older. 
    Alcoholic liquor means any spirituous, vinous, malt, or fermented liquor, liquids and compounds, whether or not medicated, proprietary, patented, and by whatever name called, containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume which are fit for use for beverage purposes as defined and classified by the commission according to alcoholic content. 
    Control means any form of regulation or dominion including a possessory right. 
    Controlled substance means a controlled substance as defined now or hereafter by the Public Acts of the State of Michigan. Currently, such controlled substances are defined by article 7 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.7101 et seq.). 
    Minor means a person not legally permitted by reason of age to possess alcoholic liquor pursuant to MCL 436.1703. 
    Open house party means a social gathering of persons at a residence other than the owner or those with rights of possession or their immediate family members. 
    Residence means a home, apartment, condominium or other dwelling unit and includes the curtilage of such dwelling unit. 
(Prior Code, § 9.124; Ord. No. 85-18, 12-16-1985) 
Sec. 22-280. - Adult responsibility. 
(a)  No adult having control of any residence shall allow an open house party to take place at said residence if any alcoholic liquor or controlled substance is possessed or consumed at said residence by any minor where the adult knew or reasonably should have known that an alcoholic liquor or controlled substance was in the possession of or being consumed by a minor at said residence, and where the adult failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the possession or consumption of the alcoholic liquor or controlled substance at said residence. 
(b)  Exception. The provisions of this section shall not apply to legally protected religious observances or legally protected educational activities. 
(Prior Code, § 9.125; Ord. No. 85-18, 12-16-1985) 
Chapter 24 - OIL, GAS AND MINERAL WELLS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of oil and gas wells, MCL 324.61001 et seq. 

Sec. 24-1. - Business and occupation deemed hazardous. 
(a)  The business and occupation of drilling and exploring for, producing, obtaining, transporting, gathering, and storing of oil, gas, petroleum, hydrocarbons and mineralized waters within the corporate limits of the city is a hazardous and dangerous business and occupation and it is necessary that said businesses and occupations be regulated, controlled and limited for the purpose of providing protection for the lives, health, welfare, and safety of the citizens of the city, and of the public generally, and for the protection of property from the danger of fire, explosion, gas, leaks, nuisances, groundwater pollutions, and other hazards injurious to the public peace, health, welfare, and safety. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be the minimum requirements for the preservation of the peace, health, safety, and welfare of the citizens, and compliance with all terms thereof shall not be deemed to relieve any person from any duty imposed by law to use all necessary care and take all necessary precautions for the safeguarding of the public peace, health, and safety, and the rights of any individual or group of individuals, and it shall be the duty of any person drilling, operating or maintaining any well to use all necessary care and take all precautions of whatsoever nature which shall be reasonably necessary under the circumstances to protect the public or the rights of any part thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 9.280; Ord. No. 81-08, 8-31-1981) 
Sec. 24-2. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, association of persons, syndicate, combination, corporation or estate to drill, explore, or commence to drill any well for oil, gas, petroleum or other hydrocarbons in any area within the corporate limits of the city or for the secondary recovery thereof, or to extend, or to deepen one already drilled, without first having applied for and received a permit therefor by the authority of the city council in accordance with the terms of this chapter and the applicant having complied with the terms of this chapter and the applicant having complied with the requirements of this section. In addition, a complete permit application and signed permit from the state shall be included. 
(b)  The producer or owner of any proposed well shall fill out, sign, and file an application in writing therefor upon forms provided by the city clerk accompanied with a filing fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time. 
(c)  The application shall contain the following information as to: 
(1)  The location where the proposed well is to be drilled, and attached thereto shall be a map, plat, or survey of the area to be drilled and the location of the well on said spacing, and the exact location of tanks, flowlines, fences, and details incident to the proposed location. The location of said well shall be stated in relation to established street or plat lines, or in lieu thereof, quarter section lines. 
(2)  The names of the owners of the oil, gas and minerals in the unit to be drilled and the consent in writing of the owner of the drill site to be drilled consenting to the drilling of the well on his, or their property, and the property damage settlement agreement shall be attached. 
(3)  The duly certified, sworn or photostatic copies of all leases for the discovery and removal of oil and gas and ratifications thereof, executed by the owners of the oil or gas in such area, owned or controlled by the application, and also a statement of other leases, insofar as they are known, setting forth the names of the lessors and lessee of each such respective lease. In the event said lease or leases shall by express terms and provisions provide for and consent to such drilling, the consent therein provided shall qualify for and be deemed sufficient compliance with the requirements for consent of lessor as herein provided. 
(4)  Bond as set forth in subsection (e) of this section shall also accompany and be filed with such application. 
(5)  It shall be made to appear, either upon the face of such application, or by other satisfactory proof, that the applicant who is filing for permission to drill a well for oil, gas and minerals is the owner, or has under his control, either as owner or lessee, or both, all interests in said area to be drilled, and if said application shows compliance with the requirements set forth by this chapter, the council may grant the permit without further notice. 
(d)  If said application shows that the applicant is not the owner, or does not have under his control for drilling purposes as owneror lessee, or both, or assignee under a valid agreement, the area which is proposed to be drilled, or in the event the city council shall for other cause shown refuse an application for a permit, then the city council shall fix a time and place for the hearing thereon and enter the same of record. The applicant shall thereupon cause notice of such hearing, on forms to be furnished by the city clerk, to be given by certified mail to all known owners of the lands within the area to be drilled, and the lessees thereof under valid oil and gas leases of record, addressed to their last known place of residence, not less than seven days prior to the date of the hearing. In addition thereto, said applicant shall publish a notice in a public newspaper published and printed in the city, at least five days prior to the hearing and shall post notices thereof in not less than five public places in the city at least five days prior to said hearing. 
(1)  Such notices shall be dated and contain a description of the property affected, state the time, date, place, and purpose of the hearing. An affidavit of the applicant or someone in his behalf shall be executed showing such mailing, posting, and publishing, and shall be prima facie evidence of the compliance with all the requirements of this chapter for notice and the same shall be filed with the city clerk at or prior to the time set for the hearing. 
(2)  The city council shall at the time and place designated in said notice, or to some later date to which the hearing may be adjourned, conduct the hearing upon the application to drill such well for oil, gas, petroleum or other hydrocarbons. At such hearing, all persons interested may be heard. All witnesses shall be examined under oath and documentary evidences may be introduced. The city council shall keep a record of its proceedings as regards the granting of said permits and the hearings thereon and may require the pooling of properties, or parts thereof, within the area or areas to be drilled in accordance with orders and regulations of the state department of natural resources, and shall make any and all reasonable requirements necessary to protect and safeguard the rights of all parties affected by such order. The city council shall have the power, and reserves the authority, to refuse any application for a permit when the location of the proposed well, considering the character and value of the permanent improvements erected in or adjacent to the area in question and the use to which the land and surroundings are adapted, or for sanitary reasons, the drilling of any oil or gas well might be disadvantageous or hazardous to the city and its inhabitants. It shall be discretionary with the city council to grant or deny a permit in any industrial area or in any area in which residences or other buildings may have been erected, when the granting of said permit might create fire hazards or otherwise be destructive of property interests. 
(e)  The application shall also be accompanied by, and no permit for the drilling of any well shall be issued without a duly executed bond given by the applicant, as principal and guaranteed by a bonding or indemnity company authorized to do business in the state as surety, running to the city for the benefit of the city and all persons concerned, conditioned that if the permit be granted, the applicant and his or its assigns will comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter in the drilling and operation of the proposed well, and that the applicant will pay and discharge any liability imposed by law for damages on account of injury to property, either public or private, or bodily injury, or death, received or suffered by any person or persons resulting from the drilling operation or maintenance of any well or of any structures, equipment, machinery, lines or appurtenances thereto used in the drilling and/or producing operation, and/or clearing from the area to be drilled all litter, machinery, derricks, trenches, pits, debris, oil, and other substances used or created therefrom in the drilling or producing operations. The maximum total liability under said bond, for loss or damage, either to persons or property shall be in the amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time total liability or an amount such as deemed necessary by the city council. Said bond shall be made for a term of not less than one year, and a new bond shall be furnished at the expiration of any existing bond if the operation of such well covered thereby is continued beyond said period. If at the time of such renewal all drilling on such well has been completed, the amount of total liability under such bond may be reduced to an amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time. In the case any bond required herein shall lapse or become void for any reason whatsoever, the permit issued under the terms of this chapter shall immediately become inoperative and void until a new bond shall have been provided and filed with the city clerk or the existing bond reinstated in full force, and such well and the drilling operations and production thereunder shall be shut down, suspended, and discontinued until the filing of such new bond or reinstatement of such existing bond. Each and every bond, both original and renewal, shall be approved by the city council and shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(f)  All applicants for a permit to drill a well for oil or gas shall, at the time of making such application pay to the city clerk the sum as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time as an application fee to apply on the cost and expenses of the administration of this chapter, of which amount, a certain amount shall be refunded if the application is not granted and the balance retained. All of said sum shall be retained if the permit is granted. 
(g)  On January 2, after the completion of any producing well, and annually thereafter, so long as the production of oil, gas or minerals continues from such well, the owner of each of said wells shall pay to the city clerk a sum as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time to apply on the cost and expense of the administration of this chapter. 
(h)  When a permit shall have been issued as provided in this section, the same shall terminate and become inoperative without any action on the part of the city council unless, within 60 days from the date of issue, actual drilling of the well shall have been commenced, and after the drilling of a well shall be commenced the cessation of drilling for 60 days, or the cessation of production of oil or gas from the well after production shall have commenced, shall operate to terminate and cancel the permit and the well shall be considered as abandoned for all purposes of this chapter and it shall be unlawful thereafter to continue the operation, reworking or drilling of such well without the issuance of another permit upon a new application as herein provided. Provided, however, there may be granted additional periods of 60 days each, but not to exceed three in number, upon application by the permittee to the city council requesting such extension if good and reasonable cause is shown. 
(i)  A copy of the permit shall be forwarded by the city clerk to the supervisor of wells of the state, and a copy thereof posted at the location of each well permitted. 
(j)  The chief of the fire department, or such other employee of the city who shall be designated the city supervisor of wells, is hereby granted the authority to suspend the permit for the operation of any well where any of the provisions of this chapter, or any amendments thereto, are violated, which said suspension of any such license shall be effective until such time as said person shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(k)  Before suspending any such license the city clerk shall cause written notice to be served upon the permittee advising such permittee that a public hearing will be held before the city council at a time and place fixed in said notice to determine whether the permit held by such permittee shall be suspended. Five days notice of the time of the hearing shall be given. 
(l)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any well during any period in which the permit covering the operation of such well is suspended. 
(m)  The provisions of this section shall in no way limit or interfere with the enforcement of the penalties for the violation of ordinances generally, but shall be cumulative and in addition to such penalties. 
(Prior Code, § 9.281; Ord. No. 81-08, 8-31-1981) 
Sec. 24-3. - Location and spacing of wells. 
(a)  Drilling units shall conform to those units established under the rules, regulations, and orders of the state department of natural resources. No permit shall be granted in the absence of some affirmative action by such department. 
(b)  No permit shall be granted and no well shall be located unless the location is at least 330 feet from an adjoining property line, unless such adjoining property shall be communitized with the property so located, and unless the location is at least 660 feet from an adjacent or adjoining well. 
(c)  The drilling location of any well shall, in no instance, be nearer than 300 feet from any street line, alley line or railroad right-of-way line. 
(d)  The drilling location of any well, shall in each instance, be at least 300 feet from the location of any building existent at the time of commencement of actual drilling operations. 
(e)  No well shall be located within any of the streets, alleys, or rights-of-way of the city, or located as to block, encumber or obstruct the use of any street, alley, or right-of-way in the drilling or producing operations, except by previous consent having been given by the city council and in such event for the limited period only. 
(f)  No well, as defined herein, shall be located within 2,000 feet of any producing public water supply water well. 
(g)  In the event it shall appear from the application on file, and after notice and hearing thereon as provided in section 24-2(d), that the limitations and restrictions herein established will preclude drilling and operating in an area which should reasonably be drilled and operated, the city council is authorized and empowered to make exceptions from such limitations and restrictions set forth in subsections (b) through (d) of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 9.282; Ord. No. 81-08, 8-31-1981) 
Sec. 24-4. - Production and operation. 
(a)  In the drilling for oil and gas, petroleum, or other hydrocarbons and the production thereof, the permittee shall use every precaution, equipment, and materials in accordance with approved methods of operation, drilling, and production to stop and prevent waste of oil, gas, petroleum, or hydrocarbons and to protect residents and properties of the city and shall equip and operate the well, and all allied equipment therewith, with equipment of standard design and quality as commonly used in the petroleum industry, and all such equipment shall be installed and maintained in accordance with standard drilling, producing and operating practices. 
(b)  From the time of placing any equipment, derricks, riggings or other drilling equipment or supplies until the time of removal thereof upon final completion of the well, each location of a well shall be completely surrounded by fencing in order to completely surround and enclose the drilling operation. Such fence shall be supported by steel posts and shall be woven wire of not less than 14-gauge, with mesh of not less than two inches nor more than four inches and shall be at least six feet high. 
(c)  All flares used within the corporate limits of the city shall be at least 300 feet from any building or structure and shall extend at least 20 feet above the surface of the ground. All such flares shall be of approved construction and shall be installed in a pit of sufficient depth and area to provide adequate drainage and safety precautions. All flares are to be equipped with fulltime pilot lights. The location of all such flares shall be completely enclosed by steel fencing of the same type and dimensions as herein provided for enclosing the drilling operation. 
(d)  The city reserves the right to refuse production of an oil or gas well above one grain of H 2 S concentration per 100 cubic feet in the corporate city limits, with the city council empowered to make exceptions after a public hearing. In all cases production equipment for H 2 S designated wells shall be located 1,320 feet or more, outside the corporate city limits. 
(e)  In all cases where an oil and gas well is being drilled in a residentially zoned area, the drilling operator shall use a portable slush pit, with a 20-mil lined pit. All slush and waste shall be deposited therein and removed outside the corporate limits of the city for disposal upon completion. No open pits for the disposal of slush, brine, or salt water shall be permitted at any time after the completion of the drilling operation in any area in the city. 
(f)  Except in an emergency, at least six hours before any mud or fluid in any well shall be removed, swabbed, bailed, or otherwise cleaned out, the chief of the fire department or other officer in charge shall be served with written notice of the hour that such cleaning, swabbing, or bailing may be hazardous to the safety of life or property, and the chief or other person so designated is hereby authorized to stop or prevent such cleaning, swabbing, or bailing until such time as conditions become favorable. It shall be unlawful to commence the testing of any well from sundown until sunrise, or during a period when gas may settle on the ground, or during any electrical storm. Before bringing in a well, all of the control devices, including master gates and safety valves shall be tested and shall be in good working order and shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 9.283; Ord. No. 81-08, 8-31-1981) 
Sec. 24-5. - Equipment. 
(a)  All equipment and materials used in the drilling of a well for the discovery of oil, gas, petroleum, and hydrocarbons shall be modern and shall be kept in good working condition at all times. All drilling rigs shall be of the rotary type only to the production state of said well, and thereafter cable tool equipment may be used for swabbing, cleaning and completing a well. All drilling rigs shall be anchored or secured in accordance with good drilling practices as specified in state oil and gas regulations. 
(b)  When cable tool equipment shall be used for completion of the well, it shall be equipped with a master gate, and the rig shall be equipped with lubricators while the well is being tested, swabbed or bailed. Such master gate shall have a remote control located at least 20 feet from the well bore. 
(c)  Each well shall have a separator capable of caring adequately for the production of the well, and both oil and gas, without spraying oil through the separator vent line. No gas shall be produced, wasted, or allowed to escape through a separator vent line from any well. When it shall appear that an explosive mixture of gas may be accumulating, the designated city officer in charge may require that the well be shut down until such gas is dissipated. 
(d)  No tanks or other facility for the storage of oil, gas, petroleum, brines or hydrocarbons produced from any well within the corporate limits of the city shall be kept, erected, or maintained within the corporate limits of the city except in areas zoned industrial where such storage tanks shall be allowed. Such storage tanks shall be erected outside the corporate limits of the city except for such installation in industrially and agriculturally zoned areas, and shall be connected to a well by pipes or pipelines by the nearest possible route. No tank shall be located nearer than 300 feet from any building or industrial structure. 
(e)  All pipes or pipelines leading to or from a well location shall be buried underground to a minimum depth of 30 inches below the normal surface of the ground and before a pipeline is layed in, down, or along a street, the person or company laying such line shall obtain a permit from the director of public works and shall pay to the city the sum as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time for the laying of such pipeline, and in the construction of such lines, the permittee shall pay to the city for all damages sustained by it by reason of the construction of said lines and the repair of any streets crossed by or extending along such pipelines in an amount sufficient to place the city property in the same condition as prior to the laying of said lines, and shall pay to the city for any and all damage incident to the taking up or repairing of said lines thereafter. No concrete or asphalt paving shall be cut or disturbed unless absolutely necessary, and then only under the supervision of the city; and the permittee shall be required to replace and repair the paving at his own expense and under the supervision of the director of public works of the city. 
(f)  No rigs or heavy machinery used in connection with the drilling operation of wells in the city shall be moved over the city streets from one location to another without obtaining a city permit therefor from the city street superintendent, which permit shall set forth the streets which may be used for that purpose. 
(g)  All flowing wells shall be properly equipped with well-head connections designed for a minimum of 4,000 psi testing pressure and 2,000 psi working pressure or working pressure in excess of bottom hold pressures, or whichever is greater. 
(h)  All pumping units, compressors, motors, production equipment, etc., installed shall be electrically operated and properly housed, with minimum noise and so enclosed as to protect the public therefrom. All electrical switches and electrical outlets shall be enclosed and be explosion proof. 
(i)  All buildings and structures shall be constructed or manufactured in compliance with the state construction code. 
(Prior Code, § 9.284; Ord. No. 81-08, 8-31-1981) 
Sec. 24-6. - Restoration; abandonment. 
(a)  Upon the discontinuance of the drilling operations or the production of any oil or gas from any working well, said well shall be abandoned and plugged under the supervision of the supervisor of wells of the state. 
(b)  All plugging operations on all dry or abandoned wells shall commence within 60 days after drilling production operations shall have ceased and shall be carried through forthwith to completion. 
(c)  The permittee shall fill all pits and cellars with dirt and level off the surface and restore the same, as nearly as possible, to its condition prior to the commencement of drilling operations. All equipment shall be removed from the location promptly and all machinery, tanks, pipes, and tools shall be transported from the well site and embankments leveled and the surface of the land restored to its former condition with the appropriate top soil added if needed with seeding and mulching for cover. 
(d)  The permittee shall not permit any undue accumulation of slush, salt water or oil, or any other offensive or dangerous substances to accumulate, and upon the completion of the well, shall remove and eliminate all debris and eliminate all conditions and circumstances contributing to the hazard of fire or pollution. 
(Prior Code, § 9.285; Ord. No. 81-08, 8-31-1981) 
Sec. 24-7. - Deepening; reworking. 
    In the event any person, owner, producer, or operator shall desire to deepen or extend a well below the depth of its original objective, he shall make application to the city council in the same manner as an original application for a permit. In such deepening and reworking, the same precautions shall be complied with as herein set forth. In the event an application for reworking or deepening shall be filed within 60 days from the date of the completion or abandonment of the original drilling operation, the fee shall be required as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time. 
(Prior Code, § 9.286; Ord. No. 81-08, 8-31-1981) 
Sec. 24-8. - Compliance and abatement. 
(a)  The chief of the fire department, the supervisor of wells, and other employees of the city, having been authorized, shall have the right and privilege at any time to enter upon the premises covered by any permit issued under this chapter for the purpose of making inspections thereof to determine if the requirements of this chapter are being complied with, or the requirements of any other ordinance of this city relating to the health, welfare, and safety of persons within the city. 
(b)  All drilling operations for the discovery of oil, gas, petroleum, or other hydrocarbons, and mineral wells, equipping of wells, producing and marketing of oil, gas, petroleum and hydrocarbons, plugging of wells and all material used and work done in connection with the exploring for, producing and marketing petroleum and mineral products shall be in conformity with all state and federal laws and statutes and rules and regulations pertaining thereto and particularly with the statutes of the state and the regulations of the supervisor of wells of the state. 
(c)  Words used in this chapter, unless otherwise defined, shall be the common meaning of such words as generally understood in the oil and gas industry, unless the content herein clearly implied otherwise. 
(d)  Each and every violation of this chapter whether denominated as unlawful or as an offense, or not, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se and may be abated by appropriate proceedings. 
(e)  Any violation of any term of this chapter, whether denominated as unlawful or as an offense, or not, shall be deemed a misdemeanor and any person, either for himself or by an agent, servant, or employee who shall violate any provision of this chapter, or who shall be engaged in any work, or the erection of any structure, derrick, drilling rig, tank, pipeline, or other drilling apparatus which shall be in violation of any provision of this chapter, and any person, agent, or employee engaged in such violation shall upon conviction be so punished therefor. 
(Prior Code, § 9.287; Ord. No. 81-08, 8-31-1981) 
Chapter 26 - PARKS, RECREATION AND WATERWAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to operate recreation and playgrounds, MCL 123.51 et seq.; playground equipment safety act, MCL 408.681 et seq.; watercraft and marine safety, MCL 324.80101 et seq.; local regulation, MCL 324.80110 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Park hours. 
    All city parks, beaches, playgrounds, parkways, recreation areas and all other places open to the public shall be closed every day from 11:00 p.m. until 7:00 a.m., except all ball diamonds shall be closed every day from 12:00 midnight to 6:00 a.m., and it shall be unlawful for any person to enter or use said premises for any purpose during such times. This section shall not apply to Kenwood Boat Launch or to any activity conducted by the city pertaining to the health, safety and welfare of its citizens. 
(Prior Code, § 3.1) 
Sec. 26-2. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  No parks, beaches, playgrounds, parkways, recreation areas or any other land open to the public shall be used for camping, sleeping or otherwise, except regular and ordinary recreational use of beaches, parks and playgrounds. 
(b)  This section is punishable as a municipal civil infraction. 
(Prior Code, § 3.2; Ord. No. 95-21, 8-7-1995) 
Sec. 26-3. - Parades and demonstrations. 
    No person shall sponsor or participate in any parade or demonstration without first obtaining a permit from the city clerk upon approval of the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 3.3) 
Sec. 26-4. - Stationing watercraft. 
(a)  No boats or watercraft shall be beached, docked, tied or anchored on or near the shoreline of Lake Cadillac adjacent to city owned property or areas open to the public except in areas authorized by the city manager. 
(b)  This section is punishable as a municipal civil infraction. 
(Prior Code, § 3.4; Ord. No. 95-21, 8-7-1995) 
Sec. 26-5. - Commercial uses. 
    No commercial or business enterprise, exhibit or any other use shall be made of any park, street or other area open to the public without first obtaining permission from the city manager. 
(Prior Code, § 3.5) 
Sec. 26-6. - Fireworks display. 
    No person shall sponsor, conduct or participate in any fireworks display or exhibition without first obtaining permission from the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 3.6) 
State Law reference- Fireworks, MCL 750.243a et seq. 
Sec. 26-7. - Public swimming areas. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to swim, bathe or enter the waters of Lake Cadillac at any area other than Kenwood Beach, unless other areas shall be approved for swimming by the city council. This prohibition shall not apply to Mitchell State Park or use of private property by the owner or by consent of the owner. 
(b)  This section is punishable as a municipal civil infraction. 
(Prior Code, § 3.8; Ord. No. 95-21, 8-7-1995) 
Sec. 26-8. - Alcoholic liquors. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly possess any alcoholic liquor in or on any park, beach, playground, parkways, recreation areas or any other place open to the public, except Kenwood Park on the north side of North Boulevard, except as approved by the city council. 
(b)  This section is punishable as a municipal civil infraction. 
(Prior Code, § 3.9; Ord. No. 95-21, 8-7-1995) 
State Law reference- Possessing or consuming alcoholic liquor on public highway or park, place of amusement, or publicly owned area, MCL 436.1915. 
Sec. 26-9. - Open fires. 
    No person shall light any fire or burn any material in or on any park, beach, playground, parkways, recreation areas or any other place open to the public except in Kenwood Park northerly of North Boulevard and at any other locations which may subsequently be so designated by the placing of picnic grills thereon by approval of the city manager. 
(Prior Code, § 3.10) 
Sec. 26-10. - Motor vehicles. 
    No motor vehicle which is self-propelled, including but not limited to, automobiles and motorcycles, shall be operated or driven on, across or over any city park, beach, playground, parkways, recreation areas or other lands open to the public, unless the same be driven on an existing and improved roadway open to the public for purposes of vehicular traffic. 
(Prior Code, § 3.11) 
Sec. 26-11. - Docking of boats. 
(a)  No boat shall be docked between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. at any city dock. 
(b)  The registered owner of a boat shall be liable for a violation of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  This section is punishable as a municipal civil infraction. 
(Prior Code, §§ 3.12, 3.13; Ord. No. 87-14, 8-3-1987; Ord. No. 95-21, 8-7-1995) 
Secs. 26-12-26-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TIME CAPSULE 

Sec. 26-41. - Official opening. 
    The time capsule buried in 1976, in Kenwood Heritage Park shall remain in its present burial site and shall be removed on July 4, 2076, by official representatives of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 3.20) 
Sec. 26-42. - Tampering unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, attempt to remove, desecrate, damage, destroy or otherwise tamper with the time capsule buried in 1976, in Kenwood Heritage Park. This prohibition also applies to the sign and marker identifying the location of said time capsule. 
(Prior Code, § 3.21) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief generally, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Secs. 26-43-26-72. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ICE FISHING STRUCTURES 

Sec. 26-73. - Owners identifying sign. 
    No person shall place any fishing shanty or structure upon the ice of Lake Cadillac within the city limits unless the name and address of owner, thereof is painted with oil paint in block letters no less than two inches square upon the structure itself, above the door and on the bottom exterior of said structure. It shall not be sufficient compliance with this section for the owner to place such name upon separate wood, metal or plastic and attach the same to said structure. 
(Prior Code, § 3.26) 
Sec. 26-74. - Deadline for removal from ice. 
    Every fishing shanty or structure placed upon the ice of said lake shall annually be removed therefrom by the owner, or his agent, on or before 12:00 midnight of March 16. 
(Prior Code, § 3.27) 
Sec. 26-75. - Destruction of structures on ice or shore prohibited. 
    No fishing shanty or other structure placed upon said ice shall be intentionally burned or destroyed in any way upon the ice or the shore of said lake within the city. 
(Prior Code, § 3.28) 
Sec. 26-76. - Resposibility for removal of debris. 
    In the event that any fishing shanty or structure shall be burned or destroyed upon the ice or shore of said lake, the owner or owners of the shanty or structure shall be responsible for the removal of the remains and the cleaning of any debris left from the burning or destruction of such shanty or structure. Such cleaning and removal shall be finished within 48 hours of the burning or destruction. 
(Prior Code, § 3.29) 
Sec. 26-77. - Deadline for removal from lake shore. 
    Every fishing shanty or structure shall be removed from the lake shore or privately owned lands and from all public land and public rights-of-way on or before April 1 of each year; however, this section shall not be construed to mean that the owner of a lake lot may not leave his own fishing shanty or structure upon his own property. 
(Prior Code, § 3.30) 
Sec. 26-78. - Structures in violation; impounding. 
    In the event that any fishing shanty or structure shall be found upon the ice or lake shore without the name and address of the owner thereof painted thereon, as provided in section 26-73, or in the event that any such shanty or structure is not removed from the lake, or from the shore, of from private or public land or right-of-way, within the time limit in section 26-77, then in any such case, such shanty may be removed by the city and impounded and shall not be released until due proof of ownership is presented by the owner of said shanty and payment of the costs of removal and impounding. In the event no person presents proof of ownership within 30 days, the city may sell or otherwise dispose of said shanty without liability to the owner thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 3.31) 
Sec. 26-79. - Responsibility for damages. 
    In the event that any fishing shanty or structure is burned or destroyed upon the ice or shore, the owner thereof shall be responsible in damages to any person injured or damaged by the remains or debris. 
(Prior Code, § 3.32) 
Sec. 26-80. - Inspection of lake ice. 
    It shall be the duty of the police department of the city, between March 1 and March 15 of each year, to make an inspection, locate and chart each fishing shanty or structure upon the lake. 
(Prior Code, § 3.33) 
Secs. 26-81-26-103. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DOCK AND BOAT HOIST USE ADJACENT TO PUBLIC LANE, PARKS AND PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 26-104. - Storage and removal. 
    No dock, boat or hoist or related appurtenances shall be stored upon any public land, park or public right-of-way. This section does not exclude the proper use, placement or construction of a dock, boat hoist, any mooring devices, or appurtenances relating to, upon or in waters adjacent to public lands (parks and public access sites excluded) or public rights-of-way identified in this article (including, but not limited to, the "lakefront" identified in section 26-109) between 10:00 a.m. on the second Saturday in the month of April and November 15 of each year. All structures and appurtenances that are placed adjacent to public lands must not be placed closer than 25 feet to any private lot line, and shall be removed by the owner or his agent on or before November 15 of each year, and remain off until 10:00 a.m. on the second Saturday in the month of April each year. 
(Prior Code, § 3.34; Ord. No. 88-03, 3-21-1988; Ord. No. 95-21, 8-7-1995; Ord. No. 2005-05, 3-7-2005; Ord. No. 2007-16, § 1, 1-7-2007; Ord. No. 2016-11, § 1, 9-19-2016) 
Sec. 26-105. - Identification. 
    No person shall place any dock or boat hoist upon or in the waters of Lake Cadillac adjacent to public land or public rights-of-way identified in this article, unless the name and address of the owner thereof is permanently affixed to said structure with each letter and numeral forming the name and address, being not less than two inches in height. If it is a dock, such identification shall be placed on the side of the dock section located closest to the shoreline. 
(Prior Code, § 3.35; Ord. No. 88-03, 3-21-1988; Ord. No. 2005-05, 3-7-2005) 
Sec. 26-106. - Maintenance. 
    It shall be the responsibility for the owner of said dock or boat hoist to maintain the structure in a safe and attractive state of repair. No dock or similar structure shall be wider than six feet as measured at the shoreline. Those structures found not to be in compliance with this section shall be removed at the direction of the public works department. 
(Prior Code, § 3.36; Ord. No. 88-03, 3-21-1988; Ord. No. 2005-05, 3-7-2005) 
Sec. 26-107. - Distance to other structures. 
    No dock or boat hoist shall be placed or constructed in such a manner so as to interfere with the normal and customary use of other similar structures in the immediate area. Such placement shall be subject to any state laws, rules or regulations. No docks shall be closer than 25 feet to each other as measured from the centerline of each dock. 
(Prior Code, § 3.37; Ord. No. 88-03, 3-21-1988; Ord. No. 2005-05, 3-7-2005) 
Sec. 26-108. - Structures in violation. 
    In the event that any structure shall be found in violation of this article, such structure may be removed by the city and impounded and shall not be released until due proof of ownership is presented by the owner or owners thereof, and payment of the cost of removal and storage. In the event no person presents proof of ownership within 30 days, the city may sell or otherwise dispose of said structure without liability to the owner thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 3.38; Ord. No. 88-03, 3-21-1988) 
Sec. 26-109. - Plat of Kenwood Park. 
    C. A. Hofmeister's Plat of Kenwood Park, known as the Plat of Kenwood Park, has lakefront which is that portion of the Plat of Kenwood Park located between North Boulevard and the shore of Lake Cadillac. Public docking may be allowed along such lakefront, subject to the other provisions of this article and to the following specific provisions: 
(1)  No docks shall be allowed within 25 feet of the west line of the Plat of Kenwood Park. 
(2)  Any such dock usage shall be subject to state laws, rules and regulations, if any. 
(3)  The placement of such docks shall be for seasonal structures to facilitate private, noncommercial recreational use of the water, and the city is not intending to offer services to the public. 
(4)  Should a state marina permit be required, such marina permit shall be obtained at the sole cost of the users of the docks. 
(5)  Docking will be open to all members of the public. Any dock usage shall be at the sole risk of the user. 
(6)  There shall be a limit of one dock per household. 
(7)  Placement of docks in the water, which are not intended to be used, but which are placed primarily for the purpose of excluding other docks shall be prohibited. 
(8)  The public's privilege to place a dock is on a "first come, first serve" basis. Spaces will be numbered by the North Boulevard Marina Association. There will be permit applications placed at each space. The application will be picked up by the user and delivered to the North Boulevard Marina Association for registration each year. The user will then have until June 1 of each year to place a dock at the reserved space. 
(9)  The roads and lots lines in the Plat of Kenwood Park running perpendicular to North Boulevard shall be deemed to end at the northern edge of North Boulevard, and not at the shore of Lake Cadillac. 
(Prior Code, § 3.39; Ord. No. 88-03, 3-21-1988; Ord. No. 2005-05, 3-7-2005; Ord. No. 2007-16, § 2, 1-7-2007) 
Sec. 26-110. - Specified road endings. 
(a)  There are a limited number of road endings along Lake Cadillac which will be made available for nonexclusive docking. These areas have had historical dock usage. The roadways, which are the subject of this section include and are limited to: 
(1)  Kentucky Avenue; 
(2)  Iowa Avenue; 
(3)  Illinois Avenue; 
(4)  Indiana Avenue; 
(5)  Ohio Avenue; 
(6)  Forest Lane; 
(7)  Lake Drive; 
(8)  Newland Street; 
(9)  Vick Street; 
(10)  Alexander Street; and 
(11)  Alice Street. 
(b)  Subject to all of the provisions of this article and specifically this subsection, such road endings may have one nonexclusive dock, except there may be a total of two nonexclusive docks where Forest Lane and Lake Drive intersect with Lake Cadillac, because it is adjacent to a city park and has a wider right-of-way, which shall be usable by the public on a nonexclusive basis as follows: 
(1)  Docking at such road endings shall be on a first come, first serve basis. 
(2)  Any such dock usage shall be subject to state laws, rules and regulations, if any. 
(3)  Should a state marina permit be required, such marina permit shall be obtained at the sole cost of the users of the docks. 
(4)  Docking will be open to all members of the public. Any dock usage shall be at the sole risk of the user. 
(5)  Docking shall be subject to all of the other provisions of this article, excluding the provisions regarding the Kenwood Park Plat. 
(6)  Docking may not be allowed at any other road endings without a public hearing being held before the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 3.40; Ord. No. 88-03, 3-21-1988; Ord. No. 2005-05, 3-7-2005; Ord. No. 2006-01, 2-6-2006) 
Sec. 26-111. - Enforcement. 
    The city shall have the power to enforce this article and all the provisions contained within it. Should there be any dispute regarding placement or timing of placement of docks, boat hoists, mooring devices or appurtenances, the city will use all available information to make a final determination regarding such placement; for instance, who placed their dock first in a certain location. 
(Prior Code, § 3.41; Ord. No. 2005-05, 3-7-2005) 
Sec. 26-112. - Violation. 
    This article is punishable as a municipal civil infraction. 
(Prior Code, § 3.42; Ord. No. 2005-05, 3-7-2005) 
Chapter 30 - SECONDHAND GOODS AND PRECIOUS METALS AND GEM DEALERS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1-30-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Licensing of secondhand and junk dealers, MCL 445.401 et seq., 445.471 et seq.; junkyards near highways, MCL 252.201 et seq.; pawnbroker licensing, MCL 446.201 et seq., 445.471 et seq. 

Sec. 30-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dealer in secondhand goods means any person who deals in, buys, sell, or receives secondhand goods, except those described in the definition of junk dealer in this section; provided, however, that nothing contained in this article shall apply to persons engaged in the business of buying, selling, or exchanging secondhand motor vehicles. 
    Junk dealer means any person who buys, sells, or receives at a fixed location within the city what is commonly called junk, such as rags, paper, old rope, bags, bagging, iron, brass, copper, tin, zinc, aluminum, scrap or discarded metal, bottles or other articles whether manufactured or in process of manufacture, or raw material, whether old or new. 
    Junk gatherer means any person not a licensed junk dealer and not in the exclusive employ of a licensed junk dealer, who buys, sells, receives or picks up the articles mentioned in the definition for junk dealer in this section in a cart, wagon or other vehicle. 
    Secondhand goods means any goods, wares, merchandise, or other personal property acquired or purchased after having been acquired at retail and used by another. Such term shall not include motor vehicles, trailers, junk, or precious items as defined in by Public Act No. 95 of 1981 (MCL 445.481 et seq.). 
(Prior Code, § 7.55; Ord. No. 93-09, 5-17-1993) 
Sec. 30-20. - Licenses required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of a junk dealer, junk gatherer or dealer in secondhand goods and merchandise, within the corporate limits of the city, without having first obtained a license therefor. No such license shall be granted without the approval of the city clerk nor until the applicant has complied with all of the requirements in section 30-21 that are applicable to him. 
(Prior Code, § 7.56; Ord. No. 93-09, 5-17-1993) 
Sec. 30-21. - Requirements for licenses. 
    Every applicant shall: 
(1)  Comply with all zoning, building, property maintenance, and fire prevention code requirements. 
(2)  Furnish their fingerprints for the noncriminal files of the police department. 
(3)  File with the application the written consent of 60 percent of the owners of residential property within a radius of 500 feet of the property where such business is to be conducted. 
(4)  Applicants for a junk dealer's license whose business is to be conducted on a vacant lot or in a partially enclosed structure shall enclose such property with a properly painted tight-board fence at least eight feet high and erected in such a manner as to obliterate the premises from view, which fence shall at all times be properly maintained by the licensee. 
(5)  Every applicant shall execute an agreement that the license issued to him may be suspended or revoked at the will of the city clerk for any violations of this Code. 
(Prior Code, § 7.57; Ord. No. 93-09, 5-17-1993) 
Sec. 30-22. - Exemption for internet dropoff store. 
    An internet dropoff store in compliance with the following conditions is exempt from licensure as a secondhand dealer or junk dealer under this article: 
(1)  Has a fixed place of business within this city, except that he exclusively transacts all purchases or sales by means of the internet and the purchases and sales are not physically transacted on the premises of that fixed place of business. 
(2)  Has the personal property or other valuable thing available on a website for viewing by photograph, if available, by the general public at no charge, which website shall be searchable by zip code or state, or both. The website viewing shall include, as applicable, serial number, make, model, and other unique identifying marks, numbers, names, or letters appearing on the personal property or other valuable thing. 
(3)  Maintains records of the sale, purchase, consignment, or trade of the personal property or other valuable thing for at least two years, which records shall contain a description, including a photograph, if available, and, if applicable, serial number, make, model, and other unique identifying marks, numbers, names, or letters appearing on the personal property or other valuable thing. 
(4)  Provide the police department with any name under which it conducts business on the website and access to the business premises at any time during normal business hours for purposes of inspection. 
(5)  Within 24 hours after a request from the police department, provide an electronic copy of the seller's or consignor's name, address, telephone number, driver license number and issuing state, the buyer's name and address if applicable, and a description of the personal property or other valuable thing as described in subsection (3) of this section. The provision of information shall be in a format acceptable to the police department but shall at least be in a legible format and in the English language. 
(6)  Provide that payment for the personal property or other valuable thing is executed by means of check or other electronic payment system, so long as the payment is not made in cash. No payment shall be provided to the seller until the item is sold. 
(7)  Immediately remove the personal property or other valuable thing from the website if the police department determines that the personal property or other valuable thing is stolen. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 445.401. 
Sec. 30-23. - License to designate location of business. 
    Each license issued under this chapter, except a junk gatherer's license, shall designate the particular place in the city where such business may be conducted and it shall be unlawful for any licensee to engage in such business at any place other than that designated in such license. No person, except the licensee, directly or indirectly shall do business or be permitted to do business under said license. 
(Prior Code, § 7.58; Ord. No. 93-09, 5-17-1993) 
Sec. 30-24. - Junk gatherer's license. 
    The junk gatherer's license shall be in such form as to contain the photographs, signatures and fingerprints of the licensee. It shall be unlawful for such licensee to remove, deface or obliterate anything contained in such license. 
(Prior Code, § 7.59; Ord. No. 93-09, 5-17-1993) 
Sec. 30-25. - License revocation. 
    Any license issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked as provided in article II of chapter 10. In addition, any of the following acts committed by the licensee or his agents or employees shall be the cause for license suspension and revocation: 
(1)  Purchase and acquisition of stolen property. 
(2)  Failure to comply with the provisions of any federal, state, or municipal tax or revenue law. 
(3)  Fraudulent misrepresentation in connection with the sale of any junk or secondhand goods. 
(Prior Code, § 7.60; Ord. No. 93-09, 5-17-1993) 
Sec. 30-26. - Post name in conspicuous place; records kept available for inspection. 
(a)  A secondhand dealer or junk dealer shall post in a conspicuous place in or upon its place of business a sign having its name and occupation. 
(b)  A secondhand or junk dealer shall keep a separate book or other record open to inspection by the police department, in which shall be written or entered in the English language at the time of the purchase or exchange of any article, a description of the article, the name, description, fingerprint, operator's or chauffeur's license or state identification number, registration plate number, and address of the person from whom the article was purchased and received, and the day and hour when the purchase or exchange was made as well as the location from which the item was obtained, if applicable. Each entry shall be numbered consecutively. 
(c)  No entry in such record shall be erased, obliterated, altered or defaced. 
(Prior Code, § 7.61; Ord. No. 93-09, 5-17-1993) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 445.404. 
Sec. 30-27. - Time limit for purchase retention; tagging; record; exceptions. 
(a)  The articles purchased or exchanged shall be retained by the purchaser for at least 15 days before disposing of them, in an accessible place in the building where the articles are purchased and received. A tag shall be attached to the articles in some visible and convenient place, with the number written thereupon, to correspond with the entry number in the book or other record. 
(b)  The purchaser shall prepare and deliver on Monday of each week to the chief of police, before 12:00 noon, a legible and correct copy written in the English language from the book or other record, containing a description of each article purchased or received during the preceding week, the hour and day when the purchase was made, and the description of the person from whom it was purchased. The statement shall be verified by the person subscribing his name thereto. 
(c)  This section does not apply to old rags, waste paper, and household goods except radios, televisions, record players, and electrical appliances and does not require the purchaser to retain articles purchased from individuals, firms, or corporations having a fixed place of business after those articles shall have been reported. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 445.405. 
Sec. 30-28. - Person without business place; retention of goods, record for police. 
    If the purchaser or receiver, by exchange or otherwise, as described in this article, is a peddler or goes about with a wagon to purchase or obtain by exchange or otherwise, any of such articles, and does not have a place of business in a building, he need not retain such articles for 15 days before selling them, provided on Monday of each week he files with the chief of police a report showing the place of business of the person to whom such sale was made; a copy of the record required by such section to be kept in a separate book of the articles purchased or received during the preceding week, including a description of such articles sold, to whom sold and his place of business. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 445.406. 
Sec. 30-29. - Prohibited purchases. 
    No licensee shall purchase, receive or take any article mentioned in this article from any person under the age of 17 years, or from any intoxicated person. No person shall purchase or receive by sale, barter or exchange or otherwise, any article mentioned in this article from any person between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., nor from any person who is at the time intoxicated or from an habitual drunkard or from any person known by said secondhand dealer or junk dealer to be a thief or any associate of thieves or receiver of stolen property or from any person he has reason to suspect of being such. 
(Prior Code, § 7.62; Ord. No. 93-09, 5-17-1993) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 445.407. 
Sec. 30-30. - Encroachment on street. 
    No licensee shall make use of any street, sidewalk, or public right-of-way, or any other property not in his possession, or under his control, for the storage or display of junk or other secondhand goods. 
(Prior Code, § 7.63; Ord. No. 93-09, 5-17-1993) 
Sec. 30-31. - Access to premises. 
    The public safety director, fire marshal, zoning administrator, and the members of the police force shall at all times have free access to all parts of the premises, for which a license has been granted and refusal to give such access by any person on such premises shall be a sufficient cause to work a forfeiture of said license. 
(Prior Code, § 7.64; Ord. No. 93-09, 5-17-1993; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 12, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 30-32. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article, shall, upon determination thereof, be punished in accordance with article II of chapter 10, pertaining to licenses and permits and section 1-14. 
(Prior Code, § 7.65; Ord. No. 93-09, 5-17-1993) 
Secs. 30-33-30-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Precious metal and gem dealer act, MCL 445.481 et seq. 

Sec. 30-53. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agent or employee means a person who, for compensation or valuable consideration, is employed either directly or indirectly by a dealer. 
    Dealer means a person that in whole or in part, engages in the ordinary course of repeated and recurrent transactions of buying or receiving precious items from the public in the city. 
    Gold means elemental gold having an atomic weight of 196.967 and the chemical element symbol of Au, whether found by itself or in combination with its alloys or any other metal or substance. 
    Jewelry means an ornamental item made of a material that includes a precious gem. 
    Platinum means elemental platinum having an atomic weight of 195.09 and the chemical element symbol of Pt, whether found by itself or in combination with its alloys or any other metal. 
    Precious gem means a diamond, alexandrite, ruby, sapphire, opal, amethyst, emerald, aquamarine, morganite, garnet, jadeite, topaz, tourmaline, turquoise, or pearl. 
    Precious item means jewelry, a precious gem, or an item containing gold, silver, or platinum. The term "precious item" does not include the following: 
(1)  Coins, commemorative medals, and tokens struck by, or on behalf of, a government or private mint; 
(2)  Bullion bars and discs of the type traded by banks and commodity exchanges; 
(3)  Items at the time they are purchased directly from a dealer registered under this chapter, a manufacturer, or a wholesaler who purchased them directly from a manufacturer; 
(4)  Industrial machinery or equipment; 
(5)  An item being returned to or exchanged by the dealer from whom the item was purchased and which is accompanied by a valid sales receipt; 
(6)  An item which is received for alteration, redesign, or repair in a manner that does not substantially change its use and returned directly to the customer; 
(7)  An item which does not have a jeweler's identifying mark or a serial mark and which the dealer purchases for less than $5.00; 
(8)  Scrap metal which contains incidental traces of gold, silver, or platinum which are recoverable as a byproduct; 
(9)  Jewelry which a customer trades for other jewelry having a greater value, and which difference in value is paid by the customer. 
    Silver means elemental silver having an atomic weight of 107.869 and the chemical element symbol of Ag, whether found by itself or in combination with its alloys or any other metal. 
(Prior Code, § 7.70; Ord. No. 93-09, 5-17-1993) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, MCL 445.482. 
Sec. 30-54. - Certificate of registration. 
(a)  A dealer shall not conduct business in the city unless the dealer has first obtained a certificate of registration from the city clerk. 
(b)  A dealer shall apply to the city clerk for a certificate and shall complete an application form, disclosing the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and thumbprint of the applicant. 
(2)  The name and address under which the applicant does business. 
(3)  The name, address and the thumbprint of all agents or employees of the dealer. Within 24 hours after hiring a new employee, the dealer shall forward to the local police agency the name, address and thumbprint of the new employee. 
(c)  Upon receipt of an application as described in subsection (b) of this section, the public safety director shall grant permission to issue a certificate of registration as long as the applicant is not disqualified from being a dealer under the provisions of Public Act No. 95 of 1981 (MCL 445.481 et seq.). 
(d)  The dealer shall pay an annual fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time. 
(Prior Code, § 7.71; Ord. No. 93-09, 5-17-1993) 
State Law reference- Certificate of registration, MCL 445.483. 
Sec. 30-55. - Exemption for internet dropoff stores. 
    An internet dropoff store in compliance with the following conditions is exempt from registration as a dealer under this article: 
(1)  Has a fixed place of business within this state except that he exclusively transacts all purchases or sales by means of the internet and the purchases and sales are not physically transacted on the premises of that fixed place of business. 
(2)  Has the personal property or other valuable thing available on a website for viewing by photograph, if available, by the general public at no charge, which website shall be searchable by zip code or state, or both. The website viewing shall include, as applicable, serial number, make, model, and other unique identifying marks, numbers, names, or letters appearing on the personal property or other valuable thing. 
(3)  Maintains records of the sale, purchase, consignment, or trade of the personal property or other valuable thing for at least two years, which records shall contain a description, including a photograph, if available, and, if applicable, serial number, make, model, and other unique identifying marks, numbers, names, or letters appearing on the personal property or other valuable thing. 
(4)  Provide the police department with any name under which it conducts business on the website and access to the business premises at any time during normal business hours for purposes of inspection. 
(5)  Within 24 hours after a request from the police department, provide an electronic copy of the seller's or consignor's name, address, telephone number, driver license number and issuing state, the buyer's name and address if applicable, and a description of the personal property or other valuable thing as described in subsection (3) of this section. The provision of information shall be in a format acceptable to the police department but shall at least be in a legible format and in the English language. 
(6)  Provide that payment for the personal property or other valuable thing is executed by means of check or other electronic payment system, so long as the payment is not made in cash. No payment shall be provided to the seller until the item is sold. 
(7)  Immediately remove the personal property or other valuable thing from the website if the police department determines that the personal property or other valuable thing is stolen. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 445.483. 
Sec. 30-56. - Revocation of certificate of registration. 
    The city clerk shall, upon ten days' written notice to the dealer, send by first class mail to the business address listed on the application, revocation of the certificate of registration issued under the provisions of this article when the dealer has been convicted, under Public Act No. 95 of 1981 (MCL 445.481 et seq.), of a misdemeanor within one year of the date of revocation or of a felony within five years of the date of revocation. In cases where an agent or employee of a dealer has been so convicted, the city clerk shall notify the dealer in writing, sent by first class mail to the dealer's business address. The dealer shall not permit an agent or employee who has been so convicted to operate as a dealer in the dealer's business. No dealer shall operate his business during any time when his license and/or certificate of registration has been revoked. 
(Prior Code, § 7.72; Ord. No. 93-09, 5-17-1993) 
Sec. 30-57. - Recordkeeping. 
(a)  A dealer shall maintain a permanent record of each transaction, on record of transaction forms provided for in subsection (f) of this section, legibly written in ink in the English language. Each record of transaction form shall be filled out in quadruplicate by the dealer or agent or employee of the dealer. One copy of the form shall go to the police department pursuant to subsection (c) of this section; one copy shall go to the customer; and one copy shall be retained by the dealer pursuant to subsection (e) of this section. At the time a dealer receives or purchases a precious item, the dealer or the agent or employee of the dealer shall ensure that the following information is recorded accurately on a record of transaction form: 
(1)  The dealer certificate of registration number. 
(2)  A general description of the precious item or precious items received or purchased, including the type of metal or precious gem. In the case of watches, the description shall contain the name of the maker and the number of both the works and the case. In the case of jewelry, all letters and marks inscribed on the jewelry shall be included in the description. 
(3)  The date of the transaction. 
(4)  The name of the person conducting the transaction. 
(5)  The name, date of birth, driver's license number or state personal identification card number, and street and house number of the customer, together with a legible imprint of the right thumb of the customer, or if that is not possible, of the left thumb or a finger of the customer. However, the thumbprint or fingerprint shall only be required on the record of transaction form retained by the dealer. The thumbprint or fingerprint shall be made available to the police department during the course of a police investigation involving a precious item or items described on the record of transaction. After a period of one year from the date of the record of transaction, if a police investigation concerning a precious item or items described on the record of transaction has not occurred, the dealer and the police department holding a copy of the record of transaction shall destroy, and not keep a permanent record of, the record of transaction. A dealer who goes out of business or changes his business address to another local jurisdiction either within or out of this state shall transmit the records of all transactions made by the dealer within one year before his closing or moving, to the police department. 
(6)  The price to be paid by the dealer for the precious item. 
(7)  The form of payment made to the customer; check, money order, bank draft, or cash. If the payment is by check, money order, or bank draft, the dealer shall indicate the number of the check, money order, or bank draft. 
(8)  The customer's signature. 
(b)  The record of each transaction shall be numbered consecutively, commencing with the number one and the calendar year. 
(c)  Within 48 hours after receiving or purchasing a precious item, the dealer shall send a copy of the record of transaction form to the police department and, if the record of transaction form indicates that the customer resides outside the jurisdiction of the police department, shall send a copy of the record of transaction form to the police department that has jurisdiction where the customer resides as set forth on the record of transaction. The record of transaction forms received by police department shall not be open to inspection by the general public. Each police department holding record of transaction forms shall be responsible for ensuring the confidentiality of the record of transaction forms and ensuring that the record of transaction forms are used only for the purpose for which they were received. 
(d)  The record of transaction forms of a dealer and each precious item received shall be open to an inspection by the county prosecuting attorney, the police department, the police agency or sheriff's department of the local governmental unit in which the customer resides, and the state police, at all times during the ordinary business hours of the dealer. As a condition of doing business, a dealer is considered to have given consent to the inspection prescribed by this subsection. The record of transaction forms of a dealer shall not be open to inspection by the general public. 
(e)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, each record of a transaction shall be retained by the dealer for not less than one year after the transaction to which the record pertains. 
(f)  The form of the record of transaction shall have an 81/2-inch by 11-inch size and shall be as follows: 
Record of Transaction Dealer certificate # ____________ / ____________ / ____________ # ____________ (Transaction number printed on the form) Description of property: ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ , 20 ____________ ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ Date of transaction Name of dealer/employee ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ Name of customer Date of birth ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ Street address Driver's license number or Michigan personal ID number ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ City and state Zip code ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ Price paid County of residence ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ Check, bank draft or money order number 
or cash Name of police agency or city, village 
or township in which customer resides ____________ ____________ Signature of customer Thumbprint  
(g)  As used in this section, the term "customer" means the person from whom the dealer or the agent or employee of the dealer receives or purchases a precious item. 
(Prior Code, § 7.73; Ord. No. 93-09, 5-17-1993) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 445.484. 
Sec. 30-58. - Retaining precious item for nine calendar days; alteration. 
    A precious item received by a dealer shall be retained by the dealer for nine calendar days after it was received without any form of alteration other than that required to make an adequate appraisal of its value. 
(Prior Code, § 7.74; Ord. No. 93-09, 5-17-1993) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 445.485. 
Sec. 30-59. - Prohibited conduct. 
    A dealer or the agent or employee of a dealer shall not: 
(1)  Knowingly receive or purchase a precious item from any person who is less than 18 years of age or any person known by the dealer or agent or employee of the dealer to have been convicted of theft or receipt of stolen property within the preceding five years, whether the person is acting in his own behalf or as the agent of another. 
(2)  Knowingly receive or purchase a precious item from a person unless that person presents a valid driver's license or a valid state personal identification card. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 445.486. 
Sec. 30-60. - Conflict. 
    This article shall be construed in such a manner so as not to be in conflict with Public Act No. 95 of 1981 (MCL 445.481 et seq.). The absence of any provision of such act from this article shall not be considered as evidencing an intent that such provision shall not have full force and effect. 
(Prior Code, § 7.75; Ord. No. 93-09, 5-17-1993) 
Sec. 30-61. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon determination thereof, be punished in accordance with article II of chapter 10 and section 1-14. 
(Prior Code, § 7.76; Ord. No. 93-09, 5-17-1993) 
Chapter 32 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Garbage disposal act, MCL 123.361 et seq.; solid waste facilities, MCL 324.4301 et seq.; hazardous waste management act, MCL 324.11101 et seq.; hazardous materials transportation act, MCL 29.417 et seq.; solid waste management act, MCL 324.11501 et seq.; waste reduction assistance act, MCL 324.14501 et seq.; clean Michigan fund act, MCL 324.19101 et seq.; low-level radioactive waste authority act, MCL 333.26201 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 32-1-32-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 32-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building material means be deemed to be all solid waste which is material resulting from the razing, repair, excavation or construction of buildings or structures; including but not limited to earth, plaster, mortar, roofing materials, wood, stone and brick. 
    Contractor means any contractor hired by the city to perform services. 
    Landfill means a disposal area that is a sanitary landfill. 
    Litter, as used herein, means all solid waste, rubbish, refuse, waste material, garbage, offal, paper, glass, cans, bottles, trash, debris or other foreign substances of every kind and description. 
    Living unit means any single-family dwelling; each living unit of a multiple-dwelling housing not more than four families and any mobile home not located within a licensed mobile home park. 
    Recyclable material shall be defined as materials such as aluminum cans, tin/steel/bi-metal cans, newsprint, magazines, cardboard, and HDPE and PETE plastic beverage containers (#1 and #2). 
    Solid waste means garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator ash, incinerator residue, street cleanings, municipal and industrial sludges, solid commercial and solid industrial waste, and animal waste other than organic waste generated in the production of livestock and poultry. The term "solid waste" does not include the following: 
(1)  Human body waste. 
(2)  Medical waste as it is defined in part 138 of the public health code, Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.13801 et seq.), and regulated under that part and part 55 (MCL 333.5501 et seq.). 
(3)  Organic waste generated in the production of livestock and poultry. 
(4)  Liquid waste. 
(5)  Ferrous or nonferrous scrap directed to a scrap metal processor or to a reuser of ferrous or nonferrous products. 
(6)  Slag or slag products directed to a slag processor or to a reuser of slag or slag products. 
(7)  Sludges and ashes managed as recycled, or nondetrimental materials appropriate for agricultural or silvicultural use pursuant to a plan approved by the state department of environmental quality. Food processing residuals; wood ashes resulting solely from a source that burns only wood that is untreated and inert; lime from kraft pulping processes generated prior to bleaching; or aquatic plants may be applied on, or composted and applied on, farmland or forestland for an agricultural or silvicultural purpose, or used as animal feed, as appropriate, and such an application or use does not require a plan described in this subsection or a permit or license under part 115 (MCL 324.11501 et seq.). In addition, source separated materials approved by the state department of environmental quality for land application for agricultural and silvicultural purposes and compost produced from those materials may be applied to the land for agricultural and silvicultural purposes and such an application does not require a plan described in this subsection or permit or license under part 115 (MCL 324.11501 et seq.). Land application authorized under this subsection for an agricultural or silvicultural purpose, or use as animal feed, as provided for in this subsection shall occur in a manner that prevents losses from runoff and leaching, and if applied to land, the land application shall be at an agronomic rate consistent with generally accepted agricultural and management practices under the state right to farm act, Public Act No. 93 of 1981 (MCL 286.471 et seq.). 
(8)  Materials approved for emergency disposal by the state department of environmental quality. 
(9)  Source separated materials. 
(10)  Site separated material. 
(11)  Fly ash or any other ash produced from the combustion of coal, when used in the following instances: 
a.  With a maximum of six percent of unburned carbon as a component of concrete, grout, mortar, or casting molds. 
b.  With a maximum of 12 percent unburned carbon passing state department of transportation test method MTM 101 when used as a raw material in asphalt for road construction. 
c.  As aggregate, road, or building material which in ultimate use will be stabilized or bonded by cement, limes, or asphalt. 
d.  As a road base or construction fill that is covered with asphalt, concrete, or other material approved by the state department of environmental quality and which is placed at least four feet above the seasonal groundwater table. 
e.  As the sole material in a depository designed to reclaim, develop, or otherwise enhance land, subject to the approval of the state department of environmental quality. In evaluating the site, the department shall consider the physical and chemical properties of the ash including leachability, and the engineering of the depository, including, but not limited to, the compaction, control of surface water and groundwater that may threaten to infiltrate the site, and evidence that the depository is designed to prevent water percolation through the material. 
(12)  Other wastes regulated by statute. 
(13)  Recyclable material. 
    Yard clippings means leaves, grass clippings, vegetable or other garden debris, shrubbery, or brush or tree trimmings, less than four feet in length and two inches in diameter, that can be converted to compost humus. The term "yard clippings" does not include stumps, agricultural wastes, animal waste, roots, sewage sludge, or garbage. 
(Prior Code, § 2.1; Ord. No. 92-08, 4-20-1992; Ord. No. 2013-10, § 3, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 32-20. - Storage. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or to place any solid waste, litter, recyclable material, or building materials in any alley, street, river or other place within the city, except for the collection of solid waste as provided for by this article. 
(1)  The occupant of any premises within the city shall be responsible for the sanitary condition of the premises occupied by him, and it shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or allow to be placed or deposited on his premises any solid waste, litter, or recyclable material, except as designated by terms of this article. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to deposit, throw or leave any solid waste, litter, recyclable material, or building materials on the premises of any other person and it shall be unlawful to bury anywhere in the city. 
(3)  Any person responsible for solid waste or recyclable material on premises not served by the solid waste or recyclable material collection system of the city, or for solid waste or recyclable material not acceptable for collection by the city, shall make arrangements for the collection and disposal of such solid waste and recyclable material, but shall otherwise comply in all respects with the terms of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 2.2; Ord. No. 2013-10, § 3, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 32-21. - Containers-Designated placement. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be the duty of the owner, occupant or person in charge of any premises to cause to be placed into the respective solid waste or recyclable material container any and all solid waste or recyclable material created or accumulated on his premises under his charge or control. It shall be the further duty of the owner, occupant or person in charge of any living unit to place or cause to be placed on the day scheduled by the city for collection of solid waste or recyclable material from such premises, the container at such place or places as designated by the city manager or his or her designee. Large household items, including, but not limited to, furniture and appliances, are not required to be placed in a solid waste or recyclable material container. 
(Prior Code, § 2.3; Ord. No. 2013-10, § 3, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 32-22. - Same-Specifications. 
    All solid waste and recyclable material containers shall be leakproof, shall have tight fitting covers, and shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition by the owner. Covers for recyclable material containers shall be provided upon request by the provider of the containers. Solid waste containers that are not provided by a commercial hauler shall be equipped with two handles or with one suitable handle for carrying, and shall not exceed 35 gallons in capacity. No solid waste shall be so loaded that it cannot be conveniently handled without spilling its contents. For solid waste containers provided by commercial haulers, the combined weight of the container and its contents shall not exceed the limit specified by the manufacturer of the container. For solid waste containers not provided by a commercial hauler, and for all recyclable material containers, the combined weight of the container and its contents shall not exceed 50 pounds. The size of any container shall not be greater than can be conveniently handled and disposed of by the collector. Plastic bags may also be used, if securely closed. 
(Prior Code, § 2.4; Ord. No. 2013-10, § 3, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 32-23. - Noncollectible items. 
    The following solid waste shall be considered not acceptable for collection: 
(1)  Dangerous material or substances, such as poisons, acid, caustics, infected materials and explosives. 
(2)  Materials which have not been prepared for collection in accordance with this article or regulations promulgated pursuant thereto. 
(3)  Solid waste resulting from commercial and industrial processes, including but not limited to, retail food establishments, cafes, restaurants, mercantile establishments, drug stores, tourist courts, trailer camps, service stations, barbershops and beauty shops. 
(4)  Dead animals shall be disposed of in accordance with the health department regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 2.5) 
Sec. 32-24. - Accumulation prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to permit solid waste or recyclable material, except bulky solid waste, to accumulate on any premises except in containers, in accordance with the specifications contained in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 2.6; Ord. No. 2013-10, § 3, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 32-25. - Size restrictions; bundled. 
(a)  Bulky solid waste or recyclable material too large to place in containers or plastic bags required by this article shall be secured in bundles and shall be of such size and weight as can be conveniently handled and disposed of by the collector. 
(b)  This section is punishable as a municipal civil infraction. 
(Prior Code, § 2.7; Ord. No. 95-21, 8-7-1995; Ord. No. 2013-10, § 3, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 32-26. - Hot ashes. 
    Ashes containing hot embers shall not be placed in containers. 
(Prior Code, § 2.8) 
Sec. 32-27. - Collection schedule. 
    The city manager or his or her designee shall arrange a schedule for the frequency of collection of solid waste and recyclable material and shall give public notice of said schedule with all changes and corrections which may from time to time be made therein. The city manager or his or her designee shall provide the necessary labor and equipment for such collection in accordance with the schedule insofar as is practicable. 
(Prior Code, § 2.9; Ord. No. 2013-10, § 3, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 32-28. - Scavengers. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, all solid waste collected by the city shall be the property of the city. Scavenging is hereby expressly prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the contents of any portable or stationary solid waste container or bundle of materials therein, or leave the container, or the contents in a condition other than that provided for by this article. All containers must be maintained in a sanitary condition. 
(b)  The term "scavenging" shall not include the collection of large household items, such as furniture and appliances, that are placed outside of a container. 
(Prior Code, § 2.10; Ord. No. 2013-10, § 3, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 32-29. - Unserviceable containers. 
    Receptacles that are broken, rotted, dented or otherwise fail to meet the requirements of this article, may be claimed as solid waste, and after notice to the persons responsible for such receptacles, may be collected as solid waste by the city. 
(Prior Code, § 2.11) 
Sec. 32-30. - Disposal at landfill. 
    No person shall dispose of or deposit any solid waste at any place in the city except in the landfill regularly established and maintained. 
(Prior Code, § 2.12) 
Sec. 32-31. - Collection license. 
    No person may engage in the business of collecting solid waste without first obtaining a license from the city. 
(Prior Code, § 2.13) 
Sec. 32-32. - Collection charges. 
    Solid waste and recyclable material will be picked up and collected under the provisions of this article subject to payment based on a fee schedule determined by resolution of the city council, and such charge so determined shall continue until changed by the city council. All living units as defined in this article are required to comply with the requirements hereof and are subject to the charge as determined by the city council, unless (i) the living unit is located in the B-2 central business district or B-3 general business district; (ii) the living unit is attached and accessory to a ground floor (street level) building or building space used, or intended to be used, for commercial purposes as permitted in the B-2 central business district or B-3 general business district; (iii) the living unit is furnished with solid waste and recyclable collection and disposal service in compliance with chapter 32 by an approved hauler under an existing lease or agreement; or (iv) the living unit is a condominium unit that is not receiving solid waste and recyclable collection services pursuant to a contract with the city and is not part of a condominium development with publicly owned infrastructure. 
(Prior Code, § 2.14; Ord. No. 2010-12, § 1, 10-4-2010; Ord. No. 2013-10, § 3, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 32-33. - Regulations. 
    This article shall be liberally construed for the purpose of providing a sanitary and satisfactory method for the preparation, collection and disposal of solid waste and recyclable material. The city manager is authorized to make such rules and regulations as from time to time appear to him to be necessary to carry out this intent, but such rules shall not conflict with this Code. 
(Prior Code, § 2.15; Ord. No. 2013-10, § 3, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 32-34. - Littering. 
(a)  Placed in authorized receptacles or landfill. No person shall throw, or deposit litter in or upon any public or private road, street, alley, park, sidewalk or other place within the city, except in authorized private receptacles for collection, or public receptacles or in the official landfill. 
(b)  By persons in vehicles. No person, while driving, or a passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street, alley, park or other place within the city. 
(c)  Vehicle loads causing litter. No person shall drive, move, or permit to be driven, any truck or other vehicle carrying solid waste within the city, unless such vehicle is constructed, loaded or covered as to prevent any load contents or litter from spilling or being deposited on any street, alley or other place. 
(Prior Code, § 2.16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 324.8901 et seq. 
Sec. 32-35. - Billing procedure; senior citizen option; delinquencies. 
(a)  All solid waste and recyclable material collection charges shall be billed by the city utilities department through its usual billing procedure, except as herein provided for senior citizens electing to use the metered bag option. The utilities department is further authorized to enforce payment of charges for solid waste and recyclable material collection by discontinuing water or sewer service or both. Such discontinuance of service shall be preceded by adequate notification by the utilities department. Notification and discontinuance shall follow the same format as set forth in articles III and IV of chapter 42, pertaining to water and sewer. 
(b)  Special solid waste collection charges shall be levied on a time and equipment basis whenever the contractor or the city may be required to clean up certain premises. 
(c)  Whenever collection charges against any premises shall be delinquent for a period of six months, prior to March 31 of any year, the utilities department shall certify on or before June 1 of that year to the city assessor the fact that such delinquency exists, and it shall be entered on the next tax roll and charged against such premises and shall constitute a lien thereon and be enforceable in the same manner as general city taxes are collected. In cases where the city utilities department is properly notified that a tenant is responsible for water, sewage disposal and/or solid waste and recyclable material charges, no such service shall be commenced or continued to such premises until there has been deposited with the department, a sum equal to the last three months billing for solid waste and recyclable material collection at said premises, plus the deposits required in articles III and IV of chapter 42, pertaining to water and sewer. The city will allow up to seven calendar days for payment of such deposit where the tenant has been residing for at least 30 days prior to notification of responsibility. When the water service to any premises is turned off to enforce the payment of water service charges, sewage disposal charges or solid waste and recyclable material collection charges, the solid waste and recyclable material service shall not be restored until all delinquent charges have been paid and a deposit, as in the case of tenants, is made. In any other case where, in the discretion of the director, the collection of charges for water, sewage disposal service or solid waste and recyclable material collection may be difficult or uncertain, the director may require a similar deposit. Such deposits may be applied against any delinquent water, sewage disposal service or solid waste and recyclable material collection charges and the application thereof shall not affect the right of the department to turn off the water service, sewage disposal service and/or solid waste and recyclable material pickup, to any premises for any delinquency thereby satisfied. No such deposit shall bear interest and such deposit, or any remaining balance thereof, shall be returned to the customer making the same when he shall discontinue receiving water, sewage disposal service or solid waste and recyclable material pickup. Said refunds will be made only upon completion of the appropriate refund request forms and the refund amount will be determined and a check drawn within 14 calendar days of the date of the refund request. 
(Prior Code, § 2.17; Ord. No. 93-19, 10-18-1993; Ord. No. 2013-10, § 3, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 32-36. - Unlawful deposit of rubbish. 
    It is unlawful for any person or business to place or deposit any solid waste or recyclable material for collection at any location other than a residence or business where said person has an existing agreement with an approved hauler for collection. 
(Prior Code, § 2.18; Ord. No. 87-02, 2-7-1987; Ord. No. 2013-10, § 3, 9-16-2013) 
Sec. 32-37. - Disposition of yard clippings. 
    A mandatory yard clippings recycling/composting program is established in the city. Yard clippings shall be disposed of in biodegradable bags or placed in containers that are clearly marked yard clippings. Yard clippings are not eligible for collection as solid waste, but shall be collected separately and processed as compost material. Yard clippings can be disposed of, as an alternative to citywide pickup, by composting in backyards or by a mulching mower. 
(Prior Code, § 2.19; Ord. No. 92-08, 4-20-1992) 
Chapter 34 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Public improvement or public building, MCL 141.261 et seq.; notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq.; deferment of special assessment for homesteads, MCL 211.761 et seq. 

Sec. 34-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cost means, when referring to the cost of any public improvement, and shall include the cost of services, plans, condemnation, spreading of rolls, notices, advertising, financing, construction and legal fees and all other costs incident to the making if such improvement, the special assessments therefor and the financing thereof. 
    Public improvement means any public work or public improvement, any part of the cost of which is to be assessed against one or more lots or parcels to be especially benefited thereby. 
(Prior Code, § 1.221) 
Sec. 34-2. - Assessments authorized. 
    The entire cost and expense, or any part thereof of all public improvements, may be defrayed by special assessment upon the lands specially benefited by the improvement in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(Prior Code, § 1.222) 
Sec. 34-3. - Initiation of improvement by petition. 
    Initiation of public improvements may be by petition to the city council signed by the property owners whose property is subject to be benefited. Said petition shall be printed on forms approved by the city attorney and shall set forth the location, extent and character of the desired public improvement. All petitions for public improvements shall be referred to the city manager for report and recommendation. After receiving the manager's report and recommendation, the city council shall proceed in the same manner as provided herein for public improvements initiated by the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 1.223) 
Sec. 34-4. - Initiation by council. 
(a)  Proceedings for making public improvements and defraying the entire cost or any part thereof by special assessment may be initiated by resolution of the council. Whenever the council shall determine to make any public improvement and defray the entire cost and expense thereof or any part thereof by special assessment, the council shall, by resolution, direct the city manager to make an investigation of the proposed public improvement and report his findings to the council. 
(b)  Said report shall include an analysis of the following: 
(1)  The estimated cost of the proposed public improvement; and 
(2)  Plans and specifications for the public improvement. 
(c)  There shall also be included recommendations as to the following: 
(1)  The portion of the cost to be borne by the special assessment district and the portion, if any, to be borne by the city at large; 
(2)  The extent of the improvement and boundaries of the district; 
(3)  The number of installments in which assessments may be paid; and 
(4)  Any other facts or recommendations which will aid the council in determining whether the improvement shall be made and how the same shall be financed. 
(Prior Code, § 1.224) 
Sec. 34-5. - Preliminary costs. 
    No cost or expenditure, except for the necessary procedures of the council and for the preparing of necessary profiles, plans, specifications and estimates of cost, shall be made for any public improvement, the cost of which is to be paid by special assessment upon the property especially benefited thereby, until the council has passed a resolution determining to proceed with such public improvement. 
(Prior Code, § 1.225) 
Sec. 34-6. - Resolution to proceed. 
    Upon receipt of the report of the city manager, if the council shall determine to proceed with said improvement, they shall by resolution order the report prepared by the city manager filed with the city clerk. In addition, by said resolution, the council shall tentatively determine to proceed with the public improvement, tentatively determine the necessity thereof and set forth the nature thereof, tentatively designate the limits of the special assessment district to be affected and describe the lands to be assessed, tentatively determine the part or proportion of the cost of the public improvement to be paid by the lands specially benefited thereby and the part or proportion, if any, to be paid by the city at large for benefit to the city at large, shall direct the city assessor to make a special assessment roll of the part or proportion of the cost to be borne by the lands specially benefited according to the benefits received and to report the same to the council. 
(Prior Code, § 1.226) 
Sec. 34-7. - Filing roll; notice of hearing. 
(a)  When the special assessment roll shall have been reported to the council, it shall order the same filed in the office of the city clerk for public examination, along with the report of the city manager required to be made pursuant to section 34-4, and shall fix a date, time and place when the council shall meet to finally determine the necessity of the improvement, composition of the district and to review the roll and to hear complaints. The city manager's report and the assessment roll shall be open to public inspection for a period of seven days before the hearing required by this section. The city clerk shall give notice of the hearing by the council to determine necessity for the improvement, composition of the district and review said special assessment roll and to hear complaints by publication at least once in a newspaper printed and circulated in the city as least ten days prior to the time of said meeting, and shall further cause notice of said meeting to be mailed by first class mail to each property owner in the special assessment district as shown by the current assessment rolls of the city at least ten days prior to the time of said hearing, said notice to be mailed to the addresses shown on the current assessment rolls of the city. Such notice shall state the plans, estimates of cost and special assessment rolls are on file with the city clerk. 
(b)  The last local tax assessment records means the last assessment roll for ad valorem tax purposes that has been reviewed by the local board of review, as supplemented by any subsequent changes in the names or the addresses of the owners or parties listed on that roll. 
(c)  The notice of hearing shall include a statement that appearance and protest at the hearing in the special assessment proceedings is required in order to appeal the amount of the special assessment to the state tax tribunal and shall describe the manner in which an appearance and protest shall be made. 
(d)  An owner or party in interest, or his agent may appear in person at the hearing to protest the special assessment, or shall be permitted to file his appearance or protest by letter and his personal appearance shall not be required. 
(e)  The city council shall maintain a record of parties who appear to protest at the hearing. If a hearing is terminated or adjourned for the day before a party is provided the opportunity to be heard, a party whose appearance was recorded is considered to have protested the special assessment in person. 
(Prior Code, § 1.227) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 211.741. 
Sec. 34-8. - Tax assessment records; filing of names; changes of names and addresses. 
    Where any person claims an interest in real property whose name and correct address do not appear upon the last local tax assessment records, he shall be obligated to file immediately his name and address with the local tax assessing officer. This requirement shall be deemed effective only for the purpose of establishing a record of the names and addresses of those persons entitled to notice of hearings in special assessment proceedings. It shall be the duty of each tax assessing officer to immediately enter on the local tax assessment records any changes in the names and addresses of owners or parties in interest filed with him and at all times to keep such tax assessment records current and complete and available for public inspection. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 211.742. 
Sec. 34-9. - Notice of hearings; mailing. 
    Any officer whose duty it is to give notice of hearings in special assessment proceedings may rely upon the last local tax assessment records in giving notice of hearing by mail. The method of giving notice by mail as provided in this act is declared to be the method that is reasonably certain to inform those to be assessed of the special assessment proceedings. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 211.743. 
Sec. 34-10. - Notice of hearings; validation of previously held hearings. 
    Each special assessment hearing heretofore held is validated insofar as any notice of hearing is concerned, if notice was given by mail to the owners or parties in interest whose names appeared at the time of mailing on the last local tax assessment records. Any such special assessment hearing is also validated as to any owner or party in interest who has actually received notice of hearing, has waived such notice, or has paid any part of the special assessment. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 211.745. 
Sec. 34-11. - Statement of right to file written appeal. 
    If a special assessment is made against property, the notice of the special assessment sent to the property owner or person responsible for payment of the ad valorem property taxes under the general property tax act, Public Act No. 206 of 1893 (MCL 211.1 et seq.), shall include, in addition to any other requirements by statute or charter, a statement that the owner or any person having an interest in the real property may file a written appeal of the special assessment with the state tax tribunal within 30 days after the confirmation of the special assessment roll if that special assessment was protested at the hearing held for the purpose of confirming the roll. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 211.746. 
Sec. 34-12. - Deferment of special assessments on homesteads; conveyance or transfer of or contract to sell homestead; termination of deferment; interest charge; notice. 
(a)  The payment of special assessments assessed and due and payable on a homestead in any year in which the owner meets all of the terms and conditions of Public Act No. 225 of 1976 (MCL 211.761 et seq.), shall be deferred until one year after the owner's death, subject to further order by the probate court or until the homestead or any part of the homestead is conveyed or transferred to another or a contract to sell is entered into. The death of a spouse shall not terminate the deferment of special assessments for a homestead owned by a husband and wife under tenancy by the entireties as long as the surviving spouse does not remarry. Special assessments deferred under this section may be paid in full at any time. 
(b)  If the collecting officer determines that legal or equitable title to a homestead or any part of a homestead for which special assessments are deferred under this section is conveyed or transferred or a contract to sell the homestead or part of a homestead is entered into, and the deferment is not terminated, the owner or owner's estate shall be subject to an interest rate of one percent per month or fraction of a month, on the amount deferred, computed from the date of conveyance, transfer, or contractual agreement. The amount of interest shall be payable to the collecting officer and transmitted by that office pursuant to state law. 
(c)  The city shall notify each owner whose special assessments are authorized to be deferred under this section that if legal or equitable title to the homestead or any part of the homestead is conveyed or transferred or a contract to sell the homestead or part of the homestead is entered into, the deferment is terminated and the amount deferred is immediately due and payable, plus interest as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 211.762. 
Sec. 34-13. - Public hearing on special assessment district and roll. 
    The council shall meet and hear objections to said public improvements to the special assessment district and the special assessment roll therefore, at the time and place appointed or at an adjourned meeting thereof and shall consider any objections thereto. The council may revise, correct or amend the plans, estimates of cost, special assessment district and special assessment roll. If any changes shall be made which result in additions to the special assessment district or increases in the special assessment roll, then a second hearing shall be held with respect to said changes and notice of such hearing shall be given in the same manner as required for the first hearing. After the hearing, or second hearing, if required, the council may, by resolution, determine to proceed with the public improvement, determine the necessity thereof and set forth the nature thereof, designate the limits of the special assessment district to be affected and describe the lands to be assessed, finally determine the part and proportion of the cost of the public improvement to be paid by the lands specially benefited thereby and the part or portion, if any, to be paid by the city at large for benefit to the city at large. The council may also confirm the special assessment roll with such corrections as it may have made, if any, or may refer it back to the city assessor for revision, or may annul it or any proceedings in connection therewith. The city clerk shall endorse the date of confirmation upon each special assessment roll. 
(Prior Code, § 1.228) 
Sec. 34-14. - Confirmation of roll. 
    Such roll shall be, upon ratification and confirmation, final and conclusive. 
(Prior Code, § 1.229) 
Sec. 34-15. - Objections to improvements. 
    If at, or prior to the hearing by the city council, the owners of more than one-half of the property to be assessed shall object in writing to the improvement, assessment shall not be made without an affirmative vote of four members of the council. 
(Prior Code, § 1.230) 
Sec. 34-16. - Lien established; installments. 
    All special assessments contained in any special assessment roll, including any part thereof to be paid in installments, shall, from the date of confirmation of such roll constitute a lien upon the respective lots or parcels of land assessed and, until paid, shall be a charge against the respective owners of the several lots and parcels of land and a debt to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as the lien created by the city Charter for city taxes and shall include accrued interest and fees. No judgment or decree nor act of the council vacating a special assessment shall destroy or impair the lien of the city upon the premises assessed for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the same or as by a regular mode of proceeding might be lawfully assessed thereon. All special assessments shall become due upon confirmation of the special assessment roll or in annual installments, not to exceed 20 in number, as the council may determine at the time of confirmation, and, if in annual installments, the council may determine the first installment to be due upon confirmation or upon any other date the council may prescribe, and the subsequent installments annually thereafter. Deferred installments shall bear interest at a rate not to exceed the yield of a U.S. Treasury bill on the date of the city council approval of the assessment district. 
(Prior Code, § 1.231; Ord. No. 942, 7-14-1980) 
Sec. 34-17. - Transmittal to treasurer. 
    Whenever any special assessment roll shall be confirmed and be payable, the council shall direct the city clerk to transmit the assessment roll to the city treasurer for collection. The city treasurer shall mail statements of the several assessments to the respective owners of the several lots and parcels of land assessed, as indicated by the records of the city assessor, stating the amount of the assessment and the manner in which it may be paid; provided, however, that failure to mail any such statement shall not invalidate the assessment or entitle the owner to an extension of time within which to pay the assessment. 
(Prior Code, § 1.232) 
Sec. 34-18. - Early payment. 
    The whole or any part of any such assessment may be paid in full at any time after the date of confirmation of the special assessment roll until such time as the council shall prescribe without interest or penalty. 
(Prior Code, § 1.233) 
Sec. 34-19. - Collection by treasurer. 
    Each special assessment shall be collected by the city treasurer with the same rights and remedies as provided in the Charter for the collection of taxes, except as otherwise herein provided. All collection fees shall belong to the city and be collected in the same manner as the collection fee for city taxes. 
(Prior Code, § 1.234) 
Sec. 34-20. - Prepaid installments. 
    After the expiration of the period provided in section 34-18 for payment without interest or fees, any installment may be discharged by paying the face amount thereof, together with fees and interest thereon, from the date of confirmation to the date of payment; provided, however, that if the public improvement has been financed by the sale of noncallable bonds or other evidence of indebtedness which are not prepayable, then the interest shall be computed from the date of confirmation to the date upon which such installment would have fallen due had it not been prepaid. 
(Prior Code, § 1.235) 
Sec. 34-21. - Certification of total costs of improvement. 
    Upon completion of the improvement, the financing thereof and the payment of the cost thereof, the city clerk shall certify to the council the total cost of said improvement together with the amount of the original roll for said improvement. 
(Prior Code, § 1.236) 
Sec. 34-22. - Deficiency assessment. 
    Should the assessments on any special assessment roll, including the amount assessed to the city at large, prove insufficient for any reason to pay the cost of the improvement for which they were made, then the council may make additional pro rata assessments to supply the deficiency against the city and the several lots and parcels of land in the same ratio as the original assessments, but the total amount assessed against any lot to a parcel of land shall not exceed the value of the benefits received from the improvement. 
(Prior Code, § 1.237) 
Sec. 34-23. - Excess assessment. 
    Should the special assessment or the proceeds of sale of any special assessment bonds prove larger than necessary to meet the costs of the improvement or to meet the principal and interest requirements of any special assessment bonds and expenses incidental thereto, the excess shall be placed in the city treasury. If more than five percent, the excess shall be returned pro rata according to assessments; except as otherwise provided in section 34-25. No refunds may be made which contravene the provisions of any evidence of indebtedness secured in whole or in part by such special assessment. 
(Prior Code, § 1.238) 
Sec. 34-24. - Division of assessed parcel. 
    Should any lots or lands be divided after a special assessment thereon has been confirmed and divided into installments, the city assessor shall apportion the uncollected amounts upon the several lots and lands so divided, and shall enter the several amounts as amendments upon the special assessment roll. The city treasurer shall, within ten days after such apportionment, send notice of such action to the persons concerned at their last known address by first class mail. Said apportionment shall be final and conclusive on all parties unless protest in writing is received by the city treasurer within 20 days of the mailing of the aforesaid notice. 
(Prior Code, § 1.239) 
Sec. 34-25. - Invalid assessments. 
(a)  Whenever the council deems any special assessment invalid or defective, or whenever a court adjudges an assessment to be illegal in whole or in part, the council may cause a new assessment to be levied for the same purpose, whether or not the improvement or any part thereof has been completed, or any part of the special assessment collected. All proceedings on such reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be conducted in the same manner as provided for in the original assessment. If any portion of the original special assessment is collected and not refunded, it shall be applied upon reassessment, and the reassessment shall, to that extent, be deemed satisfied. If more than the amount reassessed is collected, the balance shall be refunded to the person making such payment. 
(b)  Any failure to give notice as required in subsection (a) of this section shall not invalidate an entire assessment roll but only the assessments on property affected by the lack of notice. A special assessment shall not be declared invalid as to any property if the owner or the party in interest thereof has actually received notice, has waived notice, or has paid any part of the assessment. If any assessment is declared void by court order or judgment, a reassessment against the property may be made. 
(Prior Code, § 1.240) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 211.744. 
Sec. 34-26. - Judgment for proper charges. 
    If, in any action, it shall appear that by reason of any irregularities or informalities, the assessment has not been properly made against the person assessed or upon the lot or premises sought to be charged, the court may nevertheless, on satisfactory proof that expense has been incurred by the city, which is a proper charge against the person assessed or the lot or premises in question, render judgment for the amount properly chargeable against such person or upon such lot or premises. 
(Prior Code, § 1.241) 
Sec. 34-27. - Hazards; nuisances. 
    When any lot, building or structure, because of accumulation of refuse or debris, the uncontrolled growing of weeds, or age or dilapidation, or because of any other condition or happening, becomes a public hazard or nuisance, which is detrimental to the health or safety of the inhabitants of the city or of those residing or habitually going near such lot, building or structure, the council may order such hazard or nuisance abated and the cost of such abatement assessed against the lot, premises or description of real property upon which such hazard or nuisance was located as a single lot assessment. 
(Prior Code, § 1.242) 
Sec. 34-28. - Single lot procedure. 
    When any expense shall be incurred by the city upon or in respect to any separate or single lot, parcel of land, or premises, which, by the provisions of this chapter, the council is authorized to charge and collect as a single lot special assessment against the same, and which is not of that class of special assessments required to be made pro rata upon several lots or parcels of land in a special assessment district; an account of the labor or services for which such expense was incurred, verified by the officer or person performing the labor or services, or causing the same to be done, shall be reported to the city council in a manner it prescribes. The accounting reported to the council shall include a description of the lot or premises on or in respect to which the expense was incurred, the name of the owner or person chargeable therewith, and the cost of labor or services performed. The provisions of the preceding sections of this chapter with reference to pro rata special assessments generally, and the proceedings necessary to be had before making the improvement, shall not apply to single lot assessments contemplated in this section. 
(Prior Code, § 1.243) 
Sec. 34-29. - Collection single lot assessment. 
    The city council, after review of the single lots assessment account, shall determine what amount or part of every such reported expense shall be charged, and the premises upon which the same shall be levied as a single lot special assessment. As often as the city council may deem it expedient, they shall require all of the several amounts so reported and determined and the several lots or premises chargeable therewith respectively, to be reported by the city clerk to the city assessor who shall spread such amounts against the real property chargeable therewith on the next tax roll for the collection of general city taxes. 
(Prior Code, § 1.244) 
Sec. 34-30. - Additional procedure. 
    In any case where the provision of this chapter may prove to be insufficient to carry into full effect the making of any improvement or the special assessment therefor, the city council shall provide any additional steps or procedure required to effect the improvement by special assessment in the resolution declaring the determination of the city council to make such improvement in the first instance. 
(Prior Code, § 1.245) 
Sec. 34-31. - Formula of special assessments. 
FORMULA FOR SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS 
Assessment Type Equivalent to be Paid for by Abutting Property Owners Front Footage Charges 
and Exception Adjustments City Participation Street 
construction 29' wide back of curb to back of curb street with 8" of gravel and 21/2" of bituminous or equivalent concrete street. Including incidentals such as grading, restoration, etc. Does not include storm sewer. Charged for actual footage of lot abutting the right-of-way except for corner lots. Corner lots charged 60% of the first 100' on each side street and then the actual footage on each street after the first 100'. City to pay 100% of cost for storm sewer. City not to pay for intersections. City to pay for all city owned lots. Sanitary 
sewer 8" diameter and 15' depth including 6" laterals to property line. Includes incidentals such as restoration, etc. (Laterals installed at time of main sewer construction.) Charged for actual abutting front footage, except for corner lots. When main is constructed in both streets, corner lots charged for 50% of first 100' on each street and then the actual abutting footage on each street after first 100'. If side street main is not constructed, charged for actual abutting front footage. If more than 100'* is owned on the side street, the remaining abutting frontage of the parcel on the side street will be assessed at the time the main is constructed in the side street, at the normal rate for abutting frontage. 
Unusual shaped parcels shall be assessed in a manner agreeable to both the owner and the city. If an agreement cannot be reached as to method, a third independent referee shall be selected by both parties and his decision shall be binding. Unusual shaped parcels shall be those designated by the city engineer. City to pay for anything over minimum size or depth. City to pay for city owned lots abutting. City to pay for manholes. City to not pay for intersections. Water main 6" diameter and property service from main. Includes incidentals such as restoration, etc. (Not normally necessary to construct service during main construction.) Charged for actual abutting front footage, except for corner lots. When main is constructed in both streets, 50% of first 100' on each street and then the actual abutting footage on each street after first 100'. If side street main is not constructed, charged for actual abutting front footage. If more than 100'* is owned on the side street, the remaining abutting frontage of the parcel on the side street will be assessed at the time the main is constructed in the side street, at the normal rate for abutting footage. 
Unusual shaped parcels shall be assessed in a manner agreeable to both the owner and the city. If an agreement cannot be reached as to method, a third independent referee shall be selected by both parties and his decision shall be binding. Unusual shaped parcels shall be those designated by the city engineer. City to pay for anything over minimum size. City to pay for city owned corner lots charged for lots abutting. City to pay for hydrants, valves and fittings. City not to pay for intersections. Sidewalks No equivalent required. Property owner pays 100% of cost of actual construction with no administration charge. City pay for sidewalk opposite city owned lots and sidewalks at intersections.  
*NOTE: Projects assessed prior to June 1987, shall be assessed on the side street using a setback from the corner of 150 feet rather than 100 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 1.246; Ord. No. 82-08, 6-14-1982; Ord. No. 87-11, 6-1-1987) 
Chapter 36 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 36-1-36-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREETS 

Sec. 36-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Department shall be deemed to refer to the department of engineering of the city. 
    Engineer means the city engineer. 
    Street means all of the land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, alleys and boulevards in the city, and includes lawn extensions and sidewalks and the area reserved therefor; the same are not yet constructed. 
    Tree lawn means that area between the portion of the street designated for vehicular travel and the adjoining property line; but excluding any sidewalk or driveway approaches, parking shoulders and that property lying between a sidewalk and a property line. 
(Prior Code, § 4.1; Ord. No. 85-12, 10-7-1985; Ord. No. 87-23, 10-19-1987) 
Sec. 36-20. - Damage and obstruction prohibited. 
    No person shall make any excavation in, or cause any damage to any street in the city, except under the condition and in the manner permitted in this article. No person shall place any article, thing or obstruction in any street, except under the conditions and in the manner permitted in this article, but this provision shall not be deemed to prohibit the following: 
(1)  Such temporary obstructions as may be incidental to the expeditious movement of articles and things to and from abutting premises; 
(2)  The lawful parking of vehicles within the part of the street reserved for vehicular traffic; 
(3)  The parking of any disabled vehicles, outside the traveled portion of any street for a period of not to exceed 48 hours; or 
(4)  The planting of trees and shrubs as permitted in article II of chapter 16. 
(Prior Code, § 4.2) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief generally, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 36-21. - Permits and bonds. 
(a)  Where permits are authorized in this article, they shall be obtained upon application to the engineer upon such forms as he shall prescribe. Such permit shall be revocable by the engineer for failure to comply with this article, rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto, and the lawful orders of the engineer or his duly authorized representative, and shall be valid only for the period of time endorsed thereon. Application for a permit under the provisions of this article shall be deemed an agreement by the applicant to promptly complete the work permitted, observe all pertinent laws and regulations of the city in connection therewith, repair all damage done to the street surface and installations on, over or within such street, including trees, and protect and save harmless the city from all damages or actions at law that may arise or may be brought on account of injury to persons or property resulting from the work done under the permit or in connection therewith. Where liability insurance policies are required to be filed in making application for a permit, the insurance certificate must show proof that the contractor has liability insurance with completed operations and products, issued to the city, with minimum limits as determined by a risk analysis and currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time to cover the required work within city street rights-of-way. 
(b)  The certificate must also show a ten-day cancellation clause and a description of work to be done in the city rights-of-way. 
(c)  A duplicate executed copy or photostatic copy of the original of such insurance policy, approved as to form by the city attorney, shall be filed with the city clerk. Where cash deposits are required with the application for any permit hereunder, such deposit shall be in the amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time, except as otherwise specified in this article, and such deposit shall be used to defray all expenses to the city arising out of the granting of the permit and work done under the permit or in connection therewith. Six months after the completion of the work done under the permit, any balance of such cash deposit unexpended, shall be refunded. In any case where the deposit does not cover all costs and expenses of the city, the deficit shall be paid by the applicant. 
(Prior Code, § 4.3) 
Sec. 36-22. - Street openings. 
    No person shall make any excavation or opening in or under any street without first obtaining a written permit from the engineer. No permit shall be granted until the applicant shall post a cash deposit and file a liability insurance policy as required by section 36-21. 
(Prior Code, § 4.4) 
Sec. 36-23. - Emergency openings. 
    The engineer may, if the public safety requires immediate action, grant permission to make a necessary street opening in an emergency; provided that a permit shall be obtained on the following business day and the provisions of this article shall be complied with. 
(Prior Code, § 4.5) 
Sec. 36-24. - Backfilling. 
    All trenches in a public street or other public place, except by special permission, shall be backfilled in accordance with regulations adopted pursuant to this article. Any settlement shall be corrected within eight hours after notification to do so. 
(Prior Code, § 4.6) 
Sec. 36-25. - Sidewalk vaults. 
    Openings through the sidewalk for the delivery of fuel when lawfully in existence, shall not be greater than 30 inches in diameter, shall be circular in form, and shall be effectually closed when not in actual use by an iron cover set flush within the surface of the sidewalk, level with the sidewalk and securely locked in place. All openings in the sidewalk for the admission of light and air shall be closed and protected either by substantial iron gratings or illuminating pavement of a design and so placed as to be satisfactory to the engineer. 
(Prior Code, § 4.7) 
Sec. 36-26. - Utility poles. 
    Utility poles may be placed in such streets as the engineer shall prescribe and shall be located thereon in accordance with the directions of the engineer. Such poles shall be removed or relocated as the engineer shall, from time to time, direct. 
(Prior Code, § 4.8) 
Sec. 36-27. - Maintenance of installations in street. 
    Every owner of, and every person in control of, any estate hereafter maintaining a sidewalk vault, coal hole, manhole, or any excavation, or any post, pole, sign, awning, wire, pole, conduit or other structure in, under, over or upon, any street which is adjacent to or a part of his estate, shall do so only on condition that such maintenance shall be considered as an agreement on his part with the city to keep the same and the covers thereof, and any gas and electric boxes and tubes thereon, in good repair and condition at all times during his ownership or control thereof, and to indemnify and save harmless the city against all damages or actions at law that may arise or be brought by reason of such excavation or structure being under, over, in or upon the street, or being unfastened, out of repair or defective during such ownership or control. 
(Prior Code, § 4.9) 
Sec. 36-28. - New paving. 
    Whenever the city council shall determine to pave or resurface any street, the engineer shall, not less than 30 days prior to commencement of construction, serve notice upon all public utilities requiring them to install all necessary underground work in advance of the paving or resurfacing. 
(Prior Code, § 4.10) 
Sec. 36-29. - Sewer and water connections. 
    When such paving or resurfacing shall have been ordered or declared necessary by the city council, such sewer and water connections as are necessary, shall be installed in advance of such paving or resurfacing, and the cost thereof shall be charged against the premises adjacent thereto, or to be served thereby, and against the owner of such premises. Where such paving or resurfacing is financed in whole or in part by special assessment, the cost of such sewer and water connections may be made chargeable against the premises served or adjacent thereto, as part of the special assessment for such paving or resurfacing. Where such paving or resurfacing is financed otherwise than by special assessment, the cost of the sewer and water connections so installed, shall be a lien on said premises adjacent thereto, or to be served thereby, and shall be collected as provided for assessments on single lots pursuant to the provisions of chapter 34. 
(Prior Code, § 4.11) 
Sec. 36-30. - Determination of necessity. 
    The necessity for such sewer and water connections shall be determined by the engineer, which determination shall be based upon the size, shape and area of each abutting lot or parcel of land, the lawful use of such land under the zoning regulations of the city, the character of the locality and the probable future development of each abutting lot or parcel of land. The engineer shall give written notice of the intention to install such sewer and water connections and to charge the cost of the same to the premises, to each owner of land abutting the street, to be furnished with such connections, as shown by the records of the city assessor in accordance with section 1-6. Any owner objecting to the installation of any such sewer or water connection, shall file his objections, in writing, within seven days after the service of such notice, with the engineer who shall, after considering each such objection made in writing, make a final determination of the sewer and water connections to be installed. 
(Prior Code, § 4.12) 
Sec. 36-31. - Prohibited openings. 
    No permit to make any opening or excavation in or under a paved street shall be granted to any person within a period of two years after the completion of any paving or resurfacing thereof. If a street opening is necessary as a public safety measure, the engineer may suspend the operation of this section, as to such street opening. 
(Prior Code, § 4.13) 
Sec. 36-32. - Tree lawn parking prohibited. 
(a)  To prevent damage to tree lawns, it is prohibited to drive or park motor vehicles on a tree lawn. Access to private property by motor vehicles is limited to driveway approaches and curb cuts as specified in this article. Parking on a tree lawn is prohibited, except when authorized by the city engineer. Permitted parking will be allowed only if necessary parking spaces are not available on private property. Aggrieved parties have the right to appeal any decision of the city engineer to the city zoning board of appeals. Existing paved tree lawn parking spaces are allowed. A tree lawn parking permit will be required, and the application shall be accompanied by a fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time. 
(b)  This section is punishable as a municipal civil infraction. 
(Prior Code, § 4.14; Ord. No. 85-12, 10-7-1985; Ord. No. 95-11, 6-5-1995; Ord. No. 95-21, 8-7-1995) 
Sec. 36-33. - Parking spaces on private property. 
    Parking spaces on private property shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Each parking space permitted or existing shall be a minimum of ten feet by 20 feet. 
(2)  Paved spaces shall not cause stormwater runoff onto abutting private property. 
(3)  Spaces shall be located a minimum of two feet from existing sidewalks and alleys. 
(4)  Construction of a space on private property shall be considered cost prohibitive when it costs in excess of three times the cost of constructing a paved tree lawn space. 
(5)  Spaces must comply with sections 46-658 and 46-659 and cannot be developed in the required front or side yard setbacks. 
(Prior Code, § 4.15; Ord. No. 85-12, 10-7-1985; Ord. No. 87-23, 10-19-1987) 
Sec. 36-34. - Parking within tree lawn exceptions. 
    Parking within the tree lawn shall be allowed only when all of the following conditions apply: 
(1)  A minimum of two spaces cannot be provided per dwelling unit on private property. 
(2)  Parking does not disturb utilities and/or trees, but exceptions may be granted if the property owner is willing to incur the costs to abate any such disturbance. In no case will a tree be removed from the tree lawn without permission from the director of public works. 
(3)  A tree lawn parking space shall be a minimum of 40 feet from corner curbline of a street and 20 feet from an alley right-of-way line. 
(4)  A parking space shall be a minimum of ten feet by 20 feet. 
(5)  The space shall be a minimum distance of two feet from curbs, sidewalks and driveway approaches. 
(6)  The space shall be a minimum distance of 40 feet from the corner curbline of a street and 20 feet from an alley right-of-way line. 
(7)  Parking must first be perpendicular to the street, if possible, if not, parallel to the street. 
(8)  A vehicle parked in a tree lawn is owned by the permittee or is parked with permission of the permittee. 
(9)  Tree lawn parking, on an annual basis, may be allowed between November 15 and April 15 by the city engineer or his or her designee if the applicant can establish that undue hardship or proven physical disability will justify a permit to park on a tree lawn. 
(10)  Temporary permits are available from November 15 to April 15 to guests of residents to allow parking on the tree lawn for up to 15 days, provided the tree lawn spaces meet the criteria set forth in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 4.16; Ord. No. 85-12, 10-7-1985; Ord. No. 87-23, 10-19-1987; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 13, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 36-35. - Repair of damages. 
    In any case that a tree lawn has not been repaired and/or maintained in a lawn-like condition, the department of public works shall notify the abutting property owner that the tree lawn must be repaired and/or maintained as a lawn as required by the department of public works. 
(1)  If, after 30 days, the property owner has not taken one of the following actions: 
a.  Prepared the area to be planted as a lawn and planted lawn grass seed and mulched the area with an approved mulch; or 
b.  Prepared the area for sod and had sod placed. 
The city shall cause to be placed either sod or lawn grass seed, and the owner is responsible for all costs incurred, including administrative fees. If the owner fails to reimburse the city for the cost of repairing the tree lawn, the total cost will then be applied as a special assessment against the property. 
(2)  All permanent tree lawn parking shall be surfaced and maintained with a surface similar to or equal to the adjacent street surface, or greater, according to the specifications set forth by the city engineer, with all costs incurred by the property owner, except during the time the winter off-street parking ordinance is in effect. 
(Prior Code, § 4.17; Ord. No. 85-12, 10-7-1985; Ord. No. 87-23, 10-19-1987) 
Sec. 36-36. - Curb cuts. 
    No opening in or through any curb or street shall be made without first obtaining a written permit from the city engineer. Curb cuts, driveway aprons and sidewalk driveway crossings, to provide access to private property, shall comply with the following: 
(1)  No single curb cut shall be less than 12 feet or greater than 60 feet wide. 
Exception: Residentially zoned lots are limited to a 35-foot maximum width and in no case greater than 45 percent of the abutting street frontage. 
(2)  Sidewalk driveway crossings shall be no greater than 35 feet wide. 
Exception: Residentially zoned lots are limited to a 24-foot maximum width. 
(3)  Individual properties shall not have more than one curb cut per frontage to a street right-of-way unless approved by the engineering department. Appeals may be made to the zoning board of appeals. 
(4)  The minimum distance between any curb cut and a public crosswalk shall be five feet. 
(5)  The minimum distance between curb cuts, except those serving residentially zoned properties shall be 25 feet. 
(6)  The minimum distance between any curb cut and a projected interior side lot line shall be three feet. 
(7)  The necessary adjustments to utility poles, light standards, fire hydrants, catchbasins, street or railway signs, signals or other public improvements or installations shall be accomplished without cost to the city. 
(8)  All construction shall be in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the engineering department. All sidewalks at driveway crossings and all concrete driveway aprons in city right-of-way shall be a minimum of six inches thick. 
(9)  In the B-2 central business district, additional private curb cuts are prohibited on Mitchell, Harris and Cass Streets. Wherever practical, existing curb cuts shall be eliminated to improve pedestrian safety and improve vehicular traffic flow, as determined by the engineering department and property owner. 
(Prior Code, § 4.18; Ord. No. 87-15, 9-21-1987) 
Sec. 36-37. - Agreement to install driveway apron. 
    No permit to cut any curb shall be issued unless the applicant shall agree in such application, as a condition of the issuance of the permit, to install a driveway apron of concrete or other material of comparable quality within 30 days after the completion of the cut, except that the engineer may extend this period at his discretion. A curb cut/driveway approach permit will be required, and the application shall be accompanied by a fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time. 
(Prior Code, § 4.19; Ord. No. 95-11, 6-5-1995) 
Sec. 36-38. - Driveway aprons; construction. 
    Driveway aprons shall be paved with concrete or bituminous material if the driveway apron is located on a paved street. If said driveway apron is not paved within one year after the abutting street is paved, the engineer shall give the owner 30 days notice to pave the same and if such person shall neglect or refuse to do so, then the city manager shall cause said driveway apron to be paved and he shall make a detailed report to the council of the cost and expense of performing this work, which cost and expense shall be charged to the owner in the manner provided by chapter 34, pertaining to special assessments. 
(Prior Code, § 4.20) 
Sec. 36-39. - Sidewalk obstructions. 
    No person shall occupy any street with any materials or machinery incidental to the construction, demolition or repair of any building adjacent to said street, or for any other purpose, without first obtaining a permit from the engineer and posting a cash deposit and filing an insurance policy as required by section 36-21. 
(Prior Code, § 4.26) 
Sec. 36-40. - Pedestrian passage. 
    At least five feet of sidewalk space shall be kept clean and clear for the free passage of pedestrians and if the building operations are such that such free passageway is impracticable, a temporary plank sidewalk with substantial railings or sidewalk shelter, built in accordance with article II of chapter 8, pertaining to state construction codes, shall be provided around such obstruction. 
(Prior Code, § 4.27) 
Sec. 36-41. - Merchandise displays. 
    In commercial districts, a merchant may display goods, wares and merchandise on a sidewalk within three feet of the abutting property line, owned and occupied by him upon compliance with section 36-39. 
(Prior Code, § 4.28) 
Sec. 36-42. - Safeguards. 
    All openings, excavations and obstructions shall be properly and substantially barricaded and railed off, and at night shall be provided with prescribed warning lights. Warning lights perpendicular to the flow of traffic shall not be more than three feet apart, and parallel to the flow of traffic not over 15 feet apart. 
(Prior Code, § 4.31) 
Sec. 36-43. - Shoring excavations. 
    All openings and excavations shall, where necessary, be properly and substantially sheeted and braced as a safeguard to workmen and to prevent cave-ins or washouts, which would tend to injure the thoroughfare or subsurface structure of the street. 
(Prior Code, § 4.32) 
Sec. 36-44. - Moving of building, etc. 
(a)  No person shall move, transport, or convey any building, machinery, truck or trailer, more than eight feet eight inches wide or higher than 13 feet, six inches, above the surface of the roadway, into, across or along any street, or other public place in the city, without first obtaining a permit from the engineer. An application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time. The applicant shall file written clearances from the light, telephone, gas and water utilities, stating that all connections have been properly cut off and, where necessary, all obstructions along proposed route of moving will be removed without delaying moving operations. In addition, clearance shall be obtained from the police department, approving the proposed route through the city streets and the time of moving, together with an estimated cost to the police department due to the moving operations. The applicant shall deposit with the city the total estimated cost to the police department and department of streets, plus a cash deposit as required by section 36-21 and shall file with the city a liability insurance policy in the amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time. 
(b)  If any of the work in subsection (a) of this section is started without a permit, twice the normal permit fee may be charged to cover administration costs, with a minimum increase as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time. 
(Prior Code, § 4.34; Ord. No. 95-11, 6-5-1995) 
Sec. 36-45. - Additional regulations. 
    The city manager may make additional regulations pertaining to openings and excavations in the streets, curb cuts, street obstructions, and house moving, which regulations shall be subject to the approval of the city council. No person shall fail to comply with any such regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 4.36) 
Sec. 36-46. - Removal of encroachment. 
    Encroachments and obstructions in the street may be removed and excavations refilled and the expense of such removal or refilling charged to the abutting landowner when made or permitted by him or suffered to remain by him, otherwise than in accordance with the terms and conditions of this article. The procedure for collection of such expenses shall be as prescribed in chapter 34, pertaining to special assessment. 
(Prior Code, § 4.37) 
Sec. 36-47. - Temporary street closings. 
    The city engineer, city manager, director of public works, and director of public safety shall have authority to temporarily close any street, or portion thereof, when he shall deem such street to be unsafe or temporarily unsuitable for use for any reason. He shall cause suitable barriers and signs to be erected on said street, indicating that the same is closed to public travel. When any street or portion thereof shall have been closed to public travel, no person shall drive any vehicle upon or over said street except as the same may be necessary incidentally to any street repair or construction work being done in the area closed to public travel. No person shall move or interfere with any sign or barrier pursuant to this section without authority from the engineer. 
(Prior Code, § 4.38) 
Secs. 36-48-36-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 36-68. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Sidewalk means the portion of the street right-of-way designed for pedestrian travel. 
(Prior Code, § 4.61) 
Sec. 36-69. - Permit required. 
    No person shall construct, rebuild or repair any sidewalk, except in accordance with the line, grade, slope and specifications established for such sidewalk, nor without first obtaining a written permit and specifications from the city clerk. 
(Prior Code, § 4.62) 
Sec. 36-70. - Line and grade stakes. 
    The city engineer shall furnish line and grade stakes as may be necessary for proper control of the work, but this shall not relieve the owner of responsibility for making careful and accurate measurements in constructing the work to the lines furnished by the city engineer. Where it is necessary to replace engineer's stakes disturbed or destroyed without fault on the part of the city, or its employees, a charge as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance, from time to time, shall be paid. 
(Prior Code, § 4.63) 
Sec. 36-71. - Specifications. 
(a)  Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications on file in the office of the city engineer, copies of which shall be available to the public. 
(b)  Any repairs or replacements of sidewalks in the central business district shall be made pursuant to plans and specifications approved by the downtown development authority. 
(Prior Code, § 4.64; Ord. No. 90-11, 5-25-1990) 
Sec. 36-72. - Permit revocation. 
    The city engineer may issue a stop order to any permittee holding a permit issued under the terms of this article for failure to comply with this article, or the rules, regulations, plans and specifications established for the construction, rebuilding or repair of any sidewalk, and the issuance of such stop order shall be effective until the next regular meeting of the city council, and if confirmed by the council, at its next regular meeting, such stop order shall be permanent, and shall constitute a revocation of the permit. 
(Prior Code, § 4.65) 
Sec. 36-73. - Ordering construction. 
    The city council may, by resolution, require the owners of lots and premises to build sidewalks in the public streets adjacent to and abutting upon such lots and premises. When such resolution shall be adopted, the city clerk shall give notice thereof, in accordance with chapter 1, to the owner of such lot or premises requiring him to construct or rebuild such sidewalk within 20 days from the date of such notice. 
(Prior Code, § 4.66) 
Sec. 36-74. - Construction by city. 
    If the owner of any lot or premises shall fail to build any particular sidewalk as described in said notice, and within the time and in the manner required thereby, the city manager is hereby authorized and required, immediately after the expiration of the time limited for the construction or rebuilding by the owner, to cause such sidewalk to be constructed and the expense thereof shall be charged to such premises and the owner thereof, and collected as provided for single lot assessments in chapter 34. 
(Prior Code, § 4.67) 
Sec. 36-75. - Maintenance. 
    No person shall permit any sidewalk which adjoins property owned by him to fall into a state of disrepair or to be unsafe. 
(Prior Code, § 4.68) 
Sec. 36-76. - Repair. 
    Whenever the city manager shall determine that a sidewalk is unsafe for use, notice may be given to the owner of the lot or premises adjacent to and abutting upon said sidewalk of such determination which notice shall be given in accordance with section 1-6. Thereafter, it shall be the duty of the owner to place said sidewalk in a safe condition. Such notice shall specify a reasonable time, not less than seven days, within which such work shall be commenced, and shall further provide that the work shall be completed with due diligence. If the owner of such lot or premises shall refuse or neglect to repair said sidewalk within the time limited therefor, or in a manner otherwise than in accordance with this article, the city manager shall have said sidewalk repaired. If the city manager determines that the condition of said sidewalk is such that immediate repair is necessary to protect the public, he may dispense with said notice. The cost of repairs hereunder shall be charged against the premises which said sidewalks adjoins and the owner of said premises, and shall be collected as provided for single lot assessments in chapter 34. 
(Prior Code, § 4.69) 
Sec. 36-77. - Snow and ice removal. 
(a)  The occupant of any premises, or the owner of any unoccupied premises is required to keep the sidewalks in front of or adjacent to such premises cleared, so far as is practicable and reasonable, from snow and ice to facilitate pedestrian use. 
(b)  This section is punishable as a municipal civil infraction. 
(Prior Code, § 4.70; Ord. No. 95-21, 8-7-1995; Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1, 11-17-2014) 
Sec. 36-78. - Deposit in roadway. 
(a)  No person shall place, throw, deposit, or dump any snow or ice in or on any public right-of-way in any manner which impedes or interferes with the free flow of traffic, unless consent to do so based upon necessity is granted by the city manager. 
(b)  This section is punishable as a municipal civil infraction. 
(Prior Code, § 4.71; Ord. No. 95-21, 8-7-1995) 
Sec. 36-79. - Business district snow and refuse removal. 
(a)  The business district, as used in this section, includes Mitchell Street from Howard Street, north to North Street, and that part of all streets intersecting Mitchell Street between Howard and North Streets, lying between Lake and Shelby Streets. 
(b)  Every person having the care, either as owner or occupant, of any business premises or any unoccupied premises bordered by a graded or paved sidewalk in the business district shall promptly remove all snow and ice from said sidewalk and keep the same free from obstructions, encroachments, encumbrances, filth, and other nuisances. No person shall place or deposit any snow or ice from any private or business premises within the right-of-way of any street, alley, or highway within the city, after the city has cleared that part of such street, alley, or highway, which abuts such premises for traffic. 
(c)  If any occupant or owner shall neglect or fail to promptly clear ice or snow from the sidewalk adjoining his premises, or shall otherwise permit ice or snow to accumulate on such sidewalk, he shall be guilty of a violation of this Code and in addition, the city manager may cause the same to be cleared and the expense of removal shall become a debt to the city from the occupant or owner of such premises, and shall be collected as any other debt to the city, and said debt may be levied against the premises as a special assessment and collected as provided for in chapter 34. 
(d)  This section is punishable as a municipal civil infraction. 
(Prior Code, § 4.72; Ord. No. 95-21, 8-7-1995) 
Secs. 36-80-36-101. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STREET VACATIONS 

Sec. 36-102. - Descriptions of vacated property. 
    The following described property is hereby vacated by the city, to wit: 
(1)  Pennsylvania Avenue from Kentucky Avenue to Illinois Avenue in the Plat of Sunnyside Park, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(2)  Fenner Avenue from M-55 East along the 1/8 th line of the Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) of Section 7, 474 feet, and the alley located at the end of Fenner Avenue running Northeast 380 feet, more or less, to M-55, in the City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(3)  Portion of Lake Street lying West of the West line of Block H, Mitchell's Revised Plat of the City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. All that triangular shaped parcel of land situated in the City of Cadillac, County of Wexford, and State of Michigan, bounded and described as follows, VIZ: Beginning at a point at the Southwest corner of Block H of Mitchell's Revised Plat of the Village of Clam Lake, Cadillac, Michigan; thence West along the extension of the South line of Block H, 43.00 feet; thence North 17°34'18" West, 189.87 feet to a point on the West line of Block H; thence South 30°39'4" East along the West line of Block H, 185.49 feet to the point of beginning. 
(4)  Portion of Sunnyside Drive commencing at the Southwest corner of Government Lot 5, Section 7, Township 21 North, Range 9 West; thence East along the South line of Government Lot 5, a distance of 1,432.34 feet to the North right-of-way line of Old M-55; thence North 62°21' West, 158.14 feet to the point of beginning; thence from said point of beginning South 62°21' East, 75 feet along the North right-of-way line of Old M-55; thence South 27°39' West, 13 feet; thence North 62°21' West, 75 feet; thence North 27°39' East, 13 feet to the point of beginning, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(5)  That part of West Nelson Street lying West of the railroad right-of-way, except the West 100 feet thereof, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(6)  A portion of a 25 foot alley, in Lakeside Plat, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan, commencing at the Northwest corner of Lot 83, Lakeside Plat; thence South along the West line of Lot 83, 88.5 feet; thence West 25 feet; thence North 88.5 feet; thence East 25 feet to the point of beginning; and a portion of Forest Lane, in Lakeside Plat, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan, commencing at the Northeast corner of Lot 83, Lakeside Plat; thence North 33 feet to the centerline of Forest Lane; thence Westerly along the centerline of Forest Lane, 88.6 feet to the East line of Lot 67; thence Southerly 33 feet; thence Easterly 88.6 feet to the point of beginning, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(7)  A portion of South Shelby Street between East Chapin and East Cass Streets, in the City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. South Shelby Street between the North right-of-way line of East Chapin Street and the South right-of-way line of East Cass Street, except that part of the South 175 feet lying East of a line 33 feet of the existing curb on the East Side. 
(8)  Ramona Street, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(9)  A portion of the alley running from Carmel Street to the alley running from Henry Street to Evart Street, East Lawn Plat City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(10)  That portion of Frisbie Street between Corwin and Holman Streets in the Cadillac Industrial Park Plat, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(11)  That portion of the alley running between Stimson Street and Howard Street in Block 9 of Mitchell's Revised Plat, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(12)  That portion of the 20 foot alley located East of Lots 14 and 15 in South Lake Park Plat, Section 9, Township 21 North, Range 9 West, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(13)  That portion of Mohawk Street lying West of Iroquois Street in C. A. Hofmeister's Plat of Kenwood Park, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(14)  Seventh Avenue between Blocks 160 and 161 in the Improvement Board Addition to the City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(15)  That part of the Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) of Section 33, Township 22 North, Range 9 West, Wexford County, Michigan, commencing at the Northeast corner of Block 189 of the Improvement Board Addition to the City of Cadillac; thence North 26°21'32" East, 30.61 feet along the railroad right-of-way to the point of beginning; thence North 26°21'32" East, 52.01 feet; thence North 79°46'06" West, 212.36 feet; thence North 84°22'09" West, 249.19 feet; thence South 2°24'57" West, 135.27 feet; thence South 89°53'07" East, 90.00 feet; thence North 49°48'51" East, 106.75 feet; thence South 84°25'37" East, 73.42 feet; thence South 79°49'49" East, 198.06 feet to the point of beginning, containing 0.75 acres, more or less, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(16)  With no restrictions-All of the alleys located in Blocks 170 and 171 in the Improvement Board Addition, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(17)  That portion of 7th Avenue between 6th and 13th Streets in the Plat of the Improvement Board's Addition to the City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(18)  That portion of Forest commencing at the Northeast corner of Lot 83 of the Lakeside Plat, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan as the point of beginning. Thence Northeasterly along the Westerly line of Shore Lane road extended to the South line of Lot 71; thence Westerly to the Southwest corner of Lot 69; thence South 33 feet to the centerline of Forest Lane; thence Easterly along the centerline of Forest Lane to a point directly North of the point of beginning; thence South to the point of beginning. 
(19)  A parcel of land in the Harry VanderJagt Industrial Park, which is located in the Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) of Section 32, Township 22 North, Range 9 West, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan, and described as all the right-of-way of Ron Wilson Street lying South of the South right-of-way line of Frank Miltner Street. 
(20)  The alley running between and parallel with Chestnut and Walnut Streets and connecting Allen and Donnelly Streets, in the City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(21)  Commencing at a point on the South line of Sunset Lane, 99 feet West of the Northeast corner of Lot 62, of Lakeside Plat; thence North 89°45' West, 66 feet on the North line of Lot 62; thence South 0°30' West, 340 feet, more or less, to the South line of Lot 68 of Lakeside Plat; thence East 66 feet along the South line of Lot 68; thence North 0°30' East, 340 feet, more or less, to the point of beginning, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(22)  All of the alleys located within Blocks 179 and 188 in the Improvement Board Addition, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(23)  That parcel of the City owned right-of-way lying North of and adjacent to the North right-of-way line of Chestnut Street and West of and adjacent to the West right-of-way line of Lake Street and East of and adjacent to the East right-of-way line of the old Ann Arbor Railroad, containing approximately 0.2 acres being a part of the plat of Block 105, City of Cadillac. 
(24)  The alley running North from Ayer Street to Wheeler Street, in the City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan, being in block 254, Smith & Ernsts Addition. 
(25)  North Garfield Street, except a 12 foot strip thereof, the centerline of which is the centerline of the gravel roadway now existing in said street, between Holbrook and May Streets, in the City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan, being between Blocks 7 and 8, May & Mitchells Addition. 
(26)  Seventh Street between Sixth Avenue and Fifth Avenue, bounded on the North by Block 174 of the Improvement Board Addition, and on the South by Block 169 of the Improvement Board Addition, in the City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
a.  Is hereby amended to permit construction within the former city road which was previously vacated by Ordinance No. 92-24, subject to the absolute right of the city to enter upon, tear down or take such action as it deems necessary to preserve and maintain the city utilities as now or hereafter existing, and the extra cost incurred by the city as a result of any structures in the former city road shall be reimbursed forthwith by the affected owner. The cost of any damage to any structure located on the former road shall be borne solely by the affected owner of such structures. 
b.  This vacation is subject to the condition that title to all electric poles, wires, conduits, cables, appurtenances and facilities, including a city storm sewer, now in, under or over said road is reserved to and shall remain in the owner thereof, together with the easement and continued right to occupy said road within the right-of-way thereof for public utility purposes with present and additional facilities and to operate, maintain, repair, replace or remove the same to the same effect and in the same manner as if said road had remained a public way. Construction will be permitted over and across the vacated roadway at the sole risk of the owner of said real estate, it being understood that the city reserves an easement for the purpose of servicing, installing and/or replacing utilities which exist in the vacated roadway which is the subject of this vacation. Any construction on the property vacated must be removed if it interferes with the rights retained above in favor of the city. 
(27)  The platted alley running diagonally across Lot 17 and a portion of Lot 16, Block 133, Diggins First Addition, in the City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(28)  The alley running parallel with and South of Pine Street, between Shelby and Simons Streets, in Block 20 of Mitchell's Revised Plat, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(29)  Lots 22 and 23 in Block 54, G.A. Mitchell's Plat of the Southeast Quarter (SE1/4), Section 33, Township 22 North, Range 9 West, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan, EXCEPT a 20-foot wide easement for road purposes over and across a part of Lots 22 and 23, described as being 10 feet on either side of the following described centerline: commencing at the Northwest corner of Lot 23, Block 54, of said Plat; thence North 59°58'00" East, 44.00 feet along the South right-of-way of Bremer Street to the point of beginning; thence leaving said right-of-way South 30°07'17" East, 25.33 feet; thence South 16°53'23" East, 56.30 feet; thence South 0°51'56" West, 53.10 feet; thence South 17°47'23" West, 26.27 feet to a point on the North right-of-way of the alley in said Block 54, being the point of ending. 
(30)  The North/South and East/West alleys within Block 167; the East/West alley, and the South Half (S1/2) of the North/South alley lying Easterly of Lot 7 and Westerly of Lots 4, 5 and 6, within Block 182; the East/West alley within Block 183; the East/West alley within Block 184; and the East/West alley and the North/South alley within Block 185, all in the Improvement Board Addition, City of Cadillac, Wexford, Michigan. 
(31)  The alley between Iowa and Kentucky Avenues in Block 1 of Sunnyside Park Addition, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(32)  All of Jasper Street lying East of Lake Street (formerly Hector Street) and running in an East and West direction (but this vacation shall not affect the portion of Jasper Street lying between Pollard Street and a line which would extend between the North boundary line of Lots 65 and 66 and running in an Easterly and Westerly direction), and the East-West alley lying East of Lake Street (formerly Hector Street), and lying South of Lots 62 and 63 and North of Lots 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60 and 61, all in Pollards Subdivision of Blocks E and F, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(33)  The North 50 feet of Iroquois Place in C. A. Hofmeister's Plat of Kenwood Park, in the City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(34)  South Shelby Street lying between the North right-of-way line of East Chapin Street and the South right-of-way line of East Cass Street, except that part of the South 156 feet lying East of a line 9.8 feet West of the existing centerline, Mitchell's Revised Plat, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(35)  That portion of the alley between Crippen and North Streets East of the West lot line of Lots 5 and 17, and West to vacated Hemlock Street, Block 56, G.A. Mitchell's Plat of the Southeast Quarter (SE1/4), Section 33, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(36)  That portion of the alley between Wall and Lester Streets from adjacent to Lot 7 (which is the intersection of Lots 6 and 7), East to Lester Street, Block 119, Russell's Subdivision, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(37)  That portion of Kenwood Road between Alexander Avenue and Newland Avenue in the Plat of Shadyside Park, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
Section 3 of Ord. No. 96-04, (4.151.37) adopted June 3, 1996, and recorded June 7, 1996, in Liber 75, page 710, in the office of the county register of deeds, is hereby amended to remove and replace the restriction on construction on the vacated property, said Section 3 being amended to read as follows, to wit: 
This vacation is subject to the condition that title to all electric poles, wires, conduits, cables, appurtenances, and facilities, including a city storm sewer, now in, under or over said road is reserved to and shall remain in the owner thereof, together with the easement and continued right to occupy said road within the right-of-way thereof for public utility purposes with present and additional facilities and to operate, maintain, repair, replace or remove the same to the same effect and in the same manner as if said road had remained a public way. No construction shall be permitted within ten feet on either side of the existing water line on the vacated property. Any owner contemplating construction over said vacated property shall be required to seek approval from the city water department prior to commencing any such construction. 
(38)  A portion of the public right-of-way in the Plat of Baptist Summer Resort, beginning at the Northeast corner of Lot 29 of the Plat of Baptist Summer Resort; thence North 6,221 West, 75 feet, more or less, to the Southeasterly most point of Sea Breeze Park; thence North 2,250 East, 7 feet; thence South 6,221 East, 75 feet, more or less; thence South 2,250 West, 7 feet to the Point of Beginning, Section 7, Township 21 North, Range 9 West, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(39)  The entire alley running East and West lying South of and adjacent to Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6, Block 11, Highway Park Addition to the City of Cadillac, and North of Block 333 of vacated Lakeview Addition, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(40)  A parcel of land in Section 33, Township 22 North, Range 9 West, which is 66 feet wide, whose centerline is described as beginning at the East right-of-way line of Linden Street and the centerline of Haynes Street; thence East 120 feet to the point of ending, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(41)  The East-West alley running South of Lots 76 and 81 and North of Lots 75 and 66 in Pollards Park Plat, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(42)  That portion of Eighth Street lying East of the East right-of-way line of Fourth Avenue and West of the West platted line of Lot 1, Block 176, Improvement Board Addition, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(43)  The Northerly 7 feet of Stimson Street between Shelby and Mitchell Streets in Mitchell's Revised Plat, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(44)  That portion of the alley which lies Southerly of and contiguous to Lots 7, 8 and 9, and Northerly of and contiguous to Lots 10, 11 and 12, all in Block 8, of Mitchell's Revised Plat of the Village of Clam Lake, now City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
a.  This vacation is subject to all existing easements or franchises presently exercised or in existence in said alley which benefit entities other than the city. 
b.  The city abandons any easements it may have in the above described alley. This vacation is subject to any other (noncity) easements for utilities. 
(45)  The alley which lies North of Lots 36 through 45 and South of Lots 46 through 55, and that portion of East Garfield lying North of Lots 16 through 20 and South of Lots 41 through 45, all in Rosedale Park Plat, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. This vacation is subject to and contingent upon the owners of Lots 21 and 22 in Rosedale Park Plat conveying to the City of Cadillac the North 20 feet of said Lots 21 and 22, and the owners of Lots 39 and 40 in Rosedale Park Plat conveying to the City of Cadillac the South 20 feet of said Lots 39 and 40. 
(46)  The entire alley situated in Block 134 of Diggins First Addition to the City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(47)  Parcel A: That part of the Michigan Department of Transportation Railroad (formerly Penn Central) right-of-way in Mitchell's Revised Plat of the Village of Clam Lake, now City of Cadillac, in Government Lot 3, Section 4, Township 21 North, Range 9 West, and Section 33, Township 22 North, Range 9 West, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan, described as beginning at the intersection of the North line of Pine Street and the centerline of the main track of a railroad formerly of Penndel Company (Penn Central); thence along the North line of Pine Street South 59°07'40" West (recorded as South 59°16'00" West), 50.00 feet; thence North 30°52'20" West parallel with the centerline of the main track, 200.27 feet; thence North 59°07'40" East parallel to the North line of Pine Street, 65.00 feet; thence South 30°52'20" East parallel to the main track, 200.27 feet to the North line of Pine Street; thence along the North line of Pine Street South 59°07'40" West (recorded as South 59°16'00" West), 15.00 feet to the point of beginning. 
This vacation is subject to and contingent upon the owner of the real estate described in this subsection, upon which the nonplatted alley is situated granting to the city a permanent easement and right-or-way over and across the following described parcel, to wit: 
Commencing at the Southeast corner of Lot 6, Block 3 of Mitchell's Revised Plat of Clam Lake (now City of Cadillac); thence Northerly along the Easterly lot line 156 feet, and continuing across the existing alley to the Southeast corner of Lot 12, Block 3, Mitchell's Revised Plat of Clam Lake (now City of Cadillac); thence Easterly perpendicular to said line 14 feet; thence Southerly parallel with said lot line to the right-of-way of Pine Street; thence Westerly to the point of beginning, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(48)  Parcel A. A part of Simons Street, Chittenden and Wheeler's Addition to the City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan, described as beginning at the Northeast corner of Lot 8, Block 217; thence North 60°00'00" West, 140.00 feet along the Northerly line of Lot 8; thence North 30°00'00" East, 24.00 feet; thence North 75°00'00" East, 12.73 feet; thence South 60°00'00" East, 131.00 feet to the Northwesterly line of Wheeler Street; thence South 30°00'00" West, 33.00 feet to the point of beginning. Parcel B. A part of Simons Street, Chittenden and Wheeler's Addition to the City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan, described as beginning at the Southeast corner of Lot 1, Block 216; thence South 30°00'00" West, 13.00 feet along the Northwesterly line of Wheeler Street; thence North 60°00'00" West, 131.00 feet; thence North 15°00'00" West, 18.38 feet to the Southwest corner of Lot 1, thence South 60°00'00" East, 144.00 feet to the point of beginning. 
a.  The city reserves an easement for any and all utilities and sidewalks deemed necessary by the city, or any public utility, on, in, over and across said vacated portions of Simons Street. This vacation is subject to all existing easements or franchises presently exercised or in existence in said street. 
b.  The city reserves a permanent easement for construction of the Clam River Pathway, including fences and all other necessary construction to complete the pathway. 
c.  This vacation is subject to the condition that title to all electric poles, wires, conduits, cables, appurtenances and facilities, now in, under or over said alley is reserved to and shall remain in the owner thereof, together with the easement and continued right to occupy said alley within the right-of-way thereof for public utility purposes with present and additional facilities and to operate, maintain, repair, replace or remove the same to the same effect and in the same manner as if said alley had remained a public way. No new construction shall be permitted on the property vacated. 
d.  This article is subject to all the terms and conditions of Ord. No. 2001-11 and is contingent on the passage of Ord. No. 2001-11. 
(49)  That portion of Michigan Avenue situated between Ohio Avenue and M-115, lying South of Block 5 in Sunnyside Park Plat, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(50)  The West 9 feet of Lot 1, Block 74, G. A. Mitchell's Plat of the Southwest Quarter (SW1/4), Section 3, Township 21 North, Range 9 West, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(51)  The Easterly 150 feet of Elizabeth Street lying between Lots 4, 5 and the West Half (W1/2) of Lot 6, Block 122, and Lots 4, 5 and the West Half (W1/2) of Lot 6, Block 121, in Johnson's Addition to the City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(52)  That portion of Hobart Street lying South of Block 20 of the G. A. Mitchell Plat of the Northwest Quarter (NW1/4), Section 3, Township 21 North, Range 9 West, and lying between the East line of Oak Street and the West line of Maple Street, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(53)  That part of South Garfield and May Streets in the Plats of May and Mitchell's Addition and the Plat of Crawford's Subdivision of Block 7 of May and Mitchell's Addition to the City of Cadillac, described as beginning at the Southwest corner of Block 2, May and Mitchell's Addition to the City of Cadillac; thence South 89°26'53" West, 24.00 feet along the North line of East Division Street; thence North 00°33'31" West, 142.75 feet parallel to the West line of said Block 2; thence South 89°21'08" West, 56.00 feet to the Southeast corner of Lot 6, Block 1, May and Mitchell's Addition; thence North 00°33'33" West, 34.21 feet along the East line of said Lot 6 to the South line of South Garfield Street; thence North 54°22'11" West, 163.17 feet along the South line of South Garfield Street to the Northwest corner of Lot 7 Block 1, May and Mitchell's Addition; thence North 51°36'33" East, 166.01 feet to the Northwesterly corner of Lot 12, Crawford's Subdivision of Block 7; thence South 00°42'11" East, 135.80 feet along the West line of Lots 12 and 11 to the Southwesterly corner of Lot 11 of Crawford's Subdivision of Block 7; thence South 54°22'11" East, 99.40 feet along the Southwesterly line of Lots 11 and 10, Crawford's Subdivision of Block 7; thence North 89°28'03" East, 201.29 feet along the North line of South Garfield Street to the center of a vacated alley; thence South 00°55'01" West, 50.05 feet to the South line of South Garfield Street and the North line of Block 2, May and Mitchell's Addition; thence South 89°28'32" West, 200.00 feet to the Northwest corner of said Block 2, thence South 00°33'31" East 130.57 feet to the point of beginning, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
a.  The city reserves an easement for any and all utilities and sidewalks deemed necessary by the city, or any public utility, on, in, over and across said vacated Garfield and May Streets. 
b.  This vacation is subject to the condition that title to all electric poles, wires, conduits, cables, appurtenances and facilities, now in, under or over said street is reserved to and shall remain in the owner thereof, together with the easement and continued right to occupy said street within the right-of-way thereof for public utility purposes with present and additional facilities and to operate, maintain, repair, replace or remove the same to the same effect and in the same manner as if said street had remained a public way. No new construction shall be permitted on the property vacated. However, construction may occur within the vacated right-of-way so long as all affected utilities are accommodated and compensated for relocation at the expense of the county, which would include all costs for relocating existing poles, wires, conduits, cables, piping, facilities, and related appurtenances. 
c.  This vacation is further subject to the condition that the county shall cause to have constructed at county expense, a cul-de-sac or other traffic control device or other acceptable (to the city) traffic management facility at the West end of the nonvacated portion of South Garfield Street and at the North end of the nonvacated portion of May Street to facilitate city snowplows. The county shall improve the remaining South Garfield Street (that portion not vacated) to allow for two-way traffic. All of such plans shall be subject to the satisfaction of the city administration. Further, that the North end of the proposed overflow parking lot must be closed from access onto West Garfield Street. 
d.  This vacation is conditioned upon construction of an addition to the county courthouse, and for this vacation to be effective, construction on said courthouse addition must commence on or before May 6, 2004. 
(54)  The alley located between Maple Street and Oak Street in Block 20 of G. A. Mitchell's Plat of the Northwest Quarter (NW1/4), Section 3, Township 21 North, Range 9 West, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(55)  The alley located between Allen Street and Rogers Street in Block 327, and the alley located between Rogers Street and Snider Street in Block 332, all in the Lakeview Addition Plat, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(56)  The alley located between Smith Street and Wheeler Street in Block 260, Smith and Ernst Addition, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(57)  The Southerly 120 feet of Iowa Avenue lying between Lot 6 in Block 1 and Lot 10 in Block 2, North of Michigan Avenue, Sunnyside Park Plat, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
(58)  That part of an alley lying between Lots 4 and 5 on the South and Lots 6 and 7 on the North, Block 1, May and Mitchell's Addition; and that part of May Street lying between the North Half (N1/2) of Lot 5 and the alley in Block 1 on the West; and the North Half (N1/2) of Block 2; and the South 20 feet of the West end of South Garfield Street (now vacated), May and Mitchell's Addition, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
a.  The city reserves an easement for any and all utilities and sidewalks deemed necessary by the city, or any public utility, on, in, over and across said vacated Garfield and May Streets. 
b.  This vacation is subject to the condition that title to all electric poles, wires, conduits, cables, appurtenances and facilities, now in, under or over said street is reserved to and shall remain in the owner thereof, together with the easement and continued right to occupy said street within the right-of-way thereof for public utility purposes with present and additional facilities and to operate, maintain, repair, replace or remove the same to the same effect and in the same manner as if said street had remained a public way. No new construction shall be permitted on the property vacated. However, construction may occur within the vacated right-of-way so long as all affected utilities are accommodated and compensated for relocation at the expense of the county, which would include all costs for relocating existing poles, wires, conduits, cables, piping, facilities, and related appurtenances. 
c.  This vacation is further subject to the condition that the county shall be responsible for snow removal for the small nonvacated portion of May Street. 
(59)  The alley in Block 4 of May and Mitchell's Addition to the City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
a.  The city reserves an easement for any and all utilities and sidewalks deemed necessary by the city, or any public utility, on, in, over and across said vacated alley. 
b.  This vacation is subject to the condition that title to all electric poles, wires, conduits, cables, appurtenances and facilities, now in, under or over said alley is reserved to and shall remain in the owner thereof, together with the easement and continued right to occupy said alley within the right-of-way thereof for public utility purposes with present and additional facilities and to operate maintain, repair, replace or remove the same to the same effect and in the same manner as if said alley had remained a public way. No new construction shall be permitted on the property vacated. 
(60)  That part of South Street in Government Lot 6, Section 4, Township 21 North, Range 9 West, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan, described as commencing at the Northeast corner of Lot 36 of Johnson's Cadillac Shores; thence South 24°41'41" East, 66.00 feet; thence North 65°26'00" East, 8.63 feet; thence 54.53 feet along the arc of a 53.82 foot radius curve to the right having a long chord of South 03°47'39" West, 52.22 feet, all being along the Easterly line of said Lot 36; thence North 32°47'41" East, 108.28 feet; thence 194.61 feet along the arc of a 343.07 foot radius curve to the right having a long chord of North 49°02'58" East, 192.01 feet; thence South 65°18'00" West along the existing Northerly right-of-way of South Street, 259.36 feet to the point of beginning, containing 0.21 acres, more or less. 
a.  This vacation is conditioned upon the adjacent owners, Four Winns Boats, L.L.C. and C.O. Management Services, Inc., signing the conveyances to each other so as to convey the land vacated according to the certificate of survey prepared by Wilcox Professional Services, dated October 28, 2003. 
b.  The city reserves an easement for any and all utilities and sidewalks deemed necessary by the city, or any public utility, on, in, over and across said vacated South Street, and also reserves to a sanitary sewer easement described as follows, to wit: 
A 20-foot wide sanitary sewer easement over, under and across that part of Government Lot 6, Section 4, Township 21 North, Range 9 West, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan, being described as: Commencing at the Northeast corner of Lot 36 of Johnson's Cadillac Shores; thence North 65°18'00" East along the existing Northerly right-of-way line of South Street, 244.33 feet to the point of beginning of a 20-foot wide strip of land lying 10 feet each side of and adjacent to a centerline described as: thence South 69°23'39" West, 72.18 feet; thence South 30°00'53" West, 26.11 feet; thence South 49°58'45" East, 6.99 feet; thence returning North 49°58'45" West, 6.99 feet; thence South 29°01'15" West, 24.70 feet to the point of ending, containing 130 lineal feet, more or less, sidelines to be lengthened or shorted to intersect property lines. 
c.  This vacation is subject to the condition that title to all electric poles, wires, conduits, cables, appurtenances and facilities, now in, under or over said street is reserved to and shall remain in the owner thereof, together with the easement and continued right to occupy said street within the right-of-way thereof for public utility purposes with present and additional facilities and to operate, maintain, repair, replace or remove the same to the same effect and in the same manner as if said street had remained a public way. No new construction shall be permitted on the property vacated. However, construction may occur within the vacated right-of-way so long as all affected utilities are accommodated and compensated for relocation at the expense of the county, which would include all costs for relocating existing poles, wires, conduits, cables, piping, facilities, and related appurtenances. 
(61)  All of the alleys in Block 174 of the Improvement Board's Addition to the City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
a.  The city reserves an easement for any and all utilities deemed necessary by the city, or any public utility, on, in, over and across said vacated alleys. This vacation is subject to all existing easements or franchises presently exercised or in existence in said alley. 
b.  This vacation is subject to the condition that title to all electric poles, wires, conduits, cables, appurtenances and facilities, now in, under or over said alley is reserved to and shall remain in the owner thereof, together with the easement and continued right to occupy said alley within the right-of-way thereof for public utility purposes with present and additional facilities and to operate, maintain, repair, replace or remove the same to the same effect and in the same manner as if said alley had remained a public way. No new construction shall be permitted on the property vacated. 
(Prior Code, § 4.151; Ord. No. 85-11, 9-9-1985; Ord. No. 85-13, 11-4-1985; Ord. No. 87-04, 3-2-1987; Ord. No. 87-05, 3-23-1987; Ord. No. 87-20, 10-19-1987; Ord. No. 88-10, 6-20-1988; Ord. No. 88-15, 8-15-1988; Ord. No. 88-17, 9-19-1988; Ord. No. 88-23, 11-7-1988; Ord. No. 88-24, 11-7-1988; Ord. No. 88-25, 12-5-1988; Ord. No. 89-02, 2-6-1989; Ord. No. 89-06, 3-20-1989; Ord. No. 89-14, 9-18-1989; Ord. No. 90-07, 4-16-1990; Ord. No. 90-12, 6-4-1990; Ord. No. 90-16, 9-10-1990; Ord. No. 90-17, 11-5-1990; Ord. No. 91-11, 10-7-1991; Ord. No. 91-12, 10-21-1991; Ord. No. 92-02, 2-3-1992; Ord. No. 92-13, 8-3-1992; Ord. No. 92-14, 9-14-1992; Ord. No. 92-17, 10-5-1992; Ord. No. 92-18, 10-5-1992; Ord. No. 92-24, 12-21-1992; Ord. No. 93-07, 5-3-1993; Ord. No. 93-22, 10-4-1993; Ord. No. 97-21, 12-15-1997; Ord. No. 93-31, 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 93-32, 12-20-1993; Ord. No. 93-24, 3-7-1994; Ord. No. 94-03, 3-21-1994; Ord. No. 94-09, 8-15-1994; Ord. No. 94-16, 12-7-1994; Ord. No. 95-30, 10-16-1995; Ord. No. 96-01, 5-6-1996; Ord. No. 96-04, 6-3-1996; Ord. No. 97-01, 3-3-1997; Ord. No. 97-14, 8-4-1997; Ord. No. 98-03, 5-4-1998; Ord. No. 98-11, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 98-17, 10-19-1998; Ord. No. 99-09, 7-19-1999; Ord. No. 99-13, 7-19-1999; Ord. No. 99-14, 8-16-1999; Ord. No. 99-16, 11-1-1999; Ord. No. 2000-03, 2-21-2000; Ord. No. 2001-10, 9-17-2001; Ord. No. 2001-12, 10-15-2001; Ord. No. 2002-03, 2-18-2002; Ord. No. 2002-01, 2-18-2002; Ord. No. 2002-02, 2-18-2002; Ord. No. 2002-07, 4-1-2002; Ord. No. 2002-08, 5-6-2002; Ord. No. 2002-14, 6-3-2002; Ord. No. 2002-19, 8-5-2002; Ord. No. 2002-20, 8-5-2002; Ord. No. 2002-27, 1-6-2003; Ord. No. 2003-10, 5-5-2003; Ord. No. 2003-19, 9-15-2003; Ord. No. 2004-03, 4-5-2004; Ord. No. 2004-13, 7-19-2004; Ord. No. 2006-17, § 1, 11-6-2006; Ord. No. 2006-18, 11-6-2006) 
Sec. 36-103. - Easements. 
    The city reserves an easement for any and all utilities and sidewalks deemed necessary by the city, or any public utility, on, in, over and across said street, deemed necessary by the city. This vacation is subject to all existing easements or franchises presently exercised or in existence in said street. 
(Prior Code, § 4.152; Ord. No. 85-11, 9-9-1985) 
Sec. 36-104. - Public utility rights. 
(a)  This vacation is subject to the condition that title to all electrical poles, wires, conduits, cables, appurtenances and facilities, including a city storm sewer, now, in, under or over said road is reserved to and shall remain in the owner thereof, together with the easement and continued right to occupy said road within the right-of-way thereof for public utility purposes with present and additional facilities and to operate, maintain, repair, replace or remove the same to the same effect and in the same manner as if said road had remained a public way. 
(b)  The city shall not be responsible for any damaged or destroyed vegetation or improvements caused by exercising its rights reserved in this article. 
(c)  No new construction shall be permitted on the property vacated. 
(Prior Code, § 4.153; Ord. No. 85-11, 9-9-1985) 
Chapter 38 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan telecommunications act, MCL 484.2101 et seq.; metropolitan extension telecommunications rights-of-way oversight act, MCL 484.3101 et seq.; Michigan broadband development authority act, MCL 484.3201 et seq.; uniform video services local franchise act, MCL 484.3301 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1-38-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Uniform video services local franchise act, MCL 484.3301 et seq. 

Sec. 38-19. - Purpose. 
(a)  Under the Uniform Video Services Local Franchise Act (MCL 484.3301 et seq.), video service providers may obtain a franchise to provide video services in the city using a standardized, uniform form of franchise agreement established by the MPSC. This form includes the right to use the public right-of-way to provide such service but does not contain right-of-way management and related provisions. 
(b)  Telecommunications providers who obtain such a standardized, uniform form of franchise agreement generally will have previously obtained from the city a permit under the Metro Act (MCL 484.3101 et seq.) to construct and maintain their telecommunications facilities in the public right-of-way. Such Metro Act permits set forth the terms and conditions for such right-of-way usage, standard forms of such permits were agreed to in a collaborative process between municipalities and providers that was initiated by the MPSC, and such standard forms have since been approved by the legislature and the MPSC. 
(c)  Because telecommunications providers typically provide video services over combined video and telecommunications facilities, such Metro Act permits generally provide adequate public right-of-way related protections for the city and the public when such providers are providing video services. 
(d)  Other video service providers, in particular new providers or existing cable companies, may not have a Metro Act permit issued by the city. 
(e)  The Uniform Video Services Local Franchise Act and the standardized, uniform franchise agreement require video service providers to comply with all valid and enforceable local regulations regarding the use and occupation of the public right-of-way in the delivery of video services, including the police powers of the franchising entity, and makes such right-of-way usage subject to the laws of the State of Michigan and the police powers of the franchising entity. 
(f)  The Uniform Video Services Local Franchise Act and the standardized, uniform franchise agreement state that franchising entities shall provide video service providers with open, comparable, nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral access to the public right-of-way, and may not discriminate against a video service provider for the authorization or placement of a video service or communications network in the public right-of-way. 
(g)  The Michigan constitution reserves reasonable control of their highways, streets, alleys and public places to local units of government. 
(h)  The purpose of this article is to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare and exercise reasonable control over the public right-of-way by regulating the use and occupation of such rights-of-way by video service providers who have a standardized, uniform franchise but who lack a Metro Act permit from the city. This article does so by setting forth terms and conditions for such usage and occupation from the forms of Metro Act permit approved by the MPSC and approved by the legislature in section 6(1) of the Metro Act (MCL 484.3106(1)), thus providing open, comparable, nondiscriminatory, and competitively neutral access to the public right-of-way and not discriminating against a video service provider for the authorization or placement of a video service or communications network in public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, § 3(7.201), 12-17-2007) 
Sec. 38-20. - Consistent interpretation. 
    This article shall be interpreted and applied so as to be consistent with the Metro Act and corresponding provisions of the forms of Metro Act permit approved by the MPSC, including applicable MPSC, Metro Authority and court decisions and determinations relating to same. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, § 3(7.202), 12-17-2007) 
Sec. 38-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the Uniform Video Services Local Franchise Act, being Act 480 of the Public Acts of 2007 (MCL 484.3301 et seq.), as amended from time to time. 
    Claims shall have the meaning set forth in section 38-25(a). 
    Facilities means the lines, equipment and other facilities of a permittee which use or occupy the public right-of-way in the delivery of video services in the city. 
    Franchise agreement means the franchise agreement entered into or possessed by a video service provider with the city as required by section 3(1) of the Act (MCL 484.3103(1)), if it is the standardized, uniform form of franchise agreement established by the MPSC. 
    Manager means the city manager or his designee. 
    Metro Act means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act, being Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002 (MCL 484.3101 et seq.). 
    Metro Act permit means a permit to use the public right-of-way issued by the city under its ordinance implementing the Metro Act after a provider's application for same to the city as set forth in such ordinance. 
    Metro authority shall have the same meaning as "Authority" in the Metro Act. 
    MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission, and shall have the same meaning as the term "Commission" in the Act and the Metro Act. 
    Permittee. 
(1)  The term "permittee" means a video service provider with a currently valid franchise agreement but without a currently valid Metro Act permit. 
(2)  Upon applying to the city for and then obtaining a Metro Act permit from the city, a video service provider is not a permittee and is no longer required to comply with this article. A video service provider is also not a permittee and is not required to comply with this article if it and the city enter into a voluntary franchise agreement as described in section 38-29(b). 
    Person means an individual, corporation, association, partnership, governmental entity, or any other legal entity. 
    Public right-of-way shall have the same meaning as in the Act. 
    Street construction and street resurfacing shall have the meanings set forth in section 38-24(h). 
    Video service shall have the same meaning as in the Act. 
    Video service provider shall have the same meaning as in the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, § 3(7.203), 12-17-2007) 
Sec. 38-22. - Applicability to permittees: compliance, insurance exception. 
    All permittees shall comply with this article, except that a permittee need not comply with the insurance provisions of section 38-26 if it is maintaining the insurance required by its franchise agreement (pertaining to incumbent video providers continuing certain insurance provided under their preceding franchise). 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, § 3(7.204), 12-17-2007) 
Sec. 38-23. - Contacts, maps and plans. 
(a)  Permittee contacts. The permittee shall provide the city manager with the names, addresses and the like for engineering and construction related information for the permittee and its facilities as follows: 
(1)  The address, e-mail address, phone number and contact person (title or name) at the permittee's local office (in or near the city). 
(2)  If the permittee's engineering drawings, as-built plans and related records for the facilities will not be located at the preceding local office, the location address, phone number and contact person (title or department) for them. 
(3)  The name, title, address, e-mail address and telephone numbers of the permittee's engineering contact person with responsibility for the design, plans and construction of the facilities. 
(4)  The address, phone number and contact person (title or department) at the permittee's home office/regional office with responsibility for engineering and construction related aspects of the facilities. 
(5)  The permittee shall at all times provide the city manager with the phone number at which a live representative of the permittee (not voice mail) can be reached 24 hours a day, seven days a week, in the event of a public emergency. 
(6)  The permittee shall notify the city in writing pursuant to the notice provisions of the franchise agreement of any changes in the preceding information. 
(b)  Route maps. Within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new facilities in the city, the permittee shall submit route maps showing the location of the facilities to the city, in the same manner and subject to the same provisions as apply to telecommunications providers under section 6(7) and 6(8) of the Metro Act (MCL 484.3106(7) and (8)). 
(c)  As-built records. The permittee, without expense to the city, shall, upon 48 hours' notice, give the city access to all "as-built" maps, records, plans and specifications showing the facilities or portions thereof in the public right-of-way. Upon request by the city, the permittee shall inform the city as soon as reasonably possible of any changes from previously supplied maps, records, or plans and shall mark up maps provided by the city so as to show the location of the facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, § 3(7.205), 12-17-2007) 
Sec. 38-24. - Use of public right-of-way. 
(a)  Overlashing. A permittee shall not allow the wires or any other facilities of a third party to be overlashed to the permittee's facilities without the city's prior written consent. The city's right to withhold written consent is subject to the authority of the MPSC under section 361 of the Michigan telecommunications act (MCL 484.2361). 
(b)  No burden on public right-of-way. The permittee, its contractors, subcontractors, and the facilities shall not unduly burden or interfere with the present or future use of any of the public right-of-way. The permittee's aerial cables and wires shall be suspended so as to not endanger or injure persons or property in or about the public right-of-way. If the city reasonably determines that any portion of the facilities constitutes an undue burden or interference, due to changed circumstances, the permittee, at its sole expense, shall modify the facilities or take such other actions as the city may determine is in the public interest to remove or alleviate the burden, and the permittee shall do so within a reasonable time period. The city shall attempt to require all occupants of a pole or conduit whose facilities are a burden to remove or alleviate the burden concurrently. 
(c)  No priority. This article does not establish any priority of use of the public right-of-way by the permittee over any present or future permittees or parties having agreements with the city or franchises for such use. In the event of any dispute as to the priority of use of the public right-of-way, the first priority shall be to the public generally, the second priority to the city, the third priority to the state and its political subdivisions in the performance of their various functions, and thereafter as between other permit, agreement or franchise holders, as determined (except as otherwise provided by law) by the city in the exercise of its powers, including the police power and other powers reserved to and conferred on it by the State of Michigan. 
(d)  Restoration of property. The permittee, its contractors and subcontractors shall immediately (subject to seasonal work restrictions) restore, at the permittee's sole expense, in a manner approved by the city, any portion of the public right-of-way that is in any way disturbed, damaged, or injured by the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal of the facilities to a reasonably equivalent (or, at the permittee's option, better) condition as that which existed prior to the disturbance. In the event that the permittee, its contractors or subcontractors fail to make such repair within a reasonable time, the city may make the repair and the permittee shall pay the costs the city incurred for such repair. 
(e)  Marking. The permittee shall mark its facilities installed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived as follows: Aerial portions of the facilities shall be marked with a marker on the permittee's lines on alternate poles which shall state the permittee's name and provide a toll-free number to call for assistance. Direct buried underground portions of the facilities shall have a conducting wire placed in the ground at least several inches above the permittee's cable (if such cable is nonconductive); at least several inches above that, a continuous colored tape with a statement to the effect that there is buried cable beneath; and stakes or other appropriate above ground markers with the permittee's name and a toll-free number indicating that there is buried cable below. Bored underground portions of the facilities shall have a conducting wire at the same depth as the cable and shall not be required to provide the continuous colored tape. Portions of the facilities located in conduit, including conduit of others used by the permittee, shall be marked at its entrance into and exit from each manhole and handhole with the permittee's name and a toll-free telephone number. 
(f)  Tree trimming. The permittee may trim trees upon and overhanging the public right-of-way so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming into contact with the facilities, consistent with any standards adopted by the city. The permittee shall dispose of all trimmed materials. The permittee shall minimize the trimming of trees to that essential to maintain the integrity of the facilities. Except in emergencies, all trimming of trees in the public right-of-way shall have the advance approval of manager. 
(g)  Installation and maintenance. The construction and installation of the facilities shall be performed pursuant to plans approved by the city. The open cut of any public right-of-way shall be coordinated with the city manager or his designee. The permittee shall install and maintain the facilities in a reasonably safe condition. If the existing poles in the public right-of-way are overburdened or unavailable for the permittee's use, or the facilities of all users of the poles are required to go underground then the permittee shall, at its expense, place such portion of its facilities underground, unless the city approves an alternate location. The permittee may perform maintenance on the facilities without prior approval of the city, provided that the permittee shall obtain any and all permits required by the city in the event that any maintenance will disturb or block vehicular traffic or are otherwise required by the city. 
(h)  Pavement cut coordination. 
(1)  The permittee shall coordinate its construction and all other work in the public right-of-way with the city's program for street construction and rebuilding (collectively "street construction") and its program for street repaving and resurfacing (except seal coating and patching) (collectively, "street resurfacing"). 
(2)  The goals of such coordination shall be to encourage the permittee to conduct all work in the public right-of-way in conjunction with or immediately prior to any street construction or street resurfacing planned by the city. 
(i)  Compliance with laws. The permittee shall comply with all valid and enforceable federal and state statutes and regulations; and all valid and enforceable local regulations regarding the use and occupation of the public right-of-way, including the police powers of the city; regarding the construction, installation, and maintenance of its facilities, now in force or which hereafter may be promulgated. Before any installation is commenced, the permittee shall secure all necessary permits, licenses and approvals from the city or other governmental entity as may be required by law, including, without limitation, all utility line permits and highway permits. The city shall not unreasonably delay or deny issuance of any such permits, licenses or approvals. The permittee shall comply in all respects with applicable codes and industry standards, including but not limited to the National Electrical Safety Code (latest edition adopted by the state public service commission) and the National Electrical Code (latest edition). The permittee shall comply with all zoning and land use ordinances and historic preservation ordinances as may exist or may hereafter be amended. This section does not constitute a waiver of the permittee's right to challenge laws, statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations now in force or established in the future. 
(j)  Street vacation. If the city vacates or consents to the vacation of public right-of-way within its jurisdiction, and such vacation necessitates the removal and relocation of the permittee's facilities in the vacated public right-of-way, the permittee shall consent to the vacation and remove its facilities at its sole cost and expense when ordered to do so by the city or a court of competent jurisdiction. The permittee shall relocate its facilities to such alternate route as the city and the permittee mutually agree, applying reasonable engineering standards. 
(k)  Relocation. If the city requests the permittee to relocate, protect, support, disconnect, or remove its facilities because of street or utility work, or other public projects, the permittee shall relocate, protect, support, disconnect, or remove its facilities, at its sole cost and expense, including where necessary to such alternate route as the city and the permittee mutually agree, applying reasonable engineering standards. The work shall be completed within a reasonable time period. 
(l)  Public emergency. The city shall have the right to sever, disrupt, dig-up or otherwise destroy facilities of the permittee if such action is necessary because of a public emergency. If reasonable to do so under the circumstances, the city shall attempt to provide notice to the permittee. Public emergency shall be any condition which poses an immediate threat to life, health, or property caused by any natural or manmade disaster, including, but not limited to, storms, floods, fire, accidents, explosions, water main breaks, hazardous material spills, etc. The permittee shall be responsible for repair at its sole cost and expense of any of its facilities damaged pursuant to any such action taken by the city. 
(m)  MISS DIG membership. If eligible to join, the permittee shall subscribe to and be a member of "MISS DIG," the association of utilities formed pursuant to Act 53 of the Public Acts of 1974, as amended (MCL 460.701 et seq.), and shall conduct its business in conformance with the statutory provisions and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(n)  Underground relocation. If the permittee has its facilities on poles of Consumers Energy, Detroit Edison or another electric or telecommunications provider and Consumers Energy, Detroit Edison or such other electric or telecommunications provider relocates its system underground, then the permittee shall relocate its facilities underground in the same location at the permittee's sole cost and expense. 
(o)  Identification. All personnel of the permittee and its contractors or subcontractors who have as part of their normal duties contact with the general public shall wear on their clothing a clearly visible identification card bearing the permittee's name, their name and photograph. The permittee shall account for all identification cards at all times. Every service vehicle of the permittee and its contractors or subcontractors shall be clearly identified as such to the public, such as by a magnetic sign with the permittee's name and telephone number. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, § 3(7.206), 12-17-2007) 
Sec. 38-25. - Indemnification; settlement of claims. 
(a)  Indemnity. The permittee shall defend, indemnify, protect, and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents, employees, elected and appointed officials, departments, boards, and commissions from any and all claims, losses, liabilities, causes of action, demands, judgments, decrees, proceedings, and expenses of any nature (collectively "claims") (including, without limitation, attorneys' fees) arising out of or resulting from the acts or omissions of the permittee, its officers, agents, employees, contractors, successors, or assigns, but only to the extent such acts or omissions are related to the permittee's use of or installation of facilities in the public right-of-way and only to the extent of the fault or responsibility of the permittee, its officers, agents, employees, contractors, successors and assigns. 
(b)  Notice, cooperation. The city shall notify the permittee promptly in writing of any such claims and the method and means proposed by the city for defending or satisfying any such claims. The city shall cooperate with the permittee in every reasonable way to facilitate the defense of any such claims. The city shall consult with the permittee respecting the defense and satisfaction of such claims, including the selection and direction of legal counsel. 
(c)  Settlement. The city shall not settle any claim subject to indemnification under sections 38-23 and 38-24 without the advance written consent of the permittee, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. The permittee shall have the right to defend or settle, at its own expense, any claim against the city for which the permittee is responsible hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, § 3(7.207), 12-17-2007) 
Sec. 38-26. - Insurance. 
(a)  Coverage required. Prior to beginning any construction in or installation of the permittee's facilities in the public right-of-way, the permittee shall obtain insurance as set forth below and file certificates evidencing same with the city. Such insurance shall be maintained in full force and effect until the end of the term of the franchise agreement. In the alternative, the permittee may satisfy this requirement through a program of self-insurance, acceptable to the city, by providing reasonable evidence of its financial resources to the city. The city's acceptance of such self-insurance shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(1)  Commercial general liability insurance, including completed operations liability, independent contractors liability, contractual liability coverage, railroad protective coverage and coverage for property damage from perils of explosion, collapse or damage to underground utilities, commonly known as XCU coverage, in an amount not less than $5,000,000.00. 
(2)  Liability insurance for sudden and accidental environmental contamination with minimum limits of $500,000.00 and providing coverage for claims discovered within three years after the term of the policy. Pursuant to the 2006 MPSC decision in Case U-14720, the permittee need not comply with the preceding sentence until such time after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived that it decides to place any new or existing facilities underground within the public right-of-way in the city. 
(3)  Automobile liability insurance in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00. 
(4)  Workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance with statutory limits, and any applicable federal insurance of a similar nature. 
(5)  The coverage amounts set forth above may be met by a combination of underlying (primary) and umbrella policies so long as in combination the limits equal or exceed those stated. If more than one insurance policy is purchased to provide the coverage amounts set forth above, then all policies providing coverage limits excess to the primary policy shall provide drop down coverage to the first dollar of coverage and other contractual obligations of the primary policy, should the primary policy carrier not be able to perform any of its contractual obligations or not be collectible for any of its coverages for any reason during the term of the franchise agreement, or (when longer) for as long as coverage could have been available pursuant to the terms and conditions of the primary policy. 
(b)  Additional insured. The city shall be named as an additional insured on all policies (other than worker's compensation and employer's liability). All insurance policies shall provide that they shall not be canceled, modified or not renewed unless the insurance carrier provides 30 days' prior written notice to the city. The permittee shall annually provide the city with a certificate of insurance evidencing such coverage. All insurance policies (other than environmental contamination, workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance) shall be written on an occurrence basis and not on a claims made basis. 
(c)  Qualified insurers. All insurance shall be issued by insurance carriers licensed to do business by the State of Michigan or by surplus line carriers on the Michigan Insurance Commission approved list of companies qualified to do business in Michigan. All insurance and surplus line carriers shall be rated A+ or better by A.M. Best Company. 
(d)  Deductibles. If the insurance policies required by this article are written with retainages or deductibles in excess of $50,000.00, they shall be approved by Manager in advance in writing. The permittee shall indemnify and save harmless the city from and against the payment of any deductible and from the payment of any premium on any insurance policy required to be furnished hereunder. 
(e)  Contractors. The permittee's contractors and subcontractors working in the public right-of-way shall carry in full force and effect commercial general liability, environmental contamination liability, automobile liability and workers' compensation and employer liability insurance which complies with all terms of this section. In the alternative, the permittee, at its expense, may provide such coverages for any or all its contractors or subcontractors (such as by adding them to the permittee's policies). 
(f)  Insurance primary. The permittee's insurance coverage shall be primary insurance with respect to the city, its officers, agents, employees, elected and appointed officials, departments, boards, and commissions (collectively "them"). Any insurance or self-insurance maintained by any of them shall be in excess of the permittee's insurance and shall not contribute to it (where "insurance or self-insurance maintained by any of them" includes any contract or agreement providing any type of indemnification or defense obligation provided to, or for the benefit of them, from any source, and includes any self-insurance program or policy, or self-insured retention or deductible by, for or on behalf of them). 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, § 3(7.208), 12-17-2007) 
Sec. 38-27. - Performance bond or letter of credit. 
    The city may require the permittee to post a bond (or letter of credit), in the amount provided in section 15(3) of the Metro Act, as amended (MCL 484.3115(3)). 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, § 3(7.209), 12-17-2007) 
Sec. 38-28. - Removal. 
(a)  Underground facilities. As soon as practicable after the term of the franchise agreement expires, the permittee or its successors and assigns shall remove any underground cable or other portions of the permittee's facilities from the public right-of-way which has been installed in such a manner that it can be removed without trenching or other opening of the public right-of-way. The permittee shall not remove any underground cable or other portions of the facilities which requires trenching or other opening of the public right-of-way except with the prior written approval of the city manager. All removals shall be at the permittee's sole cost and expense. For purposes of this subsection, the term "cable" means any wire, coaxial cable, fiber optic cable, feed wire or pull wire. 
(b)  Above ground facilities. As soon as practicable after the expiration of the term of a franchise agreement, the permittee, or its successor or assigns at its sole cost and expense, shall, unless waived in writing by the city manager, remove from the public right-of-way all above ground elements of its facilities, including but not limited to poles, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, and lines attached to or suspended from poles. 
(c)  Schedule. The schedule and timing of removal shall be subject to approval by the city manager. Unless extended by manager, removal shall be completed not later than 12 months following the expiration of the term of the franchise agreement. Portions of the permittee's facilities in the public right-of-way that are not removed within such time period shall be deemed abandoned and, at the option of the city exercised by written notice to the permittee at the address provided for in the franchise agreement, title to the portions described in such notice shall vest in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, § 3(7.210), 12-17-2007) 
Sec. 38-29. - Other items. 
(a)  Duties. The permittees shall faithfully perform all duties required by this article. 
(b)  Different terms. The Act allows local units of government and video service providers to enter into voluntary franchise agreements that include terms and conditions which are different from those required under the Act or which are different from those in the standardized, uniform form of franchise agreement established by the MPSC. The Metro Act allows municipalities and providers to mutually agree to Metro Act permit terms differing from those in the standard forms of Metro Act permit approved by the MPSC. Current or prospective the permittees who desire terms different from those in this article, as applied to them, should request such a voluntary franchise agreement or a mutually agreed to Metro Act permit from the city. 
(c)  Interpretation and severability. The provisions of this article shall be liberally construed to protect and preserve the peace, health, safety and welfare of the public, and should any provision or section of this article be held unconstitutional, invalid, overbroad or otherwise unenforceable, such determination/holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of any of the remaining conditions of this article. If any provision in this article is found to be partially overbroad, unenforceable, or invalid, the permittee and the city may nevertheless enforce such provision to the extent permitted under applicable law. 
(d)  Violations. A the permittee who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and shall be subject to such civil infraction fines and costs as provided in city ordinances or this Code. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the city in the event of a violation by a the permittee of this article. 
(e)  Authorized officials. The city manager, which includes his designee, is hereby designated as the authorized official of the city to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal chapter violations bureau) for violations of this article, as provided by the city's ordinances or this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, § 3(7.211), 12-17-2007) 
Secs. 38-30-38-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - USE OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY BY TELECOMMUNICATION PROVIDERS 

Sec. 38-116. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by telecommunication providers for their telecommunication facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the metropolitan extension telecommunications rights-of-way oversight act, Public Act No. 48 of 2002 (MCL 484.3101 et seq.), the act and other applicable law, and to ensure that the city qualifies for distributions under the act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the act. 
(Prior Code, § 4.171; Ord. No. 2002-22, 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 38-117. - Conflict. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict with the act or other applicable law. 
(Prior Code, § 4.172; Ord. No. 2002-22, 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 38-118. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the metropolitan extension telecommunications rights-of-way oversight act, Public Act No. 48 of 2002 (MCL 484.3101 et seq.). 
    City council means the Council of the City of Cadillac, or its designee. This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the city council. 
    Permit means a nonexclusive permit issued pursuant to the act and this article to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities. 
(b)  All other terms used in this article shall have the same meaning as defined or as provided in the act, including without limitation the following: 
    Authority means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to section 3 of the act. 
    MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning as the term "commission" in the act. 
    Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. The term "public right-of-way" does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way. 
    Telecommunication facilities or facilities means the equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals. The term "telecommunication facilities" or "facilities" does not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of title III of the Communications Act of 1934, ch. 652, 48 stat. 1064, 47 USC 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. 
    Telecommunications provider, provider and telecommunications services mean those terms as defined in section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, Public Act No. 179 of 1991 (MCL 484.2102). The term "telecommunication provider" does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of the Communications Act of 1934, ch. 652, 48 stat. 1064, 47 USC 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of the act and this article only, the term "provider" also includes the following: 
(1)  A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided by the act, a person who owns telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way. 
(3)  A person providing broadband internet transport access service. 
(Prior Code, § 4.173; Ord. No. 2002-22, 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 38-119. - Permit required. 
(a)  Permit. Except as otherwise provided in the act, a telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with section 6(1) of the act (MCL 484.3106(1)). A telecommunication provider shall file one copy of the application with the city clerk, one copy with the city manager, and one copy with the city attorney. Upon receipt, the city clerk shall make five copies of the application and distribute a copy to city councilmembers. Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the act, including without limitation, a route map showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with section 6(5) of the act (MCL 484.3106(5)). 
(c)  Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is exempt from the freedom of information act, Public Act No. 442 of 1976 (MCL 15.231 et seq.), pursuant to section 6(5) of the act (MCL 484.3106(5)), the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map. 
(d)  Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the act, the application shall be accompanied by a one-time nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $500.00. 
(e)  Additional information. The city manager may request an applicant to submit such additional information which the city manager deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the city manager. If the city and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested by the city, the city or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in section 6(2) of the act (MCL 484.3106(2)). 
(f)  Previously issued permits. Pursuant to section 5(1) of the act (MCL 484.3105(1)), authorizations or permits previously issued by the city under section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, Public Act No. 179 of 1991 (MCL 484.2251) and authorizations or permits issued by the city to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, but after 1985, shall satisfy the permit requirements of this article. 
(g)  Existing providers. Pursuant to section 5(3) of the act (MCL 484.3105(3)), within 180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the act, a telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the city as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, Public Act No. 179 of 1991 (MCL 484.2251), shall submit to the city an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this article. Pursuant to section 5(3) of the act (MCL 484.3105(3)), a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is not required to pay the $500.00 application fee required under subsection (d) of this section. A provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional 180 days to submit the permit application if allowed by the authority, as provided in section 5(4) of the act (MCL 484.3105(4)). 
(Prior Code, § 4.174; Ord. No. 2002-22, 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 38-120. - Issuance or denial procedures. 
(a)  Approval or denial. The authority, to approve or deny an application for a permit, is hereby delegated to the city manager. Pursuant to section 15(3) of the act (MCL 484.3115(3)), the city manager shall approve or deny an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under section 38-119(b) for access to a public right-of-way within the city. Pursuant to section 6(6) of the act (MCL 484.3106(6)), the city manager shall notify the MPSC when the city manager has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which the permit was granted or denied. The city manager shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit. 
(b)  Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the city manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with sections 6(1), 6(2), and 15 of the act (MCL 484.3106(1), 484.3106(2), 484.3115). 
(c)  Conditions. Pursuant to section 15(4) of the act (MCL 484.3115(4)), the city manager may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Bond requirement. Pursuant to section 15(3) of the act (MCL 484.3115(3)), and without limitation on subsection (c) of this section, the city manager may require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use. 
(Prior Code, § 4.175; Ord. No. 2002-22, 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 38-121. - Construction or engineering permit required. 
    A telecommunication provider shall not commence construction upon, over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining a construction or engineering permit as required under article II of chapter 8, as amended, for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for such a construction or engineering permit. 
(Prior Code, § 4.176; Ord. No. 2002-22, 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 38-122. - Conduit or utility poles. 
    Pursuant to section 4(3) of the act (MCL 484.3104(3)), obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the act or under this article does not give a telecommunications provider the right to use conduit or utility poles. 
(Prior Code, § 4.177; Ord. No. 2002-22, 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 38-123. - Route maps. 
    Pursuant to section 6(7) of the act (MCL 484.3106(7)), a telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the city. The route maps must be in paper or electronic format unless and until the commission determines otherwise, in accordance with section 6(8) of the act (MCL 484.3106(8)). 
(Prior Code, § 4.178; Ord. No. 2002-22, 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 38-124. - Repair of damage. 
    Pursuant to section 15(5) of the act (MCL 484.3115(5)), a telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the city, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the pubic right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition. 
(Prior Code, § 4.179; Ord. No. 2002-22, 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 38-125. - Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. 
    In addition to the nonrefundable application fee paid to the city set forth in section 38-119(d), a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the city's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance fee to the authority pursuant to section 8 of the act (MCL 484.3108). 
(Prior Code, § 4.180; Ord. No. 2002-22, 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 38-126. - Modification of existing fees. 
    In compliance with the requirements of section 13(1) of the act (MCL 484.3113(1)), the city hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the act, which shall be paid to the authority. In compliance with the requirements of section 13(4) of the act (MCL 484.3113(4)), the city also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the city's boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required under section 8 of the act (MCL 484.3108). The city shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of the ordinance from which this article is derived, in compliance with the requirement of section 13(4) of the act (MCL 484.3113(4)). To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the city's policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error. 
(Prior Code, § 4.181; Ord. No. 2002-22, 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 38-127. - Savings clause. 
    Pursuant to section 13(5) of the act (MCL 484.3113(5)), if section 8 of the act (MCL 484.3108) is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under section 38-126 shall be void from the date the modification was made. 
(Prior Code, § 4.182; Ord. No. 2002-22, 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 38-128. - Use of funds. 
    Pursuant to section 10(4) of the act (MCL 484.3110(4)), all amounts received by the city from the authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related purposes. In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the city from the authority shall be deposited into the major street fund and/or the local street fund maintained by the city under Public Act No. 51 of 1951 (MCL 247.651 et seq.). 
(Prior Code, § 4.183; Ord. No. 2002-22, 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 38-129. - Annual report. 
    Pursuant to section 10(5) of the act (MCL 484.3110(5)), the city manager shall file an annual report with the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the authority. 
(Prior Code, § 4.184; Ord. No. 2002-22, 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 38-130. - Cable television operators. 
    Pursuant to section 13(6) of the act (MCL 484.3113(6)), the city shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through broadband internet transport access services. 
(Prior Code, § 4.185; Ord. No. 2002-22, 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 38-131. - Existing rights. 
    Pursuant to section 4(2) of the act (MCL 484.3104(2)), except as expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this article shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the city may have under a permit issued by the city or under a contract between the city and a telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Prior Code, § 4.186; Ord. No. 2002-22, 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 38-132. - Compliance. 
    The city hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this article is to fully comply with the requirements of the act, and the provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The city shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the act, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Exempting certain route maps from the freedom of information act, Public Act No. 442 of 1976 (MCL 15.231 et seq.), as provided in section 38-119(c); 
(2)  Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit requirements hereof, in accordance with section 38-119(f); 
(3)  Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the $500.00 application fee, in accordance with section 38-119(g); 
(4)  Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in accordance with section 38-120(a); 
(5)  Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with section 38-120(a); 
(6)  Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance with section 38-120(a); 
(7)  Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, as provided in section 38-120(b); 
(8)  Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way, in accordance with section 38-120(c); 
(9)  Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's access and use, in accordance with section 38-120(d); 
(10)  Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with section 38-121; 
(11)  Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city's right-of-way fees with a copy of this article, in accordance with section 38-126; 
(12)  Submitting an annual report to the authority, in accordance with section 38-129; and 
(13)  Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with section 38-130. 
(Prior Code, § 4.187; Ord. No. 2002-22, 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 38-133. - Reservation of police powers. 
    Pursuant to section 15(2) of the act (MCL 484.3115(2)), this article shall not limit the city's right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the city's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(Prior Code, § 4.188; Ord. No. 2002-22, 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 38-134. - Authorized city officials. 
    The city manager or his designee is hereby designated as the authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations, directing alleged violators to appear in court, or municipal civil infraction violation notices, directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal chapter violations bureau, for violations under this article, as provided by this Code. 
(Prior Code, § 4.190; Ord. No. 2002-22, 10-21-2002) 
Sec. 38-135. - Municipal civil infraction. 
    A person who violates any provision of this article or the terms or conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the city in the event of a violation by a person of this article or a permit. 
(Prior Code, § 4.191; Ord. No. 2002-22, 10-21-2002) 
Chapter 40 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan vehicle code, MCL 257.1 et seq.; regulation by local authorities, MCL 257.605, 257.606, 257.610. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 40-1-40-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC CODE 

Sec. 40-19. - Adoption of codes by reference-Uniform traffic. 
    The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages as promulgated by the director of the Michigan Department of State Police pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, Public Act No. 306 of 1969 (MCL 24.201 et seq.) and made effective October 30, 2002, is hereby adopted by reference. All references in said uniform traffic code to a governmental unit shall mean the city. 
(Prior Code, § 10.2; Ord. No. 81-06, 6-15-1981; Ord. No. 82-11, 8-5-1982; Ord. No. 83-04, 3-7-1983; Ord. No. 2002-21, 9-16-2002; Ord. No. 2005-16, 10-3-2005) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt the uniform traffic code by reference, MCL 257.951. 
Sec. 40-20. - Same-Provisions of state vehicle. 
    The following provisions of the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, as amended (MCL 257.1 et seq.) are hereby adopted by reference: 
(1)  Chapter I, Words and Phrases Defined: MCL 257.1 to 257.82. 
(2)  Chapter II, Administration, Registration: MCL 257.225, 257.228, 257.243, 257.244, 257.255, and 257.256.8. 
(3)  Chapter III, Operator's and Chauffeur's License: MCL 257.310e, 257.311, 257.312a, 257.324, 257.325, 257.326, and 257.328. 
(4)  Chapter VI, Obedience to and Effect of Traffic Laws: MCL 257.601 to 257.601b, 257.602 to 257.606, 257.611 to 257.616, 257.617a to 257.622, 257.624a to 257.624b, 257.625 (except felony provisions), 257.625a, 257.625m, 257.626 to 257.626b, 257.627 to 257.627b, 257.629b, 257.631 to 257.632, 257.634 to 257.645, 257.647 to 257.655, 257.656 to 257.662, 257.667 to 257.675d, 257.676 to 257.682b, 257.683 to 257.710e, 257.716 to 257.724. 
(5)  Chapter VIII, License Offenses: MCL 257.904 to 257.904a, 257.904e, 257.905. 
(Prior Code, § 10.3; Ord. No. 81-06, 6-15-1981; Ord. No. 82-11, 8-5-1982; Ord. No. 83-04, 3-7-1983; Ord. No. 2005-16, 10-3-2005) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt the Michigan Vehicle Code by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Sec. 40-21. - Same-Other state laws. 
    Provisions of state law are hereby adopted by reference; section 3102 of the insurance code of 1956, Public Act No. 218 of 1956 (MCL 500.100 et seq.), pertaining to required insurance (MCL 500.3102). 
(Prior Code, § 10.4; Ord. No. 81-06, 6-15-1981; Ord. No. 82-11, 8-5-1982; Ord. No. 83-04, 3-7-1983; Ord. No. 2005-16, 10-3-2005) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt state laws by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Sec. 40-22. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate the operation of motor vehicles, snowmobiles and offroad vehicles, and to provide for the regulation and use of streets, highways, alleys and other public and semipublic places within the city, and to provide penalties for the violation of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 10.5; Ord. No. 81-06, 6-15-1981; Ord. No. 82-11, 8-5-1982; Ord. No. 83-04, 3-7-1983; Ord. No. 99-17, 10-18-1999; Ord. No. 2005-16, 10-3-2005) 
Sec. 40-23. - Penalties. 
    The penalties provided by the uniform traffic code and the provisions of the state laws adopted by reference in sections 40-19 through 40-21 are hereby adopted as the penalties for violations of the corresponding provisions of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 10.6; Ord. No. 99-17, 10-18-1999; Ord. No. 2005-16, 10-3-2005) 
Sec. 40-24. - Severability. 
    If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any provision of this article, or the uniform traffic code, or a statutory provision adopted by reference herein, to be unenforceable, in whole or in part, such declaration shall only affect the provision held to be unenforceable and shall not affect any other part or provision; provided that, if a court of competent jurisdiction declares a penalty provision to exceed the authority of the city, the penalty shall be construed as the maximum penalty that is determined by the court to be within the authority of the city to impose. 
(Prior Code, § 10.7; Ord. No. 81-06, 6-15-1981; Ord. No. 82-11, 8-5-1982; Ord. No. 83-04, 3-7-1983; Ord. No. 2005-16, 10-3-2005) 
Sec. 40-25. - Amendment to the uniform traffic code. 
    This article amends, by way of addition, the following sections of the uniform traffic code adopted in section 40-19, to include and read as follows: 
(1)  Rule 449. Limitations on backing; a violation of this rule is a civil infraction: 
a.  It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to back said vehicle into any angle parking space. 
b.  It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to execute a U-turn or to turn said vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction, which maneuver results in, or facilitates, parking in an angle parking space. 
c.  It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle, upon backing out of any angle parking space, to back said vehicle across the center of the roadway, or to back said vehicle in such a manner as to proceed in the opposite direction. 
(2)  Rule 455. Deposit of litter on streets prohibited; a violation of this rule is a misdemeanor: 
a.  A person shall not remove, or cause to be removed, snow, ice or slush onto or across a roadway or the shoulder of the roadway in a manner which obstructs the safety vision of the driver of a motor vehicle other than offroad vehicles and snowmobiles. 
b.  A person shall not deposit or cause to be deposited, snow, ice or slush onto any roadway or highway. 
(3)  Rule 801. Standing or parking close to curb; a violation of this rule is a civil infraction: 
a.  There shall be no parking on any street, roadway, alley, parking area or other municipal property from November 15 to April 15 during the hours of 2:30 a.m. to 6:30 a.m. Vehicles parked in violation of this subsection may be hauled away by or at the direction of the city police department, and any hauling or storage charge shall be paid by the owner of the vehicle prior to release of said vehicle. 
b.  No truck, one-ton capacity or more, shall be left or parked upon any street at any time, except for the purposes of loading or unloading and only for such time as reasonably necessary to achieve such loading and unloading. This subsection is not to be interpreted in conflict with rule 818. 
c.  No vehicle, except a commercial vehicle, shall be left parked in any public street unattended, unless the operator of said vehicle shall first shut off the motor of that vehicle and lock the ignition and remove the keys therefrom. 
d.  The driver of a vehicle may not park said vehicle on the south side of any east-west street, or on the east side of any north-south street, at any time, except as designated by the city engineer. 
(Prior Code, § 10.9; Ord. No. 81-06, 6-15-1981; Ord. No. 82-11, 8-5-1982; Ord. No. 83-04, 3-7-1983; Ord. No. 2005-16, 10-3-2005) 
Secs. 40-26-40-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate standing or parking of vehicles, MCL 257.606(1)(a); stopping, standing and parking of vehicles, MCL 257.672 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 40-54-40-79. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU 

Sec. 40-80. - Bureau established. 
    Pursuant to section 8395 of the revised judicature act, Public Act No. 236 of 1961 (MCL 600.8395), a parking violations bureau, for the purpose of handling alleged parking violations within the city, is hereby established. The parking violations bureau shall be under the control of the city manager. 
(Prior Code, § 10.81) 
Sec. 40-81. - Location. 
    The city manager shall, subject to the approval of the city council, establish a convenient location for the parking violations bureau, appoint qualified city employees to administer the bureau and adopt rules and regulations for the operation thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 10.82) 
Sec. 40-82. - Disposition of violations. 
    No violation, not scheduled in section 40-85, shall be disposed of by the parking violations bureau. The fact that a particular violation is scheduled shall not entitle the alleged violator to disposition of the violation at the bureau and in any case, the person in charge of such bureau may refuse to dispose of such violation, in which case, any person having knowledge of the facts may make a sworn complaint before any court having jurisdiction of the offense as provided by law. 
(Prior Code, § 10.83) 
Sec. 40-83. - Procedure. 
    No violation may be settled at the parking violations bureau, except at the specific request of the alleged violator. No penalty for any violation shall be accepted from any person who denies having committed the offense and in no case shall the person who is in charge of the bureau determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to such alleged violation. No person shall be required to dispose of a parking violation at the parking violations bureau and all persons shall be entitled to have any such violations processed before a court having jurisdiction thereof, if they so desire. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the parking violations bureau shall not prejudice him or in any way diminish the rights, privileges and protection according to him by law. 
(Prior Code, § 10.84) 
Sec. 40-84. - Violation notices. 
    The issuance of a traffic ticket or notice of violation by a police officer of the city, or other duly authorized person, shall be deemed an allegation of a parking violation. Such traffic ticket or notice of violation shall indicate the length of time in which the person to whom the same was issued must respond before the parking violations bureau. It shall also indicate the address of the bureau, the hours during which the bureau is open, the amount of the penalty scheduled for the offense for which the ticket was issued and advise that a warrant for the arrest of the person to whom the ticket was issued will be sought, if such a person fails to respond within the time limited. 
(Prior Code, § 10.85; Ord. No. 89-21, 12-4-1989) 
Sec. 40-85. - Schedule. 
    The following schedules of fines shall be imposed for violations covered by this article: 
(1)  Prohibitions generally. 
Offense Penalty First Second Third Abandoned vehicle $10.00 $15.00 $25.00 All night parking  10.00  15.00  25.00 Alley  10.00  15.00  25.00 Angle parking violations  10.00  15.00  25.00 Between sidewalk and curb  10.00  15.00  25.00 Bicycle parking violations  10.00  15.00  25.00 Bus, taxicab stand violations  10.00  15.00  25.00 Bus, parking other than bus stop  10.00  15.00  25.00 Disabled vehicle, failure to move  10.00  15.00  25.00 Failure to set brakes  10.00  15.00  25.00 Keys in vehicle or motor running  10.00  15.00  25.00 Loading zone violation  10.00  15.00  25.00 Meters, not parked within space  10.00  15.00  25.00 Obstructing traffic  10.00  15.00  25.00 Parking too far from curb  10.00  15.00  25.00  
(2)  Parking for prohibited purpose. 
Offense Penalty First Second Third Displaying vehicle for sale $10.00 $15.00 $25.00 Working or repairing vehicle (except for emergency)  10.00  15.00  25.00 Displaying advertising  10.00  15.00  25.00 Selling merchandise  10.00  15.00  25.00 Storage over 48 hours  10.00  15.00  25.00 Parking on grade, wheels not turned to curb  10.00  15.00  25.00 Private property, without owners consent  10.00  15.00  25.00 Taxicab, parking other than cabstand  10.00  15.00  25.00  
(3)  Prohibited parking (signs unnecessary). 
Offense Penalty First Second Third Tow away zone $25.00 $25.00 $25.00 Fire lane  25.00  25.00  25.00 On sidewalk  25.00  25.00  25.00 In front of drive (within two feet)  25.00  25.00  25.00 Within intersection  25.00  25.00  25.00 Within 15 feet of fire hydrant  25.00  25.00  25.00 On crosswalk  25.00  25.00  25.00 Within 20 feet of crosswalk or 15 feet of corner lot lines  25.00  25.00  25.00 Within 30 feet of street side traffic sign or signal  25.00  25.00  25.00 Within 50 feet of railroad crossing  25.00  25.00  25.00 Within 20 feet of fire station entrance  25.00  25.00  25.00 Within 75 feet of fire station entrance on opposite side of street (sign required)  25.00  25.00  25.00 Beside street excavation when traffic obstructed  25.00  25.00  25.00 Double parking  25.00  25.00  25.00 On bridge or viaduct or within tunnel  25.00  25.00  25.00 In front of theater (sign required)  25.00  25.00  25.00 Blocking emergency exit  25.00  25.00  25.00 Blocking fire escape  25.00  25.00  25.00 Truck standing  25.00  25.00  25.00 Backing into metered stall  25.00  25.00  25.00 Between 2:30 a.m. and 6:30 a.m.-November 15 through April 15  25.00  25.00  25.00 Parking on the tree lawn without a permit from the city engineer  25.00  25.00  25.00 Prohibited zone (signs required) (includes police vehicle only, overtime parking and all other posted areas)  25.00  25.00  25.00 Parked on wrong side or roadway facing traffic  25.00  25.00  25.00  
(4)  Meter violations. 
a.  If paid within 24 hours, the fine is $2.00. 
b.  Each subsequent violation in the same space while the first violation is unpaid, the fine is $5.00. 
c.  During the next eight days after expiration of the first 24 hours, the fine is $10.00. 
d.  After ten days, the penalty is court. 
(5)  Time zone violations (free parking). 
a.  Two-hour zone. 
1.  If paid within 24 hours, the fine is $15.00. 
2.  Each subsequent violation in the same zone while the first violation is unpaid, the fine is $25.00. 
3.  During the next eight days after expiration of the first 24 hours, the fine is $30.00. 
4.  After ten days, the penalty is court. 
b.  One-hour zone. 
1.  If paid within 24 hours, the fine is $15.00. 
2.  Each subsequent violation in the same zone while the first violation is unpaid, the fine is $25.00. 
3.  During the next eight days after expiration of the first 24 hours, the fine is $30.00. 
4.  After ten days, the penalty is court. 
The time zones shall be established by the city council upon a recommendation by a parking committee which shall be appointed by the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 10.86; Ord. No. 83-03, 11-5-1984; Ord. No. 85-12, 10-7-1985; Ord. No. 89-21, 12-4-1989; Ord. No. 90-13, 7-5-1990; Ord. No. 92-06, 2-17-1992; Ord. No. 92-07, 2-17-1992) 
Sec. 40-86. - Overnight parking permit required. 
    Municipal parking lots where overnight parking is permitted will have signage to that effect, also indicating that an overnight parking permit is required for all overnight parking between the dates of November 15 and April 15. Employees of downtown businesses who work during the hours of 2:20 a.m. to 6:30 a.m. will be provided a complimentary parking permit. Permits will be available subject to the fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time. 
(Prior Code, § 10.87; Ord. No. 95-12, 6-5-1995; Ord. No. 95-25, 10-2-1995; Ord. No. 2005-07, 4-18-2005; Ord. No. 2008-10, § 1, 10-20-2008) 
Secs. 40-87-40-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISABLED PARKING 

Sec. 40-116. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Disabled person means a person who, for the purposes of this division, has a physical characteristic categorized as a disability, which limits ambulation or necessitates the use of a wheelchair for mobility, or a person who is blind. 
    Parking area means an area used by the public as a means of access to and egress from, and for the free parking of motor vehicles by patrons of a shopping center, business, factory, hospital, institution, or similar building or location. 
    Shopping center means a minimum area of three acres of land on which there is located one or more stores or business establishments, and where there is provided a parking area. 
(Prior Code, § 10.110; Ord. No. 81-03, 3-2-1981) 
Sec. 40-117. - Prohibited parking. 
    In a parking space clearly identified by an official sign as being reserved for use by disabled persons which is on public property or private property available for public use, unless the person is a disabled person as defined in section 40-116 or unless the person is parking the vehicle for the benefit of a disabled person a certificate of identification issued to the disabled person shall be displayed on the lower left corner of the front windshield or a special registration plate issued to a disabled person shall be displayed on the vehicle. 
(Prior Code, § 10.112; Ord. No. 81-03, 3-2-1981) 
Sec. 40-118. - Violation. 
    A person who violates section 40-117 is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Prior Code, § 10.113; Ord. No. 81-03, 3-2-1981) 
Secs. 40-119-40-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SNOWMOBILES AND OFFROAD VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Snowmobiles, MCL 324.82101 et seq. 

Sec. 40-150. - Adoption of state laws by reference. 
    The following state laws are hereby incorporated and adopted by reference: 
(1)  Subchapter 6 of part 811 of the natural resources and environmental protection act, Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.81101 et seq.), pertaining to offroad vehicles; and 
(2)  Part 821 of the natural resources and environmental protection act, Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.82101 et seq.). 
(Prior Code, § 9.400; Ord. No. 95-01, 1-16-1995; Ord. No. 2005-17, 10-3-2005; Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1(9.400), 12-4-2006) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt state laws by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Sec. 40-151. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Operate means to ride in or on and to control the operation of a snowmobile or offroad vehicle. 
    Operator means any person who operates or is in actual physical control of a snowmobile or offroad vehicle. 
    ORV or vehicle means a motor driven offroad recreation vehicle capable of cross-country travel without benefit of a road or trail, on or immediately over land, snow, ice, marsh, swampland, or other natural terrain. The term "ORV" or "vehicle" includes, but is not limited to, a multitrack or multiwheel drive vehicle, an ATV, a motorcycle or related two-wheel, three-wheel, or four-wheel vehicle, an amphibious machine, a ground effect air cushion vehicle, or other means of transportation deriving motive power from a source other than muscle or wind. The term "ORV" or "vehicle" does not include a registered snowmobile, a farm vehicle being used for farming, a vehicle used for military, fire, emergency, or law enforcement purposes, a vehicle owned and operated by a utility company or an oil or gas company when performing maintenance on its facilities or on property over which it has an easement, a construction or logging vehicle used in performance of its common function, or a registered aircraft. 
    Snowmobile means any motor-driven vehicle designed for travel primarily on snow or ice of a type that utilizes sled-type runners or skis, an endless belt tread, or any combination of these or other similar means of contact with the surface upon which it is operated, but is not a vehicle that must be registered under the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq.). 
(Prior Code, § 9.401; Ord. No. 95-01, 1-16-1995; Ord. No. 2005-17, 10-3-2005; Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1(9.401), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 40-152. - Parking; restrictions on hours of operation. 
    The city council may, by resolution, (1) designate public parking areas within the city for snowmobile parking, (2) approve snowmobile routes to access designated parking areas, and (3) adopt additional rules and regulations for snowmobile parking and operating snowmobiles within the city. After approval of any such resolution, the resolution shall by published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
    Except as otherwise permitted by article IV or any rule or regulation adopted by the city council pursuant to this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile or ORV within the city, except upon property owned by the operator or upon the property of another who has given permission for such operation; provided, however, snowmobiles and ORVs shall not be operated on private property between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. in the areas of the city with zone district designations R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4, except to directly access Lake Cadillac or approved snowmobile routes designated by the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 9.402; Ord. No. 95-01, 1-16-1995; Ord. No. 2005-17, 10-3-2005; Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1(9.402), 12-4-2006; Ord. No. 2011-09, § 1, 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 40-153. - Speed restrictions on frozen surfaces. 
    On the frozen surfaces of Lake Cadillac, Sections 4, 5 and 6, Township 21 North, Range 9 West, and on the frozen surfaces of that part of Lake Mitchell within the boundaries of the city, a person shall not operate a snowmobile or ORV, except at the minimum speed required to maintain forward movement of the snowmobile when within 100 feet of any open water. 
(Prior Code, § 9.403; Ord. No. 95-01, 1-16-1995; Ord. No. 2005-17, 10-3-2005; Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1(9.403), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 40-154. - Exceptions-Emergency. 
    Snowmobiles or ORVs may be operated on sidewalks and highways during a period of emergency when so declared by a police agency having jurisdiction, and for official law enforcement for public safety purposes, when travel by conventional automotive equipment is not possible. 
(Prior Code, § 9.404; Ord. No. 95-01, 1-16-1995; Ord. No. 2005-17, 10-3-2005; Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1(9.404), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 40-155. - Same-Special event. 
    Snowmobiles or ORVs may be operated in the city for special snowmobile and ORV events of limited duration which are conducted according to a prearranged schedule under permit from the city, or in areas designated by the city council for the operation of snowmobiles and/or ORVs. 
(Prior Code, § 9.405; Ord. No. 95-01, 1-16-1995; Ord. No. 2005-17, 10-3-2005; Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1(9.405), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 40-156. - Same-To gain access to permitted area. 
    Whenever it is impractical to gain immediate access to an area adjacent to a permitted area where a snowmobile or ORV is to be operated, the vehicle may be operated adjacent and parallel to the highway for the purpose of gaining access to the area of operation. This section shall apply to the operation of a snowmobile and ORV from the point where the vehicle is unloaded from a motorized conveyance to and from the area where the snowmobile and ORV is to be operated, when loading and unloading cannot be effected in the immediate vicinity of the area of operation without causing a hazard to vehicular traffic approaching from either direction on the highway. Loading or unloading must be accomplished with due regard to safety at the nearest possible point to the area of operation. 
(Prior Code, § 9.406; Ord. No. 95-01, 1-16-1995; Ord. No. 2005-17, 10-3-2005; Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1(9.406), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 40-157. - Restrictions on operations. 
    No person shall operate a snowmobile or ORV: 
(1)  At a rate of speed greater than is reasonable and proper, having due regard for conditions then existing. 
(2)  While under the influence of alcoholic liquor or controlled substances. 
(3)  During the hours from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise, without displaying a lighted headlight and a lighted taillight. 
(4)  In any nursery, planting area, or natural area of forest reproduction and when growing stock may be damaged. 
(5)  Unless it is equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and annoying smoke. 
(Prior Code, § 9.407; Ord. No. 95-01, 1-16-1995; Ord. No. 2005-17, 10-3-2005; Ord. No. 2006-19, § 1(9.407), 12-4-2006) 
Secs. 40-158-40-182. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BICYCLES AND OTHER TOY VEHICLES 

Sec. 40-183. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dealer means every person engaged in the business of purchasing, selling, exchanging or dealing in bicycles of a type required to be registered hereunder and every person who negotiates the purchase, sale, deal or exchange of such bicycles and who has an established place of business for such purposes in this city. 
    Serial number means the number which a manufacturer stamps into the frame of a bicycle unless the number is determined not to be a unique number or if there is no manufacturer's serial numbers, in which case a number assigned to a bicycle by the chief of police and stamped into the frame of the bicycle. 
(Prior Code, § 10.31; Ord. No. 86-06, 6-2-1986) 
Sec. 40-184. - License required. 
(a)  No person shall ride or operate a bicycle upon any of the public streets, sidewalks, avenues, lanes, alleys, parks, bridges, or public places within the city unless such bicycle is licensed. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Prior Code, § 10.32; Ord. No. 86-06, 6-2-1986) 
Sec. 40-185. - Application procedure. 
    Application for a bicycle license and license sticker shall be made upon a form provided by the city and shall be made to the chief of police. A fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time shall be paid to the city police department as a condition of the license being granted. All license fees collected shall be paid into the general fund of the city. The application for registration hereunder shall be on a form furnished by the chief of police. Said application shall be in duplicate and shall constitute a certificate of title, one copy of which shall be given to and retained by the applicant, and the other of which shall be placed on file with the police chief. 
(Prior Code, § 10.33; Ord. No. 86-06, 6-2-1986) 
Sec. 40-186. - Issuance of license. 
    The chief of police or other person designated by him shall issue a license sticker for a bicycle upon receiving an application and the payment of the fee; provided that the bicycle to be licensed is determined to be in good mechanical condition and is equipped with required safety equipment. The license shall be permanent so long as the bicycle licensed is owned by the licensee. 
(Prior Code, § 10.34; Ord. No. 86-06, 6-2-1986) 
Sec. 40-187. - Transfer of ownership. 
(a)  Upon the sale or other transfer of a licensed bicycle, the license shall terminate and the new owner shall immediately apply for a new license. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Prior Code, § 10.35; Ord. No. 86-06, 6-2-1986) 
Sec. 40-188. - Operation and equipment. 
    The provisions of chapter 6 of the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages and the Michigan Vehicle Code shall apply to the operation and required equipment of bicycles except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 10.36; Ord. No. 86-06, 6-2-1986) 
Sec. 40-189. - Riding on private property. 
    No person riding a bicycle shall ride or operate the same upon or across the private property of another person without the permission of the owner of said property or the person in rightful possession thereof. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Prior Code, § 10.37; Ord. No. 86-06, 6-2-1986) 
Sec. 40-190. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  Whenever a person is riding or operating a bicycle, skateboard, scooter, roller blades, roller skates, or other riding or skating devices, but not including devices used by and for the aid of disabled persons, upon a sidewalk, he shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. 
(b)  No person shall ride or operate a bicycle or ride or use a skateboard, scooter, roller blades, roller skates, or other riding or skating devices, but not including devices used by and for the aid of disabled persons, upon sidewalks adjacent to the following named streets during the hours of 8:00 a.m. until 8:00 p.m.: Mitchell Street from River Street to Howard Street. 
(c)  No person shall ride or operate a bicycle or ride or use a skateboard or scooter on any sidewalk in any city park or recreation area. Roller blades and roller skates may be used on sidewalks located in any city park or recreation area, subject to the other provisions of this section. 
(d)  When approaching an intersection, a person operating a bicycle, skateboard, scooter, roller blades, roller skates, or other riding or skating devices, shall stop and look both ways before proceeding through the intersection. 
(e)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Prior Code, § 10.38; Ord. No. 86-06, 6-2-1986; Ord. No. 88-22, 10-17-1988; Ord. No. 94-07, 6-6-1994; Ord. No. 97-19, 11-3-1997) 
Sec. 40-191. - Seizure of bicycle. 
    Any police officer of the city shall have the power at any time to seize and take into custody any bicycle found to be in violation of this Code or used in violation of this Code. The bicycle may be retained by the police department until proof of ownership is furnished by the owner and arrangements are made to bring the bicycle into compliance with this Code. 
(Prior Code, § 10.39; Ord. No. 86-06, 6-2-1986) 
Sec. 40-192. - Parental responsibility. 
(a)  No person being the parent or guardian of any child under 17 years of age shall knowingly permit or authorize such child to violate any provision of this article. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Prior Code, § 10.40; Ord. No. 86-06, 6-2-1986) 
Sec. 40-193. - Revenues. 
    All revenues derived from the registration of bicycles shall be used in financing the provisions of this article and in promotion of bicycle safety education. 
(Prior Code, § 10.41; Ord. No. 86-06, 6-2-1986) 
Sec. 40-194. - Additional regulations. 
    Rules and regulations supplementary to this article may be adopted as traffic control orders in the manner prescribed in section 2.53 of the uniform traffic code and article II of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 10.42; Ord. No. 86-06, 6-2-1986) 
Sec. 40-195. - Bicycle paths; vehicles prohibited; violation is misdemeanor. 
(a)  A person shall not operate a motor vehicle on or across a bicycle path, except to enter or leave adjacent property or while lawfully driving on a public street, highway or alley or in a public park or other place open to public travel. 
(b)  A person shall not park a vehicle on a bicycle path. 
(c)  A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior Code, § 10.43; Ord. No. 86-06, 6-2-1986) 
Sec. 40-196. - Damage to serial number or license. 
(a)  No person shall willfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the serial number, or the license issued under this chapter. 
(b)  Replacement serial numbers or licenses shall be issued by the police chief in the event the original serial number or license is lost, removed, defaced, or destroyed, upon repayment of the initial sum of the registration. 
(c)  A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior Code, § 10.44; Ord. No. 86-06, 6-2-1986) 
Sec. 40-197. - Riding or skating on public parking lot. 
(a)  No person shall ride or operate a bicycle or ride or use a skateboard, scooter, roller blades, roller skates, or other riding or skating devices, but not devices used by and for the aid of disabled persons, upon the public parking lot adjacent to and east of the First Congregational United Church of Christ located at 200 East Harris Street in the city. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior Code, § 10.45; Ord. No. 2004-11, 5-3-2004) 
Secs. 40-198-40-217. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TRUCK ROUTES 

Sec. 40-218. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emergency vehicle means vehicles of the fire department, police vehicles, ambulances, emergency vehicles of governmental departments and such other vehicles which are designed for and being used to save or protect life, limb or property. 
    Gross vehicle weight means the weight of a vehicle, including the weight of any load thereon, if any. 
    Trucks means every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for transportation of property and shall include truck-tractor, trailer and semitrailer, as defined in the Michigan Vehicle Code. 
(Prior Code, § 10.61) 
Sec. 40-219. - Permitted streets. 
    The operation of any truck exceeding 13,000 pounds gross vehicle weight is prohibited upon all streets within the city, except the following: 
(1)  Fifth Street, from its intersection with the railroad tracks Westerly to Fifth Avenue. 
(2)  Sixth Street, from Leeson Avenue Easterly to Fifth Avenue. 
(3)  Seventh Street from Eighth Avenue, Easterly to Farrar Street. 
(4)  Gunn Street. 
(5)  Mitchell Street. 
(6)  M-115. 
(7)  Fifth Avenue, from Sixth Street Southerly to Fifth Street. 
(8)  Sunnyside Drive. 
(9)  Granite Street. 
(10)  Cass Street. 
(11)  Division Street from Cass Street East to the city limits. 
(12)  Bond Street from Haynes Street North to Wright Street. 
(13)  Haynes Street from Bond Street Easterly to West North Street. 
(14)  North Street from Haynes Street East to Mitchell Street. 
(15)  Lake Street from Wright Street South to Cass Street. 
(16)  Wright Street from Leeson Avenue Easterly to West River Street. 
(17)  Leeson Avenue from 13th Street South to Wright Street. 
(18)  Thirteenth Street from Plett Road Westerly to Leeson Avenue. 
(19)  Sixth Avenue from 13th Street, Southerly to Sixth Street. 
(20)  Eighth Avenue from Eighth Street Southerly to Sixth Street. 
(21)  Eighth Street from Eighth Avenue Easterly to Sixth Avenue. 
(22)  Wilcox Street from Paluster Street Southerly to the city limits. 
(23)  Third Avenue from Fifth Street Southerly to Wright Street. 
(24)  West River Street from Lake Street to Mitchell Street. 
(25)  Balsam Street. 
(26)  Paluster Street. 
(27)  Whaley Road, from Paluster Street South to the city limits. 
(Prior Code, § 10.62) 
Sec. 40-220. - Excepted vehicles. 
    No provision of this article shall prohibit: 
(1)  The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in the city. 
(2)  The operation of trucks owned or operated by the city, public utilities, any contractor or material man, while engaged in the repair or street maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements or street utilities within the city. 
(3)  A truck from making a local pickup or delivery, provided the truck may be driven on any street or streets not designated as a truck route, for not more than the minimum distance necessary for this purpose. Any truck so engaged shall take the shortest route possible to and from a street designated as a truck route in making a local pickup or delivery, and shall be driven on a street not designated as a truck route the minimum distance necessary to accomplish the pickup or delivery. 
(4)  Any truck from traveling on any prohibited street having a destination or point of departure within the city wherein the primary legal use of the property is commercial or industrial; provided that such destination or departure shall be made by the shortest route from or to the nearest street upon which it is permitted to operate. 
(Prior Code, § 10.63) 
Chapter 42 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Ownership and operation of water supply or sewage disposal facility by city, Mich. Const. 1963, art. 7, § 24; local authority to provide and regulate sewer and water service, MCL 324.4301 et seq.; water and sewer authorities, MCL 124.281 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1-42-14. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SUPPLY AND WASTEWATER SYSTEM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 42-15-42-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - 1993 WATER AND WASTEWATER REFUNDING REVENUE BONDS 

Sec. 42-40. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act 94 means Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended. 
    Bond purchase agreement means the bond purchase agreement relating to the purchase of the refunding bonds by and between the city and the underwriter. 
    Bonds mean the refunding bonds, and any additional bonds presently of equal standing or hereafter issued. 
    Issuer or city means the City of Cadillac, County of Wexford, State of Michigan. 
    Mandatory redemption requirements means the mandatory prior redemption requirements for bonds that are term bonds, if any, as specified in the bond purchase agreement relating to the refunding bonds or in any subsequent ordinance in connection with the issuance of additional bonds. 
    Outstanding bonds means the issuer's: 
(1)  Water supply and wastewater system revenue bonds, Series 1988 in the aggregate outstanding principal amount of $695,000.00, which bonds are dated as of July 1, 1988, and will mature serially on September 1 of each of the years 1993 to 2003, inclusive; 
(2)  Water supply and wastewater system revenue bonds, Series 1989, in the aggregate outstanding principal amount of $2,235,000.00, which bonds are dated as of May 1, 1989, and will mature serially on September 1 of each of the years 1993 to 2008, inclusive; and 
(3)  The issuer's water supply and wastewater system revenue bonds, Series 1993 in the aggregate outstanding principal amount of $750,000.00, which bonds will be dated as of June 1, 1993 and will mature serially on September 1 of each of the years 1993 to 2008, inclusive. 
    Outstanding ordinances means Ordinance Nos. 88-07, 89-07 and 93-08. 
    Refunded bonds means a portion of the outstanding bonds as shall be identified in the sales resolution referred to herein. 
    Refunding bonds means the water supply and wastewater system revenue refunding bonds, Series 1993 of the issuer authorized by this division. 
    Revenues and net revenues mean the revenues and net revenues of the system and shall be construed as defined in section 3 of Act 94, including with respect to revenues, the earnings derived from the investment of moneys in the various funds and accounts established by the outstanding ordinances and this division. 
    Sales resolution means the sales resolution to be adopted by the issuer respecting the sale of the refunding bonds. 
    Sufficient government obligations means direct obligations of the United States of America or obligations, the principal and interest on which is fully guaranteed by the United States of America, not redeemable at the option of the issuer, the principal and interest payments upon which, without reinvestment of the interest, come due at such times and in such amounts as to be fully sufficient to pay the interest as it comes due on the bonds and the principal and redemption premium, if any, on the bonds as it comes due whether on the stated maturity date or upon earlier redemption. Securities representing such obligations shall be placed in trust with a bank or trust company, and if any of the bonds are to be called for redemption prior to maturity, irrevocable instructions to call the bonds for redemption shall be given to the paying agent. 
    System means the entire water supply and wastewater system of the city, both inside and outside the city including all plants, works, instrumentalities and properties, used or useful in connection with the supply and distribution of water as well as the collection and treatment of sanitary sewage, and all enlargements, extensions, repairs and improvements thereto hereafter made. 
    Transfer agent and/or escrow agent means Bank of New York, New York. 
    Underwriter means Robert W. Baird & Co., Inc., as representative of the purchasers of the refunding bonds. 
(Prior Code, § 2.237; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 93-10, 5-3-1993) 
Sec. 42-41. - Necessary public purpose. 
    It is hereby determined to be a necessary public purpose of the issuer to refund the refunded bonds. 
(Prior Code, § 2.238; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 93-10, 5-3-1993) 
Sec. 42-42. - Payment of cost; authorization. 
    To pay the costs associated with the refunding of the refunded bonds, including all legal, financial and other expenses incident thereto and incident to the issuance and sale of the bonds, the issuer shall borrow the sum of not to exceed $2,300,000.00, as finally determined in the sales resolution and issue the bonds therefor pursuant to the provisions of Act 94. The remaining costs, if any, of refunding the refunded bonds shall be defrayed from city funds on hand and legally available for such use, including moneys in the bond reserve account established for the refunded bonds. 
(Prior Code, § 2.239; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 93-10, 5-3-1993) 
Sec. 42-43. - Details, registration and execution. 
(a)  The bonds hereby authorized shall be designated water supply and wastewater system revenue refunding bonds, Series 1993, shall be payable solely and only out of the net revenues, as set forth more fully herein, shall consist of bonds of the denomination of $5,000.00, or integral multiples of $5,000.00, not exceeding in any one year the amount maturing in that year, dated as of June 1, 1993, or such later date as shall be determined in the sales resolution, numbered in order of authentication, and shall mature on September 1 in the years 1993 to 2008, inclusive, or such other years of maturity as shall be determined in the sales resolution. 
(b)  The bonds shall bear interest at a rate or rates set forth in the bond purchase agreement determined on sale thereof, but in any event not exceeding eight percent annum, payable on April 1 and October 1 of each year, commencing September 1, 1993, by check or draft mailed by the transfer agent to the person or entity which is, as of the 15th day of the month preceding the interest payment date, the registered owner at the registered address as shown on the registration books of the issuer maintained by the transfer agent. The date of determination of the registered owner, for purposes of payment of interest as provided in this subsection, may be changed by the issuer to conform to market practice in the future. The principal of the bonds shall be payable at the principal trust office of the transfer agent. The bonds shall be sold at the price set forth in the bond purchase agreement. 
(c)  The bonds may be subject to redemption prior to maturity at the times and prices and in the manner finally determined by the city council in the sales resolution. 
(d)  In case less than the full amount of an outstanding bond is called for redemption, the transfer agent, upon presentation of the bond called in part for redemption, shall register, authenticate and deliver to the registered owner a new bond in the principal amount of the portion of the original bond not called for redemption. Notice of redemption shall be given in the manner specified in the form of the bond contained in section 42-52. 
(e)  The bonds shall be executed in the name of the issuer with the facsimile signatures of the mayor and the city clerk and shall have a facsimile of the issuer's seal printed on them. No bond shall be valid until authenticated by an authorized signer of the transfer agent. The bonds shall be delivered to the transfer agent for authentication and be delivered by the transfer agent to the underwriter in accordance with instructions from the finance director of the issuer upon payment of the purchase price for the bonds in accordance with the bid therefor when accepted. Executed blank bonds for registration and issuance to transferees shall simultaneously, and from time to time thereafter as necessary, be delivered to the transfer agent for safekeeping. 
(Prior Code, § 2.240; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 93-10, 5-3-1993) 
Sec. 42-44. - Registration and transfer. 
(a)  Any bond may be transferred upon the books required to be kept pursuant to this section by the person in whose name it is registered, in person or by the registered owner's duly authorized attorney, upon surrender of the bond for cancellation, accompanied by delivery of a duly executed written instrument of transfer in a form approved by the transfer agent. Whenever any bond or bonds shall be surrendered for transfer, the issuer shall execute and the transfer agent shall authenticate and deliver a new bond or bonds, for like aggregate principal amount. The transfer agent shall require payment by the bondholder requesting the transfer of any tax or other governmental charge required to be paid with respect to the transfer. The transfer agent shall not be required: 
(1)  To issue, register the transfer of or exchange any bond during a period beginning at the opening of business 15 days before the day of the giving of a notice of redemption of bonds selected for redemption as described in the form of bonds contained in section 42-52 and ending at the close of business on the day of that giving of notice; or 
(2)  To register the transfer of or exchange of any bond so selected for redemption in whole or in part, except the unredeemed portion of bonds being redeemed in part. The issuer shall give the transfer agent notice of call for redemption at least 20 days prior to the date, notice of redemption is to be given. 
(b)  The transfer agent shall keep or cause to be kept, at its principal office, sufficient books for the registration and transfer of the bonds, which shall at all times be open to inspection by the issuer, and upon presentation for such purpose, the transfer agent shall, under such reasonable regulations as it may prescribe, transfer or cause to be transferred, on said books, bonds as hereinbefore provided. 
(c)  If any bond shall become mutilated, the issuer, at the expense of the holder of the bond, shall execute, and the transfer agent shall authenticate and deliver, a new bond of like tenor in exchange and substitution for the mutilated bond, upon surrender to the transfer agent of the mutilated bond. If any bond issued under this division shall be lost, destroyed or stolen, evidence of the loss, destruction or theft may be submitted to the transfer agent and, if this evidence is satisfactory to both and indemnity satisfactory to the transfer agent shall be given, and if all requirements of any applicable law including Act 354, Public Acts of Michigan, 1972, as amended Act 354, being MCL 129.131 to 129.135, inclusive, have been met, the issuer, at the expense of the owner, shall execute, and the transfer agent shall thereupon authenticate and deliver, a new bond of like tenor and bearing the statement required by Act 354, or any applicable law hereafter enacted, in lieu of and in substitution for the bond so lost, destroyed or stolen. If any such bond shall have matured or shall be about to mature, instead of issuing a substitute bond, the transfer agent may pay the same without surrender thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 2.241; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 93-10, 5-3-1993) 
Sec. 42-45. - Payment of bonds. 
    The bonds and the interest thereon shall be payable solely and only from the net revenues, and to secure such payment, there is hereby created a statutory lien upon the whole of the net revenues, which shall be a first lien to continue until payment in full of the principal of and interest on all bonds payable from the net revenues, or, until sufficient cash or sufficient government obligations have been deposited in trust for payment in full of all bonds of a series then outstanding, principal and interest on such bonds to maturity, or, if called for redemption, to the date fixed for redemption together with the amount of the redemption premium, if any. The first lien referred to herein shall be equally shared and be a first priority with the city's outstanding bonds. Upon deposit of cash or sufficient government obligations, as provided in the previous sentence, the statutory lien shall be terminated with respect to that series of bonds, the holders of that series shall have no further rights under this division except for payment from the deposited funds, and the bonds of that series shall no longer be considered to be outstanding under this division. 
(Prior Code, § 2.242; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 93-10, 5-3-1993) 
Sec. 42-46. - Bondholders' rights; receiver. 
(a)  The holder or holders of the bonds representing in the aggregate not less than 20 percent of the entire principal amount thereof then outstanding, may, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, protect and enforce the statutory lien upon the net revenues of the system, and may, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, enforce and compel performance of all duties of the officers of the issuer, including the fixing of sufficient rates, the collection of the proper application thereof. The statutory lien upon the net revenues, however, shall not be construed as to compel the sale of the system or any part thereof. 
(b)  If there is a default in the payment of the principal of or interest on the bonds, any court having jurisdiction in any proper action may appoint a receiver to administer and operate the system on behalf of the issuer and under the direction of the court, and by and with the approval of the court to perform all of the duties of the officers of the issuer more particularly set forth herein and in Act 94. 
(c)  The hold or holders of the bonds shall have all other rights and remedies given by Act 94 and law, for the payment and enforcement of the bonds and the security therefor. 
(Prior Code, § 2.243; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 93-10, 5-3-1993) 
Sec. 42-47. - Rates and charges. 
    The rates and charges for service furnished by and the use of the system and the methods of collection and enforcement of the collection of the rates shall be those in effect, as the same may be adjusted from time to time. 
(Prior Code, § 2.244; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 93-10, 5-3-1993) 
Sec. 42-48. - No free service or use. 
    No free service or use of the system, or service or use of the system at less than the reasonable cost and value thereof, shall be furnished by the system to any person, firm or corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality, including the issuer. 
(Prior Code, § 2.245; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 93-10, 5-3-1993) 
Sec. 42-49. - Fixing and revising rates. 
(a)  The rates presently in effect in the city are estimated to be sufficient to provide for the payment of the expenses of administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the system as are necessary to preserve the system in good repair and working order, to provide for the payment of the principal of and interest on the bonds as the same become due and payable, and the maintenance of the reserve therefor and to provide for all other obligations, expenditures and funds for the system required by law and this division. 
(b)  The rates shall be reviewed not less than once a year and shall be fixed and revised from time to time as may be necessary to produce these amounts, and it is hereby covenanted and agreed to fix and maintain rates for services furnished by the system at all times sufficient to provide for the foregoing. 
(Prior Code, § 2.246; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 93-10, 5-3-1993) 
Sec. 42-50. - Reserve account. 
    The reserve account in the bond and interest redemption fund, as established by the outstanding ordinances shall be maintained in such amounts, so that said bond reserve account shall total a sum equal to the largest annual debt service requirement on the bonds. In the event that the interest in said reserve account is greater than such largest annual debt service requirement, such excess amount shall be promptly transferred to the receiving fund. 
(Prior Code, § 2.247; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 93-10, 5-3-1993) 
Sec. 42-51. - Proceeds of the sale. 
(a)  From the proceeds of the sale of the refunding bonds, there shall be immediately deposited in the redemption fund an amount equal to the accrued interest and premium, if any, received on the delivery of the refunding bonds. Certain of the proceeds of the refunding bonds and, if deemed necessary or advisable by the issuer, moneys on hand in the outstanding bond reserve account shall be deposited in an escrow fund or funds (the escrow fund) consisting of cash and investments in direct obligations of or obligations of the principal of and interest on which are unconditionally guaranteed by the United States of America or other obligations, the principal of and interest on, which are fully secured by the foregoing not redeemable at the option of the issuer in amounts fully sufficient to pay the principal, interest and redemption premiums on all of the refunded bonds, which are to be refunded hereunder, and shall be used only for such purposes. 
(b)  The escrow fund shall be held by the escrow agent pursuant to an escrow agreement (the escrow agreement), which shall irrevocably direct the escrow agent to take all necessary steps to pay the principal of and interest on the refunded bonds when due and to call the refunded bonds for redemption on the first call date, as specified by the issuer. The amounts held in the escrow fund shall be such that the cash and investments and income received thereon will be sufficient, without reinvestment, to pay the principal, interest and redemption premiums on the refunded bonds when due at maturity or by call for redemption as required by the sales resolution. The remaining proceeds of the bonds shall be used to pay the costs of issuance of the bonds. Any proceeds in excess of the proceeds deposited in the escrow fund or required to pay the costs of issuance shall be deposited in the redemption fund and used to pay interest on the bonds on September 1, 1993. 
(c)  The city manager and the finance director of the issuer are each authorized to negotiate an escrow agreement on behalf of the issuer. 
(Prior Code, § 2.248; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 93-10, 5-3-1993) 
Sec. 42-52. - Form. 
    The bonds shall be in substantially the following form: 
United States Of America 
State Of Michigan 
County Of Wexford 
City Of Cadillac 
Water Supply and Wastewater System 
Revenue Refunding Bond, Series 1993 
Interest Rate Maturity Date Date of Original Issue CUSIP September 1, ____________ June 1, 1993 Registered owner: ____________ ____________ Principal amount: $ ____________ ____________ DOLLARS  
    The City of Cadillac, County of Wexford, State of Michigan (the issuer), for value received, hereby promises to pay, solely and only out of the hereinafter described net revenues of the issuer's water supply and wastewater system (hereinafter defined) the principal amount shown above in lawful money of the United States of America to the registered owner shown above, or registered assigns, on the maturity date shown above, unless prepaid prior thereto as hereinafter provided, with interest thereon from the date of original issue shown above or such later date to which interest has been paid, until paid, at the interest rate per annum shown above, payable on September 1, 1993, and semiannually thereafter. Principal of this bond is payable upon surrender of this bond at the principal corporate trust office of Bank of New York, New York or such other transfer agent as the issuer may hereafter designate by notice mailed to the registered owner not less than 60 days prior to the date of any change in transfer agent. Interest on this bond is payable by check or draft mailed by the transfer agent to the person or entity who is, as of the 15th day of the month preceding the interest payment date, the registered owner of record, at the registered address as shown on the registration books of the issuer kept by the transfer agent. For prompt payment of principal and interest on this bond, the issuer has irrevocably pledged the revenues of the water supply and wastewater system of the issuer (the system), including all appurtenances, extensions and improvements thereto, after provision has been made for reasonable and necessary expenses of operation, maintenance and administration (the net revenues), and a statutory first lien thereon is hereby recognized and created. 
    This bond is one of a series of bonds of even date of original issue aggregating the principal sum of dollars, issued pursuant to Ord. Nos. 88-07, 89-07, 93-08 and of the issuer, duly adopted by the city council of the issuer (the ordinances), and under and in full compliance with the Constitution and statutes of the State of Michigan, including specifically Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended, for the purpose of paying the cost of refunding certain of the issuer's outstanding water supply and wastewater system revenue bonds, Series 1988 and certain of the issuer's outstanding water supply and wastewater system revenue bonds, Series 1989. 
    For a complete statement of the revenues from which and the conditions under which this bond is payable, a statement of the conditions under which additional bonds of equal standing as to the net revenues may hereafter be issued and the general covenants and provisions pursuant to which this bond is issued, reference is made to the above-described ordinances. The bonds of this issue are of equal standing and priority of lien as to the net revenues with: 
(1)  That portion of the issuer's water supply and wastewater system revenue bonds, Series 1988 authorized by Ord. No. 88-07 which are not being refunded with the proceeds of the bonds of this issue. 
(2)  That portion of the issuer's water supply and wastewater system revenue bonds, Series 1989 authorized by Ord. No. 89-07 which are not being refunded with the proceeds of the bonds of this issue; and 
(3)  With the issuer's water supply and wastewater system revenue bonds, Series 1993. 
    Bonds of this issue maturing in the years ____________ to ____________ , inclusive, are not subject to redemption prior to maturity. Bonds or portions of bonds in multiples of $5,000.00 maturing in the year and thereafter may be redeemed at the option of the issuer, in such order as the issuer shall determine and within any maturity by lot, on any interest payment date on or after ____________ 1, ____________ at par and accrued interest to the date fixed for redemption plus a premium expressed as a percentage of par as follows: 
____________ percent of the par value of each bond or portion thereof called for redemption on or after ____________ , ____________ but prior to ____________ , ____________ ; 
____________ percent of the par value of each bond or portion thereof called for redemption on or after ____________ , ____________ but prior to ____________ , ____________ ; 
____________ percent of the par value of each bond or portion thereof called for redemption on or after ____________ , ____________ but prior to ____________ , ____________ ; 
No premium shall be paid on bonds or portions of bonds if called for redemption on or after ____________ , ____________ . 
In case less than the full amount of an outstanding bond is called for redemption the transfer agent upon presentation of the bond called in part for redemption shall register, authenticate and deliver to the registered owner a new bond in the principal amount of the portion of the original bond not called for redemption. 
    Notice of redemption of any bond or portion thereof shall be given by the transfer agent at least 30 days prior to the date fixed for redemption by mail to the registered owner at the registered address shown on the registration books kept by the transfer agent. Bonds shall be called for redemption in multiples of $5,000.00 and any bond of a denomination of more than $5,000.00 shall be treated as representing the number of bonds obtained by dividing the denomination of the bond by $5,000.00 and such bond may be redeemed in part. Notice of redemption for a bond redeemed in part shall state that upon surrender of the bond to be redeemed a new bond or bonds in aggregate principal amount equal to the unredeemed portion of the bonds surrendered shall be issued to the registered owner thereof. No further interest on a bond or portion thereof called for redemption shall accrue after the date fixed for redemption, whether presented for redemption or not, provided funds are on hand with the transfer agent to redeem the bond or portion thereof. 
    This bond is a self-liquidating bond and is payable solely and only, both as to principal and interest, from the net revenues of the system. The principal of and interest on this bond are secured by the statutory lien hereinbefore mentioned. 
    The issuer has covenanted and agreed, and does hereby covenant and agree, to fix and maintain at all times while any bonds payable from the net revenues of the system shall be outstanding, such rates for service furnished by the system as shall be sufficient to provide for payment of the interest on and the principal of the bonds of this issue and any additional bonds of equal standing as and when the same shall become due and payable, and to create and maintain a bond redemption fund (including a bond reserve account) therefor, to provide for the payment of expenses of administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the system as are necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order, and to provide for such other expenditures and funds for the system as are required by the ordinances. 
    This bond is transferable only upon the books of the issuer kept for that purpose at the office of the transfer agent by the registered owner hereof in person, or by the registered owner's attorney duly authorized in writing, upon the surrender of this bond together with a written instrument of the transfer satisfactory to the transfer agent duly executed by the registered owner or the registered owner's attorney duly authorized in writing, and thereupon a new registered bond or bonds in the same aggregate principal amount and of the same maturity shall be issued to the transferee in exchange therefor as provided in the ordinance authorizing the bonds, and upon the payment of the charges, if any, therein prescribed. 
    It is hereby certified and recited that all acts, conditions and things required by law precedent to and in the issuance of this bond and the series of bonds of which this is one have been done and performed in regular and due time and form as required by law. 
    This bond is not valid or obligatory for any purpose until the transfer agent's certificate of authentication on this bond has been executed by the transfer agent. 
    IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the City of Cadillac, County of Wexford, State of Michigan, by its city council, has caused this bond to be executed with the facsimile signatures of its mayor and its city clerk and a facsimile of its corporate seal to be printed on this bond, all as of the date of original issue. 
City Of Cadillac (Seal) By ____________ Countersigned: Mayor ____________ City Clerk Certificate of Authentication This bond is one of the bonds described in the within mentioned ordinances. Old Kent Bank And Trust Company ____________ ____________ Date of Registration: By Authorized Signatory  
(Prior Code, § 2.249; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 93-10, 5-3-1993) 
Sec. 42-53. - Authority to negotiate bond purchase agreement. 
    The city manager and finance director are each hereby authorized to negotiate a bond purchase agreement with the underwriter finalizing the details of the bonds within the authorized parameters of this division and the city manager, city clerk, finance director, city treasurer and city attorney are each authorized to do all other acts and take all other necessary procedures required to effectuate the sale, issuance and delivery of the bonds. 
(Prior Code, § 2.250; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 93-10, 5-3-1993) 
Sec. 42-54. - Tax matters. 
    The issuer shall, to the extent permitted by law, take all actions within its control necessary to maintain the exclusion of the interest on the bonds from gross income for federal income tax purposes under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the code), including, but not limited to, actions relating to any required rebate of arbitrage earnings and the expenditures and investment of bond proceeds and moneys deemed to be bond proceeds. The refunding bonds are hereby designated as qualified tax exempt obligations for purposes of deduction of interest expense by financial institutions. 
(Prior Code, § 2.251; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 93-10, 5-3-1993) 
Sec. 42-55. - Savings clause. 
    Ordinance Nos. 88-07, 89-07 and 93-08 shall continue in effect, except as specifically supplemented or altered herein. 
(Prior Code, § 2.252; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 93-10, 5-3-1993) 
Sec. 42-56. - Other matters. 
    The finance director and/or the city manager are each authorized and directed to: 
(1)  File with the state department of treasury an application for prior approval of the issuance of the bonds together with requests for such waivers as each shall deem necessary or appropriate; 
(2)  Approve the circulation of a preliminary official statement describing the bonds and deem the preliminary official statement final, for purposes of rule 15c2-12 of the SEC; and 
(3)  Do all other acts and take all other necessary procedures required to effectuate the sale, issuance and delivery of the bonds. 
(Prior Code, § 2.255; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 93-10, 5-3-1993) 
Secs. 42-57-42-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - 1999 WATER AND WASTEWATER REFUNDING REVENUE BONDS 

Sec. 42-86. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act 94 means Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended. 
    Bond purchase agreement means the bond purchase agreement relating to the purchase of the Series 1999 bonds by and between the city and the underwriter. 
    Bonds means the Series 1999 bonds, and any additional bonds presently of equal standing or hereafter issued. 
    Escrow agent means Bank of New York, New York. 
    Issuer or city means the City of Cadillac, County of Wexford, State of Michigan. 
    Mandatory redemption requirements means the mandatory prior redemption requirements of bonds that are term bonds, if any, as specified in the bond purchase agreement relating to the Series 1999 bonds or in any subsequent ordinance in connection with the issuance of additional bonds. 
    1988 bonds means the issuer's water supply and wastewater system revenue bonds, Series 1988, dated July 1, 1988, in the outstanding principal amount of $65,000.00, which bonds mature on September 1, 1999. 
    1989 bonds means the issuer's water supply and wastewater system revenue bonds, Series 1989, dated May 1, 1989, in the outstanding principal amount of $615,000.00, which bonds mature serially on September 1 of each of the years 1999 to 2001, inclusive and 2008. 
    1993 bonds means the issuer's water supply and wastewater system revenue bonds, Series 1993, dated June 1, 1993, in the outstanding principal amount of $525,000.00, which bonds mature serially on September 1 of each of the years 1999 to 2008, inclusive. 
    1993 refunding bonds means the issuer's water supply and wastewater system revenue refunding bonds, Series 1993, dated July 1, 1993, in the outstanding principal amount of $1,515,000.00, which bonds mature serially on September 1 of each of the years 1999 to 2007, inclusive. 
    1995 bonds means the issuer's water supply and wastewater system revenue bonds, Series 1995, dated September 1, 1995, in the outstanding principal amount of $2,300,000.00, which bonds mature on September 1 of each of the years 2004 to 2009, inclusive and 2012. 
    Outstanding bonds means the 1988 bonds, the 1989 bonds, the 1993 bonds, the 1993 refunding bonds and the 1995 bonds. 
    Outstanding ordinances means Ordinance Nos. 88-07, 89-07, 93-08, 93-10 and 95-20. 
    Project means the additions, extensions and improvements to the system, together with all necessary appurtenances and additions thereto. 
    Refunded bonds means all or a portion of the following: 
(1)  The 1989 bonds as shall be finally identified in the sales resolution referred to herein, but preliminarily refers to those 1989 bonds maturing in the years 2000, 2001 and 2008, aggregating the principal amount of $500,000.00; and 
(2)  The 1993 bonds as shall be finally identified in the sales resolution referred to herein, but preliminarily refers to those 1993 bonds maturing in the years 2000 to 2008, inclusive aggregating the principal amount of $485,000.00. 
    Revenues and net revenues mean the revenues and net revenues of the system and shall be construed as defined in section 3 of Act 94, including with respect to revenues, the earnings derived from the investment of moneys in the various funds and accounts established by the outstanding ordinances and this division. 
    Sales resolution means the sales resolution to be adopted by the issuer respecting the sale of the Series 1999 bonds. 
    Series 1999 bonds means the water supply and wastewater system revenue and revenue refunding bonds, Series 1999, of the issuer authorized by the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
    Sufficient government obligations means direct obligations of the United States of America or obligations, the principal and interest on which is fully guaranteed by the United States of America, not redeemable at the option of the issuer, the principal and interest payments upon which, without reinvestment of the interest, come due at such items and in such amounts as to be fully sufficient to pay the interest as it comes due on the bonds and the principal and redemption premium, if any, on the bonds as it comes due whether on the stated maturity date or upon earlier redemption. Securities representing such obligations shall be placed in trust with a bank or trust company, and if any of the bonds are to be called for redemption prior to maturity, irrevocable instructions to call the bonds for redemption shall be given to the paying agent. 
    System means the entire water supply and wastewater system of the city as defined in the term "outstanding ordinances." 
    Transfer agent means Old Kent Bank, Grand Rapids, Michigan. 
    Underwriter means Robert W. Baird & Co. Incorporated, as the purchaser of the Series 1999 bonds. 
(Prior Code, § 2.257; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 99-03, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 42-87. - Necessary public purpose; estimated cost and life of project. 
    It is hereby determined to be a necessary public purpose of the issuer to refund the refunded bonds and to acquire and construct the project. The estimated cost of refunding the refunded bonds, including legal and financing expenses, in an amount not to exceed $1,200,000.00 and the estimated cost of acquiring and constructing the project, including contingencies, engineer, legal and financing expenses, in an amount of not to exceed $1,100,000.00, is hereby approved. The issuer does hereby estimate the period of usefulness of the project to be at least 40 years. 
(Prior Code, § 2.258; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 99-03, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 42-88. - Payment of cost; authorization. 
    To pay the costs associated with the refunding of the refunded bonds and acquiring and constructing the project, including all legal, financial and other expenses incident thereto and incident to the issuance and sale of the bonds, the issuer shall borrow the sum of not to exceed $2,300,000.00, as finally determined in the sales resolution and issue the bonds therefor pursuant to the provisions of Act 94. The remaining costs, if any, of refunding the refunded bonds shall be defrayed from system funds on hand and legally available for such use, including moneys in the bond reserve account established for the outstanding bonds and the refunded bonds. 
(Prior Code, § 2.259; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 99-03, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 42-89. - Bond details, registration and execution. 
(a)  The bonds hereby authorized shall be designated water supply and wastewater system revenue and revenue refunding bonds, Series 1999, shall be payable solely and only out of the net revenues, as set forth more fully herein, shall consist of bonds of the denomination of $5,000.00, or integral multiples of $5,000.00, not exceeding in any one year the amount maturing in that year, dated as of May 1, 1999, or such other date as shall be determined in the sales resolution, numbered in order of authentication, and shall mature on September 1 in the years 1999 to 2019, inclusive, or such other years of maturity as shall be determined in the sales resolution. 
(b)  The bonds shall bear interest at a rate or rates set forth in the bond purchase agreement determined on sale thereof, but in any event not exceeding six percent per annum, payable on March 1 and September 1 of each year, commencing September 1, 1999, or such later date as shall be determined in the sales resolution, by check or draft mailed by the transfer agent to the person or entity which is, as of the 15th day of the month preceding the interest payment date, the registered owner at the registered address as shown on the registration books of the issuer maintained by the transfer agent. The date of determination of the registered owner for purposes of payment of interest as provided in this subsection, may be changed by the issuer to conform to market practice in the future. The principal of the bonds shall be payable at the principal corporate trust office of the transfer agent. The bonds shall be sold at the price set forth in the bond purchase agreement. 
(c)  The bonds may be subject to redemption prior to maturity at the times and prices and in the manner finally determined by the city council in the sales resolution. 
(d)  In case less than the full amount of an outstanding bond is called for redemption, the transfer agent, upon presentation of the bond called in part for redemption, shall register, authenticate and deliver to the registered owner a new bond in the principal amount of the portion of the original bond not called for redemption. Notice of redemption shall be given in the manner specified in the form of the bonds contained in section 42-98. 
(e)  The bonds shall be executed in the name of the issuer with the facsimile signatures of the mayor and the city clerk and shall have a facsimile of the issuer's seal printed on them. No bond shall be valid until authenticated by an authorized signer of the transfer agent. The bonds shall be delivered to the transfer agent for authentication and be delivered by the transfer agent to the underwriter in accordance with instructions from the finance director of the issuer upon payment of the purchase price for the bonds in accordance with the bid therefor when accepted. Executed blank bonds for registration and issuance to transferees shall simultaneously, and from time to time thereafter as necessary, be delivered to the transfer agent for safekeeping. 
(Prior Code, § 2.260; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 99-03, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 42-90. - Registration and transfer. 
(a)  Any bond may be transferred upon the books required to be kept pursuant to this section by the person in whose name it is registered, in person or by the registered owner's duly authorized attorney, upon surrender of the bond for cancellation, accompanied by delivery of a duly executed written instrument of transfer in a form approved by the transfer agent. Whenever any bond or bonds shall be surrendered for transfer, the issuer shall execute and the transfer agent shall authenticate and deliver a new bond or bonds, for like aggregate principal amount. The transfer agent shall require payment by the bondholder requesting the transfer of any tax or other governmental charge required to be paid with respect to the transfer. The transfer agent shall not be required to: 
(1)  Issue, register the transfer of or exchange any bond during a period beginning at the opening of business 15 days before the day of the giving of a notice of redemption of bonds selected for redemption as described in the form of bonds contained in section 42-98 and ending at the close of business on the day of that giving of notice; or 
(2)  Register the transfer of or exchange of any bond so selected for redemption in whole or in part, except the unredeemed portion of bonds being redeemed in part. The issuer shall give the transfer agent notice of call for redemption at least 20 days prior to the date notice of redemption is to be given. 
(b)  The transfer agent shall keep or cause to be kept, at its principal office, sufficient books for the registration and transfer of the bonds, which shall at all times be open to inspection by the issuer, and upon presentation for such purpose, the transfer agent shall, under such reasonable regulations as it may prescribe, transfer or cause to be transferred, on said books, bonds as hereinbefore provided. 
(c)  If any bond shall become mutilated, the issuer, at the expense of the holder of the bond, shall execute, and the transfer agent shall authenticate and deliver, a new bond of like tenor in exchange and substitution for the mutilated bond, upon surrender to the transfer agent of the mutilated bond. If any bond issued under this division shall be lost, destroyed or stolen, evidence of the loss, destruction or theft may be submitted to the transfer agent and, if this evidence is satisfactory to both and indemnity satisfactory to the transfer agent shall be given, and if all requirements of any applicable law including Act 354, Public Acts of Michigan, 1972, as amended (Act 354), being MCL 129.131 to 129.135, inclusive, have been met, the issuer, at the expense of the owner, shall execute, and the transfer agent shall thereupon authenticate and deliver, a new bond of like tenor and bearing the statement required by Act 354, or any applicable law hereafter enacted, in lieu of and in substitution for the bond so lost, destroyed or stolen. 
(d)  If any such bond shall have matured or shall be about to mature, instead of issuing a substitute bond, the transfer agent may pay the same without surrender thereof. 
(e)  The bonds may be issued in book-entry-only form through the Depository Trust Company in New York, New York (DTC) and any officer of the city is authorized to execute such custodial or other agreement with the DTC as may be necessary to accomplish the issuance of the bonds in book-entry-only form and to make such changes in the bond form with the parameters of this resolution as may be required to accomplish the foregoing. 
(Prior Code, § 2.261; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 99-03, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 42-91. - Payment of bond. 
    The bonds and the interest thereon shall be payable solely and only from the net revenues, and to secure such payment, there is hereby recognized a statutory lien upon the whole of the net revenues which shall be a first lien to continue until payment in full of the principal of and interest on all bonds payable from the net revenues, or, until sufficient cash or sufficient government obligations have been deposited in trust for payment in full of all bonds of a series then outstanding, principal and interest on such bonds to maturity, or, if called for redemption, to the date fixed for redemption together with the amount of the redemption premium, if any. The statutory first lien referred to herein shall be of equal standing and priority with the city's outstanding bonds which are not being refunded with the bonds. Upon deposit of cash or sufficient government obligations, as provided in the previous sentence, the statutory lien shall be terminated with respect to that series of bonds, the holders of that series shall have no further rights under this division except for payment from the deposited funds, and the bonds of that series shall no longer be considered to be outstanding under this division. 
(Prior Code, § 2.262; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 99-03, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 42-92. - Bondholders' rights; receiver. 
(a)  The holder of the bonds representing in the aggregate not less than 20 percent of the entire principal amount thereof then outstanding, may, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, protect and enforce the statutory lien upon the net revenues of the system, and may, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, enforce and compel performance of all duties of the officers of the issuer, including the fixing of sufficient rates, the collection of revenues, the proper segregation of the revenues of the system and the proper application thereof. The statutory lien upon the net revenues, however, shall not be construed as to compel the sale of the system or any part thereof. 
(b)  If there is a default in the payment of the principal of or interest on the bonds, any court having jurisdiction in any proper action may appoint a receiver to administer and operate the system on behalf of the issuer and under the direction of the court, and by and with the approval of the court to perform all of the duties of the officers of the issuer more particularly set forth herein and in Act 94. 
(c)  The holder of the bonds shall have all other rights and remedies given by Act 94 and law, for the payment and enforcement of the bonds and the security therefor. 
(Prior Code, § 2.263; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 99-03, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 42-93. - Rates and charges for service. 
    The rates and charges for service furnished by and the use of the system and the methods of collection and enforcement of the collection of the rates shall be those in effect as the same may be increased from time to time. 
(Prior Code, § 2.264; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 99-03, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 42-94. - No free service or use. 
    No free service or use of the system, or service or use of the system at less than the reasonable cost and value thereof, shall be furnished by the system to any person, firm or corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality, including the issuer. 
(Prior Code, § 2.265; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 99-03, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 42-95. - Expenses for maintenance; review of rates. 
    The rates presently in effect in the city are estimated to be sufficient to provide for the payment of the expenses of administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the system as are necessary to preserve the system in good repair and working order, to provide for the payment of the principal of and interest on the bonds as the same become due and payable, and the maintenance of the reserve therefor and to provide for all other obligations, expenditures and funds for the system required by law and this division. In addition, the rates shall be set from time to time so that there shall be produced net revenues in an amount equal to 120 percent of the principal of and interest on the bonds coming due in each fiscal year. The rates shall be reviewed not less than once a year and shall be fixed and revised from time to time as may be necessary to produce these amounts, and it is hereby covenanted and agreed to fix and maintain rates for services furnished by the system at all times sufficient to provide for the foregoing. 
(Prior Code, § 2.266; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 99-03, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 42-96. - Reserve account. 
(a)  The reserve account in the bond and interest redemption fund, as established by the outstanding ordinances, shall be maintained in such amounts, so that the bond reserve account shall total a sum equal to the lesser of: 
(1)  The maximum annual principal and interest requirements on the bonds outstanding after issuance of the additional bonds; 
(2)  One hundred and twenty-five percent of the average annual debt service on the bonds after issuance of the additional bonds; or 
(3)  An amount equal to ten percent of the principal amount of the bonds. 
(b)  In the event that the interest in said reserve account is greater than such largest annual debt service requirement, such excess amount shall be promptly transferred to the receiving fund. 
(Prior Code, § 2.267; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 99-03, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 42-97. - Proceeds of sale. 
(a)  There is hereby established in a bank insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, to be selected by the finance director, a separate depositary account to be designated the water supply and wastewater system revenue bonds, Series 1999, construction fund, the moneys from time to time on deposit to be used solely to pay part of the cost of the project and the incidental costs set forth in section 42-89. The proceeds of the sale of the bonds shall be allocated and used as follows: 
(1)  Any premium and accrued interest, if any, shall be deposited into the bond and interest redemption fund established by the outstanding ordinances. 
(2)  The amount of funds necessary to pay the costs of the project, as set forth in the sales resolution, shall be deposited in the water supply and wastewater system revenue bonds, Series 1999, construction fund. Moneys in the construction fund shall be applied solely in payment of the cost of the acquisition and construction of the project, including any engineering expenses incident thereto. Any payments for construction, either on account or otherwise, shall not be made unless the registered engineer in charge of such work shall file with the board a signed statement to the effect that the work has been completed in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor; that it was done pursuant to and in accordance with the contract therefor (including properly authorized change orders), that the work is satisfactory and that any such work has not been previously paid for. The investment of the bonds shall be limited as may be required by federal law. Any unexpended balance of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds in the construction fund remaining after completion of the project may, in the discretion of the issuer, be used for further improvements and extensions to the system; provided that at the time of such expenditure, such use be approved by the state department of treasury. 
(3)  Any remaining balance after such expenditure, or in the event no such expenditure is made, the entire unexpended balance shall be paid into the bond and interest redemption fund and used for the redemption or purchase of callable bonds or for any other purpose permitted by Act 94. The proceeds of the sale of said bonds may be invested in whole or in part in the manner provided by Act 94. 
(4)  Certain of the proceeds of the Series 1999 bonds and, if deemed necessary or advisable by the issuer, moneys on hand in the outstanding bond reserve account, as set forth in the sales resolution, shall be deposited in an escrow fund (the escrow fund) consisting of cash and investments in direct obligations of or obligations of the principal of and interest on which are unconditionally guaranteed by the United States of America or other obligations the principal of and interest on which are fully secured by the foregoing not redeemable at the option of the issuer in amounts fully sufficient to pay the principal, interest and redemption premiums on all of the refunded bonds, which are to be refunded hereunder and shall be used only such purposes together with all costs of issuance of the Series 1999 bonds including legal and other expenses incident thereto and to the financing thereof including bond insurance premiums. The escrow fund shall be held by the escrow agent pursuant to an escrow agreement (the escrow agreement) which shall irrevocably direct the escrow agent to take all necessary steps to pay the principal of and interest on the refunded bonds when due and to call the refunded bonds for redemption on the first call date, as specified by the issuer. The amounts held in the escrow fund shall be such that the cash and investments and income received thereon will be sufficient without reinvestment to pay the principal, interest and redemption premiums on the refunded bonds when due at maturity or by call for redemption as required by the sales resolution. Any proceeds in excess of the proceeds deposited in the escrow fund or required to pay the costs of issuance shall be deposited in the redemption fund and used to pay interest on the bonds on the next available interest payment date. 
(b)  The city manager, city clerk and the finance director of the issuer are each authorized to negotiate an escrow agreement on behalf of the issuer. 
(Prior Code, § 2.268; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 99-03, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 42-98. - Form. 
    The bonds shall be in substantially the following form: 
United States Of America 
State Of Michigan 
County Of Wexford 
City Of Cadillac 
Water Supply and Wastewater System 
Revenue and Revenue Refunding Bond, Series 1999 
Interest Rate Maturity Date Date of Original Issue CUSIP September 1, ____________ May 1, 1999 Registered owner: ____________ ____________ Principal amount: $ ____________ ____________ DOLLARS  
    The City of Cadillac, County of Wexford, State of Michigan (the issuer), for value received, hereby promises to pay, solely and only out of the hereinafter described net revenues of the issuer's water supply and wastewater system the principal amount shown above in lawful money of the United States of America to the registered owner shown above, or registered assigns, on the maturity date shown above, unless prepaid prior thereto as hereinafter provided, with interest thereon from the date of original issue shown above or such later date to which interest has been paid, until paid, at the interest rate per annum shown above, payable on September 1, 1999, and semiannually thereafter. Principal of this bond is payable upon surrender of this bond at the corporate trust office of Old Kent Bank, Grand Rapids, Michigan, the transfer agent, or such other transfer agent as the issuer may hereafter designate by notice mailed to the registered owner not less than 60 days prior to any interest payment date. Interest on this bond is payable by check or draft mailed by the transfer agent to the person or entity who is, as of the 15th day of the month preceding the interest payment date, the registered owner of record, at the registered address as shown on the registration books of the issuer kept by the transfer agent. For prompt payment of principal and interest on this bond, the issuer has irrevocably pledged the revenues of the water supply and wastewater system of the issuer (the system), including all appurtenances, extensions and improvements thereto, after provision has been made for reasonable and necessary expenses of operation, maintenance and administration (the net revenues), and a statutory first lien thereon is hereby recognized and created. 
    This bond is one of a series of bonds of even date of original issue aggregating the principal sum of $ ____________ , issued pursuant to Ordinance Nos. 88-07, 89-07, 93-08, 93-10, 95-20 and 99- ____________ of the issuer, duly adopted by the city council of the issuer (the ordinances), and under and in full compliance with the Constitution and statutes of the State of Michigan, including specifically Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended, for the purpose of paying the cost of refunding certain of the issuer's outstanding water supply and wastewater system revenue bonds, Series 1989 and the issuer's outstanding water supply and wastewater system revenue bonds, Series 1993 and paying the cost of acquiring and constructing additions, extensions and improvements to the system. 
    For a complete statement of the revenues from which and the conditions under which this bond is payable, a statement of the conditions under which additional bonds of equal standing as to the net revenues may hereafter be issued and the general covenants and provisions pursuant to which this bond is issued, reference is made to the above-described ordinances. The bonds of this issue are of equal standing and priority of lien as to the net revenues with the issuer's: 
(1)  Water supply and wastewater system revenue bonds, Series 1988 in the outstanding principal amount of $65,000.00; 
(2)  Water supply and wastewater system revenue bonds, Series 1989 in the outstanding principal amount of $115,000.00 not being refunded by this issue; 
(3)  Water supply and wastewater system revenue bonds, Series 1993 in the outstanding principal amount of $40,000.00 not being refunded by this issue; 
(4)  Water supply and wastewater system revenue refunding bonds, Series 1993 in the outstanding principal amount of $1,515,000.00; and 
(5)  Water supply and wastewater system revenue bonds, Series 1995 in the outstanding principal amount of $2,300,000.00. 
    Bonds of this issue maturing in the years ____________ to ____________ , inclusive, are not subject to redemption prior to maturity. Bonds or portions of bonds in multiples of $5,000.00 maturing in the year and thereafter may be redeemed at the option of the issuer, in such order as the issuer shall determine, and within any maturity by lot, on any interest payment date on or after September 1, ____________ at par and accrued interest to the date fixed for redemption. 
    In case less than the full amount of an outstanding bond is called for redemption the transfer agent upon presentation of the bond called in part for redemption shall register, authenticate and deliver to the registered owner a new bond in the principal amount of the portion of the original bond not called for redemption. 
    Notice of redemption of any bond or portion thereof shall be given by the transfer agent at least 30 days prior to the date fixed for redemption by mail to the registered owner at the registered address shown on the registration books kept by the transfer agent. Bonds shall be called for redemption in multiples of $5,000.00 and any bond of a denomination of more than $5,000.00 shall be treated as representing the number of bonds obtained by dividing the denomination of the bond by $5,000.00 and such bond may be redeemed in part. Notice of redemption for a bond redeemed in part shall state that upon surrender of the bond to be redeemed a new bond or bonds in aggregate principal amount equal to the unredeemed portion of the bonds surrendered shall be issued to the registered owner thereof. No further interest on a bond or portion thereof called for redemption shall accrue after the date fixed for redemption, whether presented for redemption or not, provided funds are on hand with the transfer agent to bond or portion thereof. 
    This bond is a self-liquidating bond and is not a general obligation of the issuer and does not constitute an indebtedness of the issuer within any constitutional, statutory or charter debt limitation of the issuer but is payable solely and only, both as to principal and interest, from the net revenues of the system. The principal of and interest on this bond are secured by the statutory lien hereinbefore mentioned. 
    The issuer has covenanted and agreed, and does hereby covenant and agree, to fix and maintain at all times while any bonds payable from the net revenues of the system shall be outstanding, such rates for service furnished by the system as shall be sufficient to provide for payment of the interest on and the principal of the bonds of this issue and any additional bonds of equal standing as and when the same shall become due and payable, and to create and maintain a bond redemption fund, including a bond reserve account therefor, to provide for the payment of expenses of administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the system as are necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order, and to provide for such other expenditures and funds for the system as are required by the ordinances. 
    This bond is transferable only upon the books of the issuer kept for that purpose at the office of the transfer agent by the registered owner hereof in person, or by the registered owner's attorney duly authorized in writing, upon the surrender of this bond together with a written instrument of transfer satisfactory to the transfer agent duly executed by the registered owner or the registered owner's attorney duly authorized in writing, and thereupon a new registered bond or bonds in the same aggregate principal amount and of the same maturity shall be issued to the transferee in exchange therefor as provided in the ordinances authorizing the bonds, and upon the payment of the charges, if any, therein prescribed. 
    It is hereby certified and recited that all acts, conditions and things required by law precedent to and in the issuance of this bond and the series of bonds of which this is one have been done and performed in regular and due time and form as required by law. 
    This bond is not valid or obligatory for any purpose until the transfer agent's certificate of authentication on this bond has been executed by the transfer agent. 
    IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the City of Cadillac, County of Wexford, State of Michigan, by its city council, has caused this bond to be executed with the facsimile signatures of its mayor and its city clerk and a facsimile of its corporate seal to be printed on this bond, all as of the date of original issue. 
City Of Cadillac (Seal) By ____________ Countersigned: Mayor ____________ City Clerk Certificate of Authentication This bond is one of the bonds described in the within mentioned ordinances. Old Kent Bank Grand Rapids, Michigan Transfer Agent ____________ / ____________ / ____________ ____________ Date of Registration: By Authorized Signatory  
(Prior Code, § 2.269; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 99-03, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 42-99. - Authorization to negotiate purchase agreement. 
    The city manager and finance director are each hereby authorized to negotiate a bond purchase agreement with the underwriter finalizing the details of the bonds within the authorized parameters of this division and the mayor, city manager, city clerk and finance director are each authorized to do all other acts and take all other necessary procedures required to effectuate the sale, issuance and delivery of the bonds. 
(Prior Code, § 2.270; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 99-03, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 42-100. - Qualified tax exempt obligations. 
    The issuer hereby designates the bonds as qualified tax exempt obligations for purposes of deduction of interest expense by financial institutions. 
(Prior Code, § 2.271; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 99-03, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 42-101. - Tax matters. 
    The issuer shall, to the extent permitted by law, take all actions within its control necessary to maintain the exclusion of the interest on the bonds from gross income for federal income tax purposes under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the code), including, but not limited to, actions relating to any required rebate of arbitrage earnings and the expenditures and investment of bond proceeds and moneys deemed to be bond proceeds. 
(Prior Code, § 2.272; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 99-03, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 42-102. - Disclosure. 
    The city covenants it shall comply with the requirements of rule 15c2-12 of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) regarding continuing disclosure, as shall be more fully set forth in the sales resolution. 
(Prior Code, § 2.273; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 99-03, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 42-103. - Savings clause. 
    The outstanding ordinances shall continue in effect, except as specifically supplemented or altered herein. 
(Prior Code, § 2.274; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 99-03, 3-1-1999) 
Sec. 42-104. - Other matters. 
    The mayor, city manager, finance director and/or the city clerk are each authorized and directed to: 
(1)  File with the state department of treasury an application for prior approval of the issuance of the bonds together with requests for such waivers as each shall deem necessary or appropriate; 
(2)  Approve the circulation of a preliminary official statement describing the bonds and to deem the preliminary official statement final, for purposes of rule 15c2-12 of the SEC; 
(3)  Solicit bids for and approve the purchase of a municipal bond insurance policy for the bonds; and 
(4)  Do all other acts and take all other necessary procedures required to effectuate the sale, issuance and delivery of the bonds. 
(Prior Code, § 2.277; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 99-03, 3-1-1999) 
Secs. 42-105-42-121. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - 2001 WATER AND WASTEWATER REFUNDING REVENUE BONDS 

Sec. 42-122. - Definitions. 
    Whenever used in this division, except when otherwise indicated by the context, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Act 94 means Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended. 
    Bond purchase agreement means the bond purchase agreement relating to the purchase of the Series 2001 bonds by and between the city and the underwriter. 
    Bonds mean the Series 2001 bonds, and any additional bonds presently of equal standing or hereafter issued. 
    Escrow agent means Bank of New York, New York. 
    Issuer or city means the City of Cadillac, County of Wexford, State of Michigan. 
    Mandatory redemption requirements means the mandatory prior redemption requirements for bonds that are term bonds, if any, as specified in the bond purchase agreement relating to the Series 1999 bonds or in any subsequent ordinance in connection with the issuance of additional bonds. 
    1993 bonds means the issuer's water supply and wastewater system revenue refunding bonds, Series 1993, dated July 1, 1993, in the outstanding principal amount of $1,405,000.00, which bonds mature serially on September 1 of each of the years 2001 to 2007, inclusive. 
    1995 bonds means the issuer's water supply and wastewater system revenue bonds, Series 1995, dated September 1, 1995 in the outstanding principal amount of $2,300,000.00, which bonds mature on September 1 of each of the years 2004 to 2012, inclusive. 
    1999 bonds means the issuer's water supply and wastewater system revenue and revenue refunding bonds, Series 1999, in the outstanding principal amount of $1,915,000.00 which bonds mature on September 1 of each of the years 2001 to 2019, inclusive. 
    Outstanding bonds means the 1993 bonds, the 1995 bonds and the 1999 bonds. 
    Outstanding ordinances means Ordinance Nos. 88-07, 89-07, 93- 08, 93-10, 95-20 and 99-03. 
    Project means the additions, extensions and improvements to the system, together with all necessary appurtenances and additions thereto. 
    Refunded bonds means all or a portion of the 1995 bonds as shall be finally identified in the sales resolution referred to herein, but preliminarily refers to those 1995 bonds maturing in the years 2008 to 2012, inclusive, aggregating the principal amount of $1,940,000.00. 
    Revenues and net revenues mean the revenues and net revenues of the system and shall be construed as defined in section 3 of Act 94, including with respect to revenues the earnings derived from the investment of moneys in the various funds and accounts established by the outstanding ordinances and this division. 
    Sales resolution means the sales resolution to be adopted by the issuer respecting the sale of the Series 2001 bonds. 
    Series 2001 bonds means the water supply and wastewater system revenue and revenue refunding bonds, Series 2001, of the issuer authorized by the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
    Sufficient government obligations means direct obligations of the United States of America or obligations, the principal and interest on which is fully guaranteed by the United States of America, not redeemable at the option of the issuer, the principal and interest payments upon which, without reinvestment of the interest, come due at such times and in such amounts as to be fully sufficient to pay the interest as it comes due on the bonds and the principal and redemption premium, if any, on the bonds as it comes due whether on the stated maturity date or upon earlier redemption. Securities representing such obligations shall be placed in trust with a bank or trust company, and if any of the bonds are to be called for redemption prior to maturity, irrevocable instructions to call the bonds for redemption shall be given to the paying agent. 
    System means the entire water supply and wastewater system of the city as defined in the outstanding ordinances. 
    Transfer agent means Bank of New York, New York. 
    Underwriter means Robert W. Baird & Co., Incorporated, as the purchaser of the Series 2001 bonds. 
(Prior Code, § 2.279; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 2001-07, 6-4-2001) 
Sec. 42-123. - Public purpose; estimated cost and life of project. 
    It is hereby determined to be a necessary public purpose of the issuer to refund the refunded bonds and to acquire and construct the project. The estimated cost of refunding the refunded bonds, including legal and financing expenses, in an amount not to exceed $2,100,000.00 and the estimated cost of acquiring and constructing the project, including contingencies, engineering, legal and financing expenses, in an amount of not to exceed $3,200,000.00 is hereby approved. The issuer does hereby estimate the period of usefulness of the project to be at least 30 years. 
(Prior Code, § 2.280; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 2001-07, 6-4-2001) 
Sec. 42-124. - Payment of cost; bonds authorized. 
    To pay the costs associated with the refunding of the refunded bonds and acquiring and constructing the project, including all legal, financial and other expenses incident thereto and incident to the issuance and sale of the bonds, the issuer shall borrow the sum of not to exceed $5,300,000.00, as finally determined in the sales resolution and issue the bonds therefor pursuant to the provisions of Act 94. The remaining costs, if any, of refunding the refunded bonds shall be defrayed from system funds on hand and legally available for such use, including moneys in the bond reserve account established for the outstanding bonds and refunded bonds. 
(Prior Code, § 2.281; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 2001-07, 6-4-2001) 
Sec. 42-125. - Bond details, registration and execution. 
(a)  The bonds hereby authorized shall be designated water supply and wastewater system revenue and revenue refunding bonds, Series 2001, shall be payable solely and only out of the net revenues, as set forth more fully herein, shall consist of bonds of the denomination of $5,000.00, or integral multiples of $5,000.00 not exceeding in any one year the amount maturing in that year, dated as of August 1, 2001, or such other date as shall be determined in the sales resolution, numbered in order of authentication, and shall mature on September 1, in the years 2002 to 2026, inclusive, or such other years of maturity as shall be determined in the sales resolution. 
(b)  The bonds shall bear interest at a rate or rates set forth in the bond purchase agreement determined on sale thereof, but in any event not exceeding seven percent per annum, payable on March 1 and September 1 of each year, commencing March 1, 2002, or such later date as shall be determined in the sales resolution, by check or draft mailed by the transfer agent to the person or entity which is, as of the 15th day of the month preceding the interest payment date, the registered owner at the registered address as shown on the registration books of the issuer maintained by the transfer agent. The date of determination of the registered owner for the purposes of payment of interest, as provided in this subsection, may be changed by the issuer to conform to the market practice in the future. The principal of the bonds shall be payable at the principal corporate trust office of the transfer agent. The bonds shall be sold at the price set forth in the bond purchase agreement. 
(c)  The bonds may be subject to redemption prior to maturity at the times and prices and in the manner finally determined by the city council in the sales resolution. 
(d)  In case less than the full amount of an outstanding bond is called for redemption, the transfer agent upon presentation of the bond called in part for redemption shall register, authenticate and deliver to the registered owner a new bond in the principal amount of the portion of the original bond not called for redemption. Notice of redemption shall be given in the manner specified in the form of the bonds contained in section 42-134. 
(e)  The bonds shall be executed in the name of the issuer with the facsimile signatures of the mayor and the city clerk and shall have a facsimile of the issuer's seal printed on them. No bond shall be valid until authenticated by an authorized signer of the transfer agent. The bonds shall be delivered to the transfer agent for authentication and be delivered by the transfer agent to the underwriter in accordance with instructions from the finance director of the issuer upon payment of the purchase price for the bonds in accordance with the bid therefor when accepted. Executed blank bonds for registration and issuance to transferees shall simultaneously, and from time to time thereafter as necessary, be delivered to the transfer agent for safekeeping. 
(Prior Code, § 2.282; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 2001-07, 6-4-2001) 
Sec. 42-126. - Registration and transfer. 
(a)  Any bond may be transferred upon the books required to be kept pursuant to this section by the person in whose name it is registered, in person or by the registered owner's duly authorized attorney, upon surrender of the bond for cancellation, accompanied by delivery of a duly executed written instrument of transfer in a form approved by the transfer agent. Whenever any bond or bonds shall be surrendered for transfer, the issuer shall execute and the transfer agent shall authenticate and deliver a new bond or bonds, for like aggregate principal amount. The transfer agent shall require payment by the bondholder requesting the transfer of any tax or other governmental charge required to be paid with respect to the transfer. The transfer agent shall not be required: 
(1)  To issue, register the transfer of or exchange any bond during a period beginning at the opening of business 15 days before the day of the giving of a notice of redemption of bonds selected for redemption as described in the form of bond contained in section 42-134 and ending at the close of business on the day of that giving of notice; or 
(2)  To register the transfer of or exchange of any bond so selected for redemption in whole or in part, except the unredeemed portion of bonds being redeemed in part. The issuer shall give the transfer agent notice of call for redemption at least 20 days prior to the date notice of redemption is to be given. 
(b)  The transfer agent shall keep or cause to be kept, at its principal office, sufficient books for the registration and transfer of the bonds, which shall at all times be open to inspection by the issuer, and upon presentation for such purpose, the transfer agent shall, under such reasonable regulations as it may prescribe, transfer or cause to be transferred, on said books, bonds as hereinbefore provided. 
(c)  If any bond shall become mutilated, the issuer, at the expense of the holder of the bond, shall execute, and the transfer agent shall authenticate and deliver, a new bond of like tenor in exchange and substitution for the mutilated bond, upon surrender to the transfer agent of the mutilated bond. If any bond issued under this division shall be lost, destroyed or stolen, evidence of the loss, destruction or theft may be submitted to the transfer agent and, if this evidence is satisfactory to both and indemnity satisfactory to the transfer agent shall be given, and if all requirements of any applicable law including Act 354, Public Acts of Michigan, 1972, as amended (Act 354), being MCL 129.131 to 129.135, inclusive, have been met, the issuer, at the expense of the owner, shall execute, and the transfer agent shall thereupon authenticate and deliver, a new bond of like tenor and bearing the statement required by Act 354, or any applicable law hereafter enacted, in lieu of and in substitution for the bond so lost, destroyed or stolen. If any such bond shall have matured or shall be about to mature, instead of issuing a substitute bond the transfer agent may pay the same without surrender thereof. 
(d)  The bonds may be issued in book-entry-only form through the Depository Trust Company in New York, New York (DTC) and any officer of the city is authorized to execute such custodial or other agreement with the DTC as may be necessary to accomplish its issuance of the bonds in book-entry-only form and to make such changes in the bond form with the parameters of this resolution as may be required to accomplish the foregoing. 
(Prior Code, § 2.283; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 2001-07, 6-4-2001) 
Sec. 42-127. - Payment of bonds. 
    The bonds and the interest thereon shall be payable solely and only from the net revenues, and to secure such payment, there is hereby recognized a statutory lien upon the whole of the net revenues which shall be a first lien to continue until payment in full of the principal of and interest on all bonds payable from the net revenues, or, until sufficient cash or sufficient government obligations have been deposited in trust for payment in full of all bonds of a series then outstanding, principal and interest on such bonds to maturity, or, if called for redemption, to the date fixed for redemption together with the amount of the redemption premium, if any. The statutory first lien referred to herein shall be of equal standing and priority with the city's outstanding bonds which are not being refunded with the bonds. Upon deposit of cash or sufficient government obligations, as provided in the previous sentence, the statutory lien shall be terminated with respect to that series of bonds, the holders of that series shall have no further rights under this division except for payment from the deposited funds, and the bonds of that series shall no longer be considered to be outstanding under this division. 
(Prior Code, § 2.284; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 2001-07, 6-4-2001) 
Sec. 42-128. - Bondholders' rights; receiver. 
(a)  The holder of the bonds representing in the aggregate not less than 20 percent of the entire principal amount thereof then outstanding, may, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, protect and enforce the statutory lien upon the net revenues of the system, and may, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, enforce and compel performance of all duties of the officers of the issuer, including the fixing of sufficient rates, the collection of revenues, the proper segregation of the revenues of the system and the proper application thereof. The statutory lien upon the net revenues, however, shall not be construed as to compel the sale of the system or any part thereof. 
(b)  If there is a default in the payment of the principal of or interest on the bonds, any court having jurisdiction in any proper action may appoint a receiver to administer and operate the system on behalf of the issuer and under the direction of the court, and by and with the approval of the court to perform all of the duties of the officers of the issuer more particularly set forth herein and in Act 94. 
(c)  The holder of the bonds shall have all other rights and remedies given by Act 94 and law, for the payment and enforcement of the bonds and the security therefor. 
(Prior Code, § 2.285; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 2001-07, 6-4-2001) 
Sec. 42-129. - Rates and charges. 
    The rates and charges for service furnished by and the use of the system and the methods of collection and enforcement of the collection of the rates shall be those in effect as the same may be increased from time to time. 
(Prior Code, § 2.286; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 2001-07, 6-4-2001) 
Sec. 42-130. - No free service or use. 
    No free service or use of the system, or service or use of the system at less than the reasonable cost and value thereof, shall be furnished by the system to any person, firm or corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality, including the issuer. 
(Prior Code, § 2.287; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988) 
Sec. 42-131. - Expense for maintenance of system; reviewing rates. 
    The rates presently in effect in the city are estimated to be sufficient to provide for the payment of the expenses of administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the system as are necessary to preserve the system in good repair and working order, to provide for the payment of the principal of and interest on the bonds as the same become due and payable, and the maintenance of the reserve therefor and to provide for all other obligations, expenditures and funds for the system required by law and this division. In addition, the rates shall be set from time to time so that there shall be produced net revenues in an amount equal to 120 percent of the principal of and interest on the bonds coming due in each fiscal year. The rates shall be reviewed not less than once a year and shall be fixed and revised from time to time as may be necessary to produce these amounts, and it is hereby covenanted and agreed to fix and maintain rates for services furnished by the system at all times sufficient to provide for the foregoing. 
(Prior Code, § 2.288; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 2001-07, 6-4-2001) 
Sec. 42-132. - Reserve account. 
(a)  The reserve account in the bond and interest redemption fund, as established by the outstanding ordinances, shall be maintained in such amounts, so that the bond reserve account shall total a sum equal to the lesser of: 
(1)  The maximum annual principal and interest requirements on the bonds outstanding after issuance of the additional bonds; 
(2)  One hundred and twenty-five percent of the average annual debt service on the bonds after issuance of the additional bonds; or 
(3)  An amount equal to ten percent of the principal amount of the bonds. 
(b)  In the event that the interest in said reserve account is greater than such largest annual debt service requirement, such excess amount shall be promptly transferred to the receiving fund. 
(Prior Code, § 2.289; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 2001-07, 6-4-2001) 
Sec. 42-133. - Proceeds of sale. 
(a)  There is hereby established in a bank insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, to be selected by the finance director, a separate depositary account to be designated water supply and wastewater system revenue bonds, Series 2001, construction fund, the moneys from time to time on deposit to be used solely to pay part of the cost of the project and the incidental costs set forth in section 42-125. The proceeds of the sale of the bonds shall be allocated and used as follows: 
(1)  Any premium and accrued interest, if any, shall be deposited into the bond and interest redemption fund established by the outstanding ordinances. 
(2)  The amount of funds necessary to pay the costs of the project, as set forth in the sales resolution, shall be deposited in the water supply and wastewater system revenue bonds, Series 2001, construction fund. Moneys in the construction fund shall be applied solely in payment of the cost of the acquisition and construction of the project, including any engineering expenses incident thereto. Any payments for construction, either on account or otherwise, shall not be made unless the registered engineer in charge of such work shall file with the board a signed statement to the effect that the work has been completed in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor; that it was done pursuant to and in accordance with the contract therefore, including properly authorized change orders, that the work is satisfactory and that any such work has not been previously paid for. The investment of the bonds shall be limited as may be required by federal law. Any unexpended balance of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds in the construction fund remaining after completion of the project may, in the discretion of the issuer, be used for further improvements and extensions to the system; provided that at the time of such expenditure, such use be approved by the state department of treasury. Any remaining balance after such expenditure, or in the event no such expenditure is made, the entire unexpended balance shall be paid into the bond and interest redemption fund and used for the redemption or purchase of callable bonds or for any other purpose permitted by Act 94. The proceeds of the sale of said bonds may be invested in whole or in part in the manner provided by Act 94. 
(3)  Certain of the proceeds of the Series 2001 bonds and, if deemed necessary or advisable by the issuer, moneys on hand in the outstanding bond reserve account, as set forth in the sales resolution, shall be deposited in an escrow fund or funds the escrow fund) consisting of cash and investments in direct obligations of or obligations of the principal of and interest on which are unconditionally guaranteed by the United States of America or other obligations the principal of and interest on which are fully secured by the foregoing not redeemable at the option of the issuer in amounts fully sufficient to pay the principal, interest and redemption premiums on all of the refunded bonds, which are to be refunded hereunder and shall be used only for such purposes together with all costs of issuance of the Series 2001 bonds including legal and other expenses incident thereto and to the financing thereof including bond insurance premiums. The escrow fund shall be held by the escrow agent pursuant to an escrow agreement (the escrow agreement) which shall irrevocably direct the escrow agent to take all necessary steps to pay the principal of and interest on the refunded bonds when due and to call the refunded bonds for redemption on the first call date, as specified by the issuer. The amounts held in the escrow fund shall be such that the cash and investments and income received thereon will be sufficient without reinvestment to pay the principal, interest and redemption premiums on the refunded bonds when due at maturity or by call for redemption as required by the sales resolution. Any proceeds in excess of the proceeds deposited in the escrow fund or required to pay the costs of issuance shall be deposited in the redemption fund and used to pay interest on the bonds on the next available interest payment date. 
(b)  The city manager, city clerk and finance director of the issuer are each authorized to negotiate an escrow agreement on behalf of the issuer. 
(Prior Code, § 2.290; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 2001-07, 6-4-2001) 
Sec. 42-134. - Form. 
    The bonds shall be in substantially the following form: 
United States Of America 
State Of Michigan 
County Of Wexford 
City Of Cadillac 
Water Supply and Wastewater System 
Revenue and Revenue Refunding Bond, Series 2001 
Interest Rate Maturity Date Date of Original Issue CUSIP September 1, ____________ August 1, 2001 Registered owner: ____________ ____________ Principal amount: $ ____________ ____________ DOLLARS  
    The City of Cadillac, County of Wexford, State of Michigan (the issuer), for value received, hereby promises to pay, solely and only out of the hereinafter described net revenues of the issuer's water supply and wastewater system the principal amount shown above in lawful money of the United States of America to the registered owner shown above, or registered assigns, on the maturity date shown above, unless prepaid prior thereto as hereinafter provided, with interest thereon from the date of original issue shown above or such later date to which interest has been paid, until paid, at the interest rate per annum shown above, payable on March 1, 2002, and semiannually thereafter. The principal of this bond is payable upon surrender of this bond at the corporate trust office of Bank of New York, New York (the transfer agent) or such other transfer agent as the issuer may hereafter designate by notice mailed to the registered owner not less than 60 days prior to any interest payment date. Interest on this bond is payable by check or draft mailed by the transfer agent to the person or entity who is, as of the 15th day of the month preceding the interest payment date, the registered owner of record, at the registered address as shown on the registration books of the issuer kept by the transfer agent. For prompt payment of principal and interest on this bond, the issuer has irrevocably pledged the revenues of the water supply and wastewater system of the issuer (the system), including all appurtenances, extensions and improvements thereto, after provision has been made for reasonable and necessary expenses of operation, maintenance and administration (the net revenues), and a statutory first lien thereon is hereby recognized and created. 
    This bond is one of a series of bonds of even date of original issue aggregating the principal sum of $ ____________ , issued pursuant to Ordinance Nos. 88-07, 89-07, 93-08, 93-10, 95-20, 99-03 and 2001- ____________ of the issuer, duly adopted by the city council of the issuer (the ordinances), and under and in full compliance with the Constitution and statutes of the State of Michigan, including specifically Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, outstanding water supply and wastewater system revenue bonds, Series 1995 and paying the cost of acquiring and constructing additions, extensions and improvements to the system. 
    For a complete statement of the revenues from which and the conditions under which this bond is payable, a statement of the conditions under which additional bonds of equal standing as to the net revenues may hereafter be issued and the general covenants and provisions pursuant to which this bond is issued, reference is made to the above-described ordinances. The bonds of this issue are of equal standing and priority of lien as to the net revenues with the issuer's: 
    (1) Water supply and wastewater system revenue refunding bonds, Series 1993, in the outstanding principal amount of $1,405,000.00; 
    (2) Water supply and wastewater system revenue bonds, Series 1995, in the outstanding principal amount of $360,000.00 not being refunded by this issue; and 
    (3) Water supply and wastewater system revenue and revenue refunding bonds, Series 1999, in the outstanding principal amount of $1,915,000.00, together the outstanding bonds. 
    Bonds of this issue maturing in the years ____________ to ____________ , inclusive, are not subject to redemption prior to maturity. Bonds or portions of bonds in multiples of $5,000.00, maturing in the year and thereafter may be redeemed at the option of the issuer, in such order as the issuer shall determine and within any maturity by lot, on any interest payment date on or after September 1, ____________ at par and accrued interest to the date fixed for redemption. 
    In case less than the full amount of an outstanding bond is called for redemption the transfer agent upon presentation of the bond called in part for redemption shall register, authenticate and deliver to the registered owner a new bond in the principal amount of the portion of the original bond not called for redemption. 
    Notice of redemption of any bond or portion thereof shall be given by the transfer agent at least 30 days prior to the date fixed for redemption by mail to the registered owner at the registered address shown on the registration books kept by the transfer agent. Bonds shall be called for redemption in multiples of $5,000.00 and any bond of a denomination of more than $5,000.00 shall be treated as representing the number of bonds obtained by dividing the denomination of the bond by $5,000.00 and such bond may be redeemed in part. Notice of redemption for a bond redeemed in part shall state that upon surrender of the bond to be redeemed a new bond or bonds in aggregate principal amount equal to the unredeemed portion of the bonds surrendered shall be issued to the registered owner thereof. No further interest on a bond or portion thereof called for redemption shall accrue after the date fixed for redemption, whether presented for redemption or not, provided funds are on hand with the transfer agent to bond or portion thereof. 
    This bond is a self-liquidating bond and is not a general obligation of the issuer and does not constitute and indebtedness of the issuer within any constitutional, statutory or charter debt limitation of the issuer but is payable solely and only, both as to principal and interest, from the net revenues of the system. The principal of and interest on this bond are secured by the statutory lien hereinbefore mentioned. 
    The issuer have covenanted and agreed, and does hereby covenant and agree, to fix and maintain at all times while any bonds payable from the net revenues of the system shall be outstanding, such rates for service furnished by the system as shall be sufficient to provide for payment of the interest on and the principal of the bonds of this issue, the outstanding bonds and any additional bonds of equal standing as and when the same shall become due and payable, and to create and maintain a bond redemption fund, including a bond reserve account, therefor, to provide for the payment of expenses of administration and operations and such expenses for maintenance of the system as are necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order, and to provide for such other expenditures and funds for the system as are required by the ordinances. 
    This bond is transferable only upon the books of the issuer kept for that purpose at the office of the transfer agent by the registered owner hereof in person, or by the registered owner's attorney duly authorized in writing, upon the surrender of this bond together with a written instrument of transfer satisfactory to the transfer agent duly executed by the registered owner or the registered owner's attorney duly authorized in writing, and thereupon a new registered bond or bonds in the same aggregate principal amount and of the same maturity shall be issued to the transferee in exchange therefore as provided in the ordinances authorizing the bonds, and the outstanding bonds, and upon the payment of the charges, if any, therein prescribed. 
    It is hereby certified and recited that all acts, conditions and things required by law precedent to and in the issuance of this bond and the series of bonds of which this is one have been done and performed in regular and due time and form as required by law. 
    This bond is not valid or obligatory for any purpose until the transfer agent's certificate of authentication on this bond has been executed by the transfer agent. 
    IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the City of Cadillac, County of Wexford, State of Michigan, by its city council, has caused this bond to be executed with the facsimile signatures of its mayor and its city clerk and a facsimile of its corporate seal to be printed on this bond, all as of the date of original issue. 
City Of Cadillac (Seal) By ____________ Countersigned:  Mayor ____________ City Clerk Certificate of Authentication This bond is one of the bonds described in the within mentioned ordinances. Bank of New York New York, New York Transfer Agent ____________ ____________ Date of Registration: By Authorized Signatory  
(Prior Code, § 2.291; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 2001-07, 6-4-2001) 
Sec. 42-135. - Authorization to negotiate purchase agreement. 
    The city manager and finance director are each hereby authorized to negotiate a bond purchase agreement with the underwriter finalizing the details of the bonds within the authorized parameters of this division and the mayor, city manager, city clerk and finance director are each authorized to do all other acts and take all other necessary procedures required to effectuate the sale, issuance and delivery of the bonds. 
(Prior Code, § 2.292; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 2001-07, 6-4-2001) 
Sec. 42-136. - Qualified tax exempt obligations. 
    The issuer hereby designates the bonds as qualified tax exempt obligations for purposes of deduction of interest expense by financial institutions. 
(Prior Code, § 2.293; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 2001-07, 6-4-2001) 
Sec. 42-137. - Tax matters. 
    The issuer shall, to the extent permitted by law, take all actions within its control necessary to maintain the exclusion of the interest on the bonds from gross income for federal income tax purposes under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the code), including, but not limited to, actions relating to any required rebate of arbitrage earnings and the expenditures and investment of bond proceeds and moneys deemed to be bond proceeds. 
(Prior Code, § 2.294; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 2001-07, 6-4-2001) 
Sec. 42-138. - Disclosure. 
    The city covenants it shall comply with the requirements of rule 15c2-12 of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) regarding continuing disclosure, as shall be more fully set forth in the sales resolution. 
(Prior Code, § 2.295; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 2001-07, 6-4-2001) 
Sec. 42-139. - Savings clause. 
    The outstanding ordinances shall continue in effect, except as specifically supplemented or altered herein. 
(Prior Code, § 2.296; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 2001-07, 6-4-2001) 
Sec. 42-140. - Other matters. 
    The mayor, city manager, finance director and/or the city clerk are each authorized and directed to: 
(1)  File with the state department of treasury an application for prior approval of the issuance of the bonds together with requests for such waivers as each shall deem necessary or appropriate; 
(2)  Approve the circulation of a preliminary official statement describing the bonds and to deem the preliminary official statement final, for purposes of rule 15c2-12 of the SEC; 
(3)  Solicit bids for and approve the purchase of a municipal bond insurance policy for the bonds; and 
(4)  Do all other acts and take all other necessary procedures required to effectuate the sale, issuance and delivery of the bonds. 
(Prior Code, § 2.299; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 2001-07, 6-4-2001) 
Secs. 42-141, 42-142. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SERIES 2007 BONDS 

Sec. 42-143. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act 94 means Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended. 
    Authority means the state municipal bond authority. 
    Authorized officers means the mayor, the city clerk, the city manager and the director of finance of the issuer. 
    Bonds means the Series 2007 bonds, together with any additional bonds heretofore or hereafter issued of equal standing with the Series 2007 bonds. 
    Engineers means Stantec Consulting, registered engineers of Ann Arbor, Michigan. 
    Issuer means the City of Cadillac, County of Wexford, Michigan. 
    Junior lien bonds means the Series 2007 bonds, and any additional bonds that are of equal standing with the Series 2007 bonds, and junior in standing to the senior lien bonds. 
    MDEQ means the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
    Outstanding bonds means the issuer's water supply and wastewater system revenue and revenue refunding bonds, Series 1999, dated May 5, 1999, in the outstanding principal amount of $1,445,000.00, and water supply and wastewater system revenue and revenue refunding bonds, Series 2001, dated August 1, 2001, in the outstanding principal amount of $5,165,000.00. 
    Prior ordinances means, collectively, the ordinances and resolutions adopted by the city council authorizing the issuance of the outstanding bonds. 
    Project means the acquisition, construction, furnishing and equipping of additions, extensions and improvements to the city's water supply and wastewater system, together with all necessary interests in land, rights of way and all appurtenances and attachments therefor, as described in the plans prepared by the engineers and approved herein. 
    Purchase contract means the purchase contract to be entered into between the authority and the issuer relating to the purchase by the authority of the Series 2007 bonds. 
    Revenues and net revenues means the revenues and net revenues of the system and shall be construed as defined in Section 3 of Act 94, including with respect to "revenues", the earnings derived from the investment of moneys in the various funds and accounts established by the prior ordinances and this division. 
    Senior lien bonds means the outstanding bonds and any additional bonds issued pursuant to the prior ordinances that are of equal standing and priority of lien with the outstanding bonds. 
    Series 2007 bonds means the water supply and wastewater system junior lien revenue bond, Series 2007, in the principal amount of not to exceed $3,870,000 issued pursuant to this division. 
    Sufficient government obligations means direct obligations of the United States of America or obligations the principal and interest on which is fully guaranteed by the United States of America, not redeemable at the option of the issuer, the principal and interest payments upon which without reinvestment of the interest, come due at such times and in such amounts as to be fully sufficient to pay the interest as it comes due on the bonds and the principal and redemption premium, if any, on the bonds as it comes due whether on the stated maturity date or upon earlier redemption. Securities representing such obligations shall be placed in trust with a bank or trust company, and if any of the bonds are to be called for redemption prior to maturity, irrevocable instructions to call the bonds for redemption shall be given to the paying agent. 
    Supplemental agreement means the supplemental agreement among the issuer, the authority and MDEQ relating to the Series 2007 bonds. 
    System means the entire water supply and wastewater system of the issuer, including the project and all additions, extensions and improvements hereafter acquired. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, § 1, 7-16-2007) 
Sec. 42-144. - Necessity; approval of plans and specifications. 
    It is hereby determined to be a necessary public purpose of the issuer to acquire and construct the project in accordance with the plans and specifications prepared by the engineers, which plans and specifications are hereby approved. The project qualifies for the state revolving fund financing program being administered by the MDEQ and the authority, whereby bonds of the issuer are sold to the authority and bear interest at a fixed rate of 1.625 percent per annum. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, § 2, 7-16-2007) 
Sec. 42-145. - Costs; useful life. 
    The cost of the project is estimated to be $3,870,000.00, including the payment of incidental expenses as specified in section 42-146, which estimate of cost is hereby approved and confirmed, and the period of usefulness of the project is estimated to be not less than 22 years. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, § 3, 7-16-2007) 
Sec. 42-146. - Payment of cost; bonds authorized. 
(a)  To pay part of the cost of acquiring and constructing the project, legal, engineering, financial and other expenses incident thereto and incident to the issuance and sale of the Series 2007 bonds, the issuer shall borrow the sum of not to exceed $3,870,000.00, or such lesser amount as shall have been advanced to the issuer pursuant to the purchase contract and the supplemental agreement, and issue the Series 2007 bonds pursuant to the provisions of Act 94. The remaining cost of the project, if any, shall be defrayed from Issuer funds on hand and legally available for such use. 
(b)  Except as amended by or expressly provided to the contrary in this division, all of the provisions of the prior ordinances shall apply to the Series 2007 bonds issued pursuant to this division, the same as though each of said provisions were repeated in this division in detail; the purpose of this division being to authorize the issuance of additional revenue bonds of subordinate lien with respect to the outstanding bonds to finance the cost of acquiring and constructing additions, extensions and improvements to the system, additional bonds of subordinate standing with the outstanding bonds for such purpose being authorized by the provisions of the prior ordinances, upon the conditions therein stated, which conditions have been fully met. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, § 4, 7-16-2007) 
Sec. 42-147. - Issuance of Series 2007 bonds; details. 
(a)  The Series 2007 bonds of the issuer, to be designated "Water Supply And Wastewater System Junior Lien Revenue Bond, Series 2007," are authorized to be issued in the aggregate principal sum of not to exceed $3,870,000.00 as finally determined by order of the MDEQ for the purpose of paying part of the cost of the project, including the costs incidental to the issuance, sale and delivery of the Series 2007 bonds. The Series 2007 bonds shall be payable out of the net revenues, as set forth more fully in section 42-22, provided that the Series 2007 bonds shall be subordinate to the prior lien with respect to the net revenues in favor of the outstanding bonds and of any additional bonds of equal standing with the outstanding bonds hereafter issued. The Series 2007 bonds shall be in the form of a single fully-registered, nonconvertible bond of the denomination of the full principal amount thereof, dated as of the date of delivery, payable in principal installments as finally determined by the order of the MDEQ at the time of sale of the Series 2007 bonds and approved by the authority and an authorized officer. Principal installments of the Series 2007 bonds shall be payable on October 1 of the years 2009 through 2028, inclusive, or such other payment dates as hereinafter provided. Interest on the Series 2007 bonds shall be payable on April 1 and October 1 of each year, commencing April 1, 2008, or on such other interest payment dates as hereinafter provided. Final determination of the principal amount of and interest on the Series 2007 bonds and the payment dates and amounts of principal installments of the Series 2007 bonds shall be evidenced by execution of the purchase contract and each of the authorized officers is authorized and directed to execute and deliver the purchase contract when it is in final form and to make the determinations set forth above; provided, however, that the first principal installment shall be due no earlier than October 1, 2008, and the final principal installment shall be due no later than October 1, 2029, and that the total principal amount shall not exceed $3,870,000.00. 
(b)  The Series 2007 bonds shall bear interest at a rate of 1.625 percent per annum on the par value thereof or such other rate as evidenced by execution of the purchase contract, but in any event not to exceed the rate permitted by law, and any authorized officers as shall be appropriate shall deliver the Series 2007 bonds in accordance with the delivery instructions of the authority. 
(c)  The principal amount of the Series 2007 bonds is expected to be drawn down by the issuer periodically, and interest on principal amount shall accrue from the date such principal amount is drawn down by the issuer. 
(d)  The Series 2007 bonds shall not be convertible or exchangeable into more than one fully registered bond. Principal of and interest on the Series 2007 bonds shall be payable as provided in the Series 2007 bonds form in this division. 
(e)  The Series 2007 bonds shall be subject to optional redemption by the issuer with the prior written approval of the authority and on such terms as may be required by the authority. 
(f)  The city clerk shall record on the registration books payment by the issuer of each installment of principal or interest or both when made and the cancelled checks or other records evidencing such payments shall be returned to and retained by the city clerk. 
(g)  Upon payment by the issuer of all outstanding principal of and interest on the Series 2007 bonds, the authority shall deliver the Series 2007 bonds to the issuer for cancellation. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, § 5, 7-16-2007) 
Sec. 42-148. - Execution of Series 2007 bonds. 
    The Series 2007 bonds shall be signed by the manual or facsimile signature of the mayor and countersigned by the manual or facsimile signature of the city clerk and shall have the corporate seal of the issuer or facsimile thereof impressed thereon. The Series 2007 bonds bearing the manual or facsimile signatures of the mayor and the city clerk sold to the authority shall require no further authentication. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, § 6, 7-16-2007) 
Sec. 42-149. - Registration and transfer. 
(a)  Any bond may be transferred upon the books required to be kept pursuant to this section by the person in whose name it is registered, in person or by the registered owner's duly authorized attorney, upon surrender of the bond for cancellation, accompanied by delivery of a duly executed written instrument of transfer in a form approved by the transfer agent. Whenever any bond shall be surrendered for transfer, the issuer shall execute and the transfer agent shall authenticate and deliver a new bond, for like aggregate principal amount. The transfer agent shall require payment by the bondholder requesting the transfer of any tax or other governmental charge required to be paid with respect to the transfer. The issuer shall not be required: (i) to issue, register the transfer of or exchange any bond during a period beginning at the opening of business 15 days before the day of the giving of a notice of redemption of bonds selected for redemption as described in the form of Series 2007 bonds contained in section 42-155 and ending at the close of business on the day of that giving of notice, or (ii) to register the transfer of or exchange any bond so selected for redemption in whole or in part, except the unredeemed portion of bonds being redeemed in part. The issuer shall give the transfer agent notice of call for redemption at least 20 days prior to the date notice of redemption is to be given. 
(b)  The transfer agent shall keep or cause to be kept at its principal office sufficient books for the registration and transfer of the bonds, which shall at all times be open to inspection by the issuer; and upon presentation for such purpose the transfer agent shall under such reasonable regulations as it may prescribe transfer or cause to be transferred on said books bonds as hereinbefore provided. 
(c)  If any bond shall become mutilated, the issuer, at the expense of the holder of the bond, shall execute, and the transfer agent shall authenticate and deliver, a new bond of like tenor in exchange and substitution for the mutilated bond, upon surrender to the transfer agent of the mutilated bond. If any bond issued under this division shall be lost, destroyed or stolen, evidence of the loss, destruction or theft may be submitted to the transfer agent and, if this evidence is satisfactory to both and indemnity satisfactory to the transfer agent shall be given, and if all requirements of any applicable law including Act 354, Public Acts of Michigan, 1972, as amended ("Act 354"), being MCL 129.131 to 129.135, inclusive, have been met, the issuer, at the expense of the owner, shall execute, and the transfer agent shall thereupon authenticate and deliver, a new bond of like tenor and bearing the statement required by Act 354, or any applicable law hereafter enacted, in lieu of and in substitution for the bond so lost, destroyed or stolen. If any such bond shall have matured or shall be about to mature, instead of issuing a substitute bond the transfer agent may pay the same without surrender thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, § 7, 7-16-2007) 
Sec. 42-150. - Payment of Series 2007 bonds; security; priority of lien. 
    Principal of and interest on the Series 2007 bonds shall be payable from the net revenues. There is hereby recognized the statutory lien upon the whole of the net revenues created by this division which shall be a lien that is junior and subordinate to the lien of the senior lien bonds created by the prior ordinances, to continue until payment in full of the principal of and interest on all bonds payable from the net revenues, or until sufficient cash or sufficient government obligations have been deposited in trust for payment in full of all bonds of a series then outstanding, principal and interest on such bonds to maturity, or, if called for redemption, to the date fixed for redemption together with the amount of the redemption premium, if any. Upon deposit of cash or sufficient government obligations, as provided in the previous sentence, the statutory lien shall be terminated with respect to that series of bonds, the holders of that series shall have no further rights under the prior ordinances or this division except for payment from the deposited funds, and the bonds of that series shall no longer be considered to be outstanding under the prior ordinances or this division. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, § 8, 7-16-2007) 
Sec. 42-151. - Management; fiscal year. 
    The operation, repair and management of the system and the acquiring and constructing of the project shall continue to be under the supervision and control of the issuer. The issuer may employ such person or persons in such capacity or capacities as it deems advisable to carry on the efficient management and operation of the system. The issuer may make such rules and regulations as it deems advisable and necessary to assure the efficient management and operation of the system. The system shall be operated on the basis of an operating year which shall coincide with the issuer's fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, § 9, 7-16-2007) 
Sec. 42-152. - Rates and charges; no free service. 
    The rates and charges for service furnished by the system and the methods of collection and enforcement of the collection of the rates shall be those in effect on the date of adoption of this division. No free service or use of the system, or service or use of the system at less than cost, shall be furnished by the system to any person, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality, including the issuer. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, § 10, 7-16-2007) 
Sec. 42-153. - Funds and accounts; flow of funds. 
    The funds and accounts established by the prior ordinances are hereby continued, the flow of funds established by the prior ordinances, as amended, is hereby continued, and the applicable sections of the prior ordinances, as amended, relating to funds and accounts and flow of funds are incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, § 11, 7-16-2007) 
Sec. 42-154. - Bond proceeds. 
    The proceeds of the sale of the Series 2007 bonds as received by the issuer shall be deposited in a separate account in a bank or banks qualified to act as depository of the proceeds of sale under the provisions of Section 15 of Act 94 designated WATER SUPPLY AND WASTEWATER SYSTEM JUNIOR LIEN REVENUE BONDS, SERIES 2007 CONSTRUCTION FUND (the "construction fund"). Moneys in the construction fund shall be applied solely in payment of the cost of the project and any engineering, legal and other expenses incident thereto and to the financing thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, § 12, 7-16-2007) 
Sec. 42-155. - Bond form. 
    The Series 2007 bonds shall be in substantially the following form with such changes or completion as necessary or appropriate to give effect to the intent of this division: 
United States Of America 
State Of Michigan 
County Of Wexford 
City Of Cadillac 
Water Supply And Wastewater System 
Junior Lien Revenue Bond, Series 2007 
REGISTERED OWNER: Michigan Municipal Bond Authority PRINCIPAL AMOUNT: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ ____________ Dollars ($ ____________ ,000) DATE OF ORIGINAL ISSUE: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 2007  
    The CITY OF CADILLAC, County of Wexford, State of Michigan (the "City"), for value received, hereby promises to pay, but only out of the hereinafter described Net Revenues of the City's Water Supply and Wastewater System (hereinafter defined), to the Michigan Municipal Bond Authority (the "Authority"), or registered assigns, the Principal Amount shown above, or such portion thereof as shall have been advanced to the City pursuant to a Purchase Contract between the City and the authority and a Supplemental Agreement by and among the City, the authority and the State of Michigan acting through the Department of Environmental Quality, in lawful money of the United States of America, unless prepaid prior thereto as hereinafter provided. 
    During the time the Principal Amount is being drawn down by the City under this bond, the authority will periodically provide to the City a statement showing the amount of principal that has been advanced and the date of each advance, which statement shall constitute prima facie evidence of the reported information; provided that no failure on the part of the authority to provide such a statement or to reflect a disbursement or the correct amount of a disbursement shall relieve the City of its obligation to repay the outstanding Principal Amount actually advanced, all accrued interest thereon, and any other amount payable with respect thereto in accordance with the terms of this bond. 
    The Principal Amount shall be payable on the dates and in the annual principal installment amounts set forth on the Schedule attached hereto and made a part hereof, as such Schedule may be adjusted if less than $ ____________ is disbursed to the City or if a portion of the Principal Amount is prepaid as provided below, with interest on said principal installments from the date each said installment is delivered to the holder hereof until paid at the rate of one and five-eighths percent (1.625%) per annum. Interest is first payable on April 1, 2008, and semiannually thereafter on the first day of April and October of each year, as set forth in the Purchase Contract. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this bond, as long as the authority is the owner of this bond, (a) this bond is payable as to principal, premium, if any, and interest at the designated office of The Bank of New York Trust Company, N.A. or at such other place as shall be designated in writing to the City by the authority (the "Authority's Depository"); (b) the City agrees that it will deposit with the authority's depository payments of the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on this bond in immediately available funds at least five business days prior to the date on which any such payment is due whether by maturity, redemption or otherwise; and (c) written notice of any redemption of this bond shall be given by the City and received by the authority's depository at least 40 days prior to the date on which such redemption is to be made. 
Additional Interest 
    In the event of a default in the payment of principal or interest hereon when due, whether at maturity, by redemption or otherwise, the amount of such default shall bear interest (the "additional interest") at a rate equal to the rate of interest which is two percent above the authority's cost of providing funds (as determined by the authority) to make payment on the bonds of the authority issued to provide funds to purchase this bond but in no event in excess of the maximum rate of interest permitted by law. The additional interest shall continue to accrue until the authority has been fully reimbursed for all costs incurred by the authority (as determined by the authority) as a consequence of the City's default. Such additional interest shall be payable on the interest payment date following demand of the authority. In the event that (for reasons other than the default in the payment of any municipal obligation purchased by the authority) the investment of amounts in the reserve account established by the authority for the bonds of the authority issued to provide funds to purchase this bond fails to provide sufficient available funds (together with any other funds which may be made available for such purpose) to pay the interest on outstanding bonds of the authority issued to fund such account, the City shall and hereby agrees to pay on demand only the City's pro rata share (as determined by the authority) of such deficiency as additional interest on this bond. 
    For prompt payment of principal and interest on this bond, the City has irrevocably pledged the revenues of the Water Supply and Wastewater System of the City, including all appurtenances, extensions and improvements thereto (the "Water Supply and Wastewater System"), after provision has been made for reasonable and necessary expenses of operation, maintenance and administration (the "Net Revenues"), and a statutory lien thereon is hereby recognized and created which is junior in standing and priority of lien as to the prior lien of the City's Water Supply and Wastewater System Revenue and Revenue Refunding Bonds, Series 1999, and Water Supply and Wastewater System Revenue and Revenue Refunding Bonds, Series 2001 (together, the "Outstanding Bonds") of the City and of any additional bonds of the City of equal standing and priority of lien with the Outstanding Bonds. 
    This bond is a single, fully-registered, non-convertible bond in the principal sum indicated above issued pursuant to Ordinance No. ____________ duly adopted by the City Council of the City (the "Ordinance") and the Prior Ordinances and resolutions authorizing issuance of the Outstanding Bonds (the "Prior Ordinances"), and under and in full compliance with the Constitution and statutes of the State of Michigan, including specifically Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended, for the purpose of paying part of the cost of acquiring and constructing additions, extensions and improvements to the Water Supply and Wastewater System of the City. 
    For a complete statement of the revenues from which and the conditions under which this bond is payable, a statement of the conditions under which additional bonds of superior and equal standing may hereafter be issued and the general covenants and provisions pursuant to which this bond is issued, reference is made to the Ordinance and the Prior Ordinances. 
    This bond is a self-liquidating bond, payable, both as to principal and interest, from the Net Revenues of the Water Supply and Wastewater System. The principal of and interest on this bond are secured by the statutory lien hereinbefore mentioned. 
    The City has covenanted and agreed, and does hereby covenant and agree, to fix and maintain at all times while any bonds payable from the Net Revenues of the Water Supply and Wastewater System shall be outstanding, such rates for service furnished by the Water Supply and Wastewater System as shall be sufficient to provide for payment of the interest upon and the principal of this bond and any bonds of equal standing with this bond, the Outstanding Bonds and any additional bonds of equal standing with the Outstanding Bonds, as and when the same shall become due and payable, and to maintain a bond redemption fund (including, except for bonds of this issue, a bond reserve account) therefor, to provide for the payment of expenses of administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the Water Supply and Wastewater System as are necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order, and to provide for such other expenditures and funds for the Water Supply and Wastewater System as are required by the Ordinance and the Prior Ordinances. 
    Principal installments of this bond are subject to prepayment by the City prior to maturity only with the prior written consent of the authority and on such terms as may be required by the authority. 
    This bond is transferable only upon the books of the City by the registered owner in person or the registered owner's attorney duly authorized in writing, upon the surrender of this bond together with a written instrument of transfer satisfactory to the transfer agent, duly executed by the registered owner or the registered owner's attorney duly authorized in writing, and thereupon a new bond or bonds in the same aggregate principal amount and of the same maturity shall be issued to the transferee in exchange therefor as provided in the Ordinance, and upon payment of the charges, if any, therein prescribed. 
    It is hereby certified and recited that all acts, conditions and things required by law to be done precedent to and in the issuance of this bond have been done and performed in regular and due time and form as required by law. 
    IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the City of Cadillac, County of Wexford, State of Michigan, by its City Council has caused this bond to be executed with the manual signatures of its Mayor and its City Clerk and the corporate seal of the City to be impressed hereon, all as of the Date of Original Issue. 
CITY OF CADILLAC By ____________ Mayor (Seal) Countersigned: ____________ City Clerk  
SCHEDULE A 
    Based on the schedule provided below unless revised as provided in this paragraph, repayment of the principal of the bond shall be made until the full amount advanced to the issuer is repaid. In the event the Order of Approval issued by the Department of Environmental Quality (the "Order") approves a principal amount of assistance less than the amount of the bond delivered to the authority, the authority shall only disburse principal up to the amount stated in the Order. In the event (1) that the payment schedule approved by the issuer and described below provides for payment of a total principal amount greater than the amount of assistance approved by the Order or (2) that less than the principal amount of assistance approved by the Order is disbursed to the issuer by the authority, the authority shall prepare a new payment schedule which shall be effective upon receipt by the issuer. 
Maturity Date Principal Amount October 1, 2009 $165,000 October 1, 2010  170,000 October 1, 2011  170,000 October 1, 2012  175,000 October 1, 2013  175,000 October 1, 2014  180,000 October 1, 2015  180,000 October 1, 2016  185,000 October 1, 2017  190,000 October 1, 2018  190,000 October 1, 2019  195,000 October 1, 2020  195,000 October 1, 2021  200,000 October 1, 2022  205,000 October 1, 2023  205,000 October 1, 2024  210,000 October 1, 2025  215,000 October 1, 2026  220,000 October 1, 2027  220,000 October 1, 2028  225,000  
    Interest on the bond shall accrue on principal disbursed by the authority to the issuer from the date principal is disbursed, until paid, at the rate of 1.625% per annum, payable April 1, 2008 and semi-annually thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, § 13, 7-16-2007) 
Sec. 42-156. - Bondholders' rights; receiver. 
(a)  The holder of the bonds representing in the aggregate not less than 20 percent of the entire principal amount thereof then outstanding, may, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, protect and enforce the statutory lien upon the net revenues of the system, and may, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, enforce and compel performance of all duties of the officers of the issuer, including the fixing of sufficient rates, the collection of revenues, the proper segregation of the revenues of the system and the proper application thereof. The statutory lien upon the net revenues, however, shall not be construed as to compel the sale of the system or any part thereof. 
(b)  If there is a default in the payment of the principal of or interest upon the Series 2007 bonds, any court having jurisdiction in any proper action may appoint a receiver to administer and operate the system on behalf of the issuer and under the direction of the court, and by and with the approval of the court to perform all of the duties of the officers of the issuer more particularly set forth herein and in Act 94. 
(c)  The holder of the Series 2007 bonds shall have all other rights and remedies given by Act 94 and law, for the payment and enforcement of the Series 2007 bonds and the security therefor. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, § 14, 7-16-2007) 
Sec. 42-157. - Additional bonds. 
    The issuer may issue additional bonds of equal standing with the Series 2007 bonds for the following purposes and subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  To complete the project in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor. Such bonds shall not be authorized unless the engineers in charge of construction shall execute a certificate evidencing the fact that additional funds are needed to complete the project in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor and stating the amount that will be required to complete the project. If such certificate shall be so executed and filed with the issuer, it shall be the duty of the issuer to provide for and issue additional revenue bonds in the amount stated in said certificate to be necessary to complete the project in accordance with the plans and specifications plus an amount necessary to issue such bonds or to provide for part or all of such amount from other sources. 
(2)  For subsequent repairs, extensions, enlargements and improvements to the system or for subsequent repairs, extensions, enlargements and improvements to the system and for the purpose of refunding part or all of the junior lien bonds then outstanding and paying costs of issuing such additional junior lien bonds. Junior lien bonds for such purposes shall not be issued pursuant to this subsection (2) unless the adjusted net revenues of the system for the then last two preceding 12-month operating years or the adjusted net revenues for the last preceding 12-month operating year, if the same shall be lower than the average, shall be equal to at least 100 percent of the maximum amount of principal and interest thereafter maturing in any operating year on the then outstanding senior lien bonds, junior lien bonds and on the additional bonds then being issued. If the additional junior lien bonds are to be issued in whole or in part for refunding outstanding junior lien bonds, the annual principal and interest requirements shall be determined by deducting from the principal and interest requirements for each operating year the annual principal and interest requirements of any junior lien bonds to be refunded from the proceeds of the additional junior lien bonds. For purposes of this subsection (2) the issuer may elect to use as the last preceding operating year any operating year ending not more than 16 months prior to the date of delivery of the additional junior lien bonds and as the next to the last preceding operating year, any operating year ending not more than 28 months prior to the date of delivery of the additional junior lien bonds. Determination by the issuer as to existence of conditions permitting the issuance of additional junior lien bonds shall be conclusive. No additional junior lien bonds of equal standing as to the net revenues of the system shall be issued pursuant to the authorization contained in this subsection if the issuer shall then be in default in making its required payments to the operation and maintenance fund or the redemption fund. 
(3)  For refunding a part or all of the junior lien bonds then outstanding and paying costs of issuing such additional junior lien bonds including deposits which may be required to be made to the bond reserve account for such junior lien bonds. No additional junior lien bonds shall be issued pursuant to this subsection unless the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing in any operating year after giving effect to the refunding shall be less than the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing in any operating year prior to giving effect to the refunding. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, § 15, 7-16-2007) 
Sec. 42-158. - Negotiated sale; application to MDEQ and authority; execution of documents. 
    The issuer determines that it is in the best interest of the issuer to negotiate the sale of the Series 2007 bonds to the authority because the state revolving fund financing program provides significant interest savings to the issuer compared to competitive sale in the municipal bond market. The authorized officers are hereby authorized to make application to the authority and to the MDEQ for placement of the Series 2007 bonds with the authority. The actions taken by the authorized officers with respect to the Series 2007 bonds prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived are ratified and confirmed. The authorized officers are authorized to execute and deliver the purchase contract, the supplemental agreement and the issuer's certificate. Any authorized officer is further authorized to execute and deliver such contracts, documents and certificates as are necessary or advisable to qualify the Series 2007 bonds for the state revolving fund. Prior to the delivery of the Series 2007 bonds to the authority, any authorized officer is hereby authorized to make such changes to the form of Series 2007 bond contained in section 42-155 as may be necessary to conform to the requirements of Act 227, Public Acts of Michigan 1985, as amended ("Act 227"), including, but not limited to changes in the principal maturity and interest payment dates and references to additional security required by Act 227. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, § 16, 7-16-2007) 
Sec. 42-159. - Covenant regarding tax exempt status of the bonds. 
    The issuer shall, to the extent permitted by law, take all actions within its control necessary to maintain the exemption of the interest on the Series 2007 bonds from general federal income taxation (as opposed to any alternative minimum or other indirect taxation) under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the "code"), including, but not limited to, actions relating to any required rebate of arbitrage earnings and the expenditure and investment of Series 2007 bond proceeds and moneys deemed to be bond proceeds. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, § 17, 7-16-2007) 
Sec. 42-160. - Approval of bond counsel. 
    The representation of the issuer by Miller, Canfield, Paddock and Stone, P.L.C. ("Miller Canfield"), as bond counsel is hereby approved, notwithstanding the representation by Miller Canfield of the authority in connection with the state revolving fund program which may include advising the authority with respect to this borrowing. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, § 18, 7-16-2007) 
Sec. 42-161. - Approval of bond details. 
    The authorized officers are each hereby authorized to adjust the final bond details set forth herein to the extent necessary or convenient to complete the transaction authorized herein, and in pursuance of the foregoing is authorized to exercise the authority and make the determinations authorized pursuant to Section 7a(1)(c) of Act 94, including but not limited to determinations regarding interest rates, prices, discounts, maturities, principal amounts, denominations, dates of issuance, interest payment dates, redemption rights, the place of delivery and payment, and other matters, provided that the principal amount of Series 2007 bonds issued shall not exceed the principal amount authorized in this division, the interest rate per annum on the Series 2007 bonds shall not exceed 1 5/8 percent per annum, and the Series 2007 bonds shall mature in not more than 20 annual installments. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, § 19, 7-16-2007) 
Secs. 42-162, 42-163. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - INSTITUTIONAL CONTROLS FOR KYSOR INDUSTRIAL CORPORATION/NORTHERNAIRE PLATING COMPANY 

Sec. 42-164. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this division is for protecting the public health, welfare and the environment, and for implementing the remedial action plan at the site commonly known as the Kysor Industrial Corporation/Northernaire Plating Company Superfund Site. 
(Prior Code, § 2.300; Ord. No. 88-07, 5-2-1988; Ord. No. 97-10, § 1, 11-3-1997; Ord. No. 2018-10, § 1, 9-4-2018) 
Sec. 42-165. - Definitions. 
(a)  Contaminated groundwater means groundwater in which there is present concentrations of materials that exceed drinking water criteria under the Safe Drinking Water Act, 1976 PA 399, as amended, or the residential drinking water criteria established by the MDEQ in the operational memoranda or rules promulgated pursuant to Part 201, Environmental Remediation (MCL 324.20101 et seq. ). 
(b)  Domestic use means the use of water by humans for drinking, cooking, food preparation and other food-related services, cleaning, washing, bathing and similar household-type water uses in any dwelling, or in any building in which commercial/business, governmental/public or industrial activities are conducted. The term does not include water used solely for closed-loop heat pumps, non-contact cooling, production and/or processing purposes of commercial or industrial enterprises. 
(c)  Irrigation use means the use of water for lawn, garden or landscaping irrigation on a residential parcel of land. The term does not include water used for commercial, agricultural, or farm irrigation, except as specifically directed by the MDEQ. 
(d)  MDEQ means the Michigan Department Of Environmental Quality or its successor agency. 
(e)  Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, club, joint venture, estate, trust, and any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the individuals constituting such group or unit. 
(f)  Restricted zone means an area or areas described within section 42-166 of this division for which the prohibition of wells and the use of groundwater applies and includes parcels of lands that are legally described in the map attached as exhibit A. 
(g)  Well means an opening in the surface of the earth for the purpose of removing fresh water through non-mechanical or mechanical means for any purpose other than a public emergency or conducting response actions that are consistent with the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, as amended ("NREPA"), the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, 42 USC § 9601 et seq. , the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 USC § 6901 et seq., and other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10, § 1, 9-4-2018) 
Sec. 42-166. - Restricted zone. 
    The following described area(s) in the city shall be restricted zone(s) under this division. Additional restricted zones may be added by amending this section. 
(a)  All land located in Township 22 North, Range 9 West, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan, described as follows: 
(1)  The East Quarter (E1/4) of the Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) of Section 32. 
(2)  The Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) of Section 32. 
(3)  The North Half (N1/2) of the Southeast Quarter (SE1/4) of Section 32. 
(4)  The Southwest Quarter (SW1/4) of Section 33 lying North and West of the Tuscola-Saginaw Bay Railroad. 
(5)  The Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) of Section 33, except the following: South of Gunn Street and Seventh Street which is East of the Ann Arbor Railroad; the property lying East of the Pennsylvania Central Railroad; and also commencing as the Point of Beginning at the Southwest corner of Block 179 of the Improvement Board Addition; thence North to the Northwest corner of Block 188; thence East along the North line of Block 188 to the Northwest corner of Block 189; thence East along the North block line, 220 feet; thence South 71 feet; thence East 107.43 feet; thence North 71 feet; thence East 212.83 feet; thence South 16°2'30" East, 331.74 feet; thence South 3°28'30" East, 246.56 feet to the West right-of-way line of the Ann Arbor Railroad; thence Southwesterly along the West right-of-way line of the Ann Arbor Railroad to the Southeast corner of Block 177; thence West along the South line of Block 177 to the centerline of Third Avenue; thence North on the centerline of Third Avenue to the South line of Block 179 and Block 178, if extended; thence West to the Point of Beginning of the Improvement Board Addition, City of Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. 
    Hereafter referred to as the Kysor Industrial Corporation/Northernaire Plating Company Site (the "Site"). 
(Ord. No. 2018-10, § 1, 9-4-2018) 
Sec. 42-167. - Prohibition. 
    Except as provided in section 42-168, no person shall install or utilize, or allow, permit or provide for the installation or utilization of a well in any restricted zone. Any existing well at the time of the enactment of a restricted zone within the restricted zone shall be plugged/abandoned at the expense of an applicant for that particular restricted zone and as provided for in this division in accordance with applicable laws, regulations and ordinances, unless such existing well falls within one of the exceptions provided in section 42-168. Except as provided in section 42-168, no person shall use any groundwater from a restricted zone. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10, § 1, 9-4-2018) 
Sec. 42-168. - Exceptions. 
    A person may install or utilize, or allow, permit or provide for the installation or utilization of a well in any restricted zone if any of the following exceptions apply and the requirements of the exceptions are complied with. The party proposing an exception to the well prohibition shall conduct all appropriate inquiry and prepare a due care analysis pursuant to Part 201 of NREPA: 
(a)  Proof of no influence . If the MDEQ determines based on information provided to it by the person seeking an exception (1) that the use of a well in the restricted zone will not exacerbate existing groundwater contamination, and (2) that the water from the proposed well will not be affected by contaminated groundwater, the well may be so used. The party proposing the exception shall deliver proof/notice of those determinations to the city prior to well operation. 
(b)  Groundwater monitoring/remediation . A well may be used for groundwater monitoring and/or remediation as part of a response activity approved by the MDEQ or the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The party proposing the exception shall deliver proof of the MDEQ or EPA approval to the city prior to well operation. 
(c)  Construction dewatering . A well may be used for construction dewatering upon approval by the MDEQ if the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1)  The use of the dewatering well will not result in unacceptable exposure to contaminated groundwater, possible cross-contamination between saturated zones, or exacerbation of contaminated groundwater as defined in Part 201 of NREPA; and 
(2)  The water generated by that activity is properly handled and disposed of in compliance with all applicable laws, rules, regulations, permit and license requirements, and orders and directives of any governmental entity or agency of competent jurisdiction. 
Any exposure, cross-contamination, or exacerbation caused by the use of the well under this exception shall be the responsibility of the person operating the dewatering well as provided in Part 201 of NREPA. 
The party proposing the exception shall deliver proof/notice of MDEQ approval to the city prior to well operation. 
(d)  Processing activities. If the MDEQ determines that the use of a well for non-contact heating, cooling, production, or processing involved in industrial, commercial or residential activities will not cause migration or exacerbation of contaminated groundwater, such use of the well under terms and conditions specified by the MDEQ will be allowed. All information necessary for the MDEQ determination described in this subsection shall be provided by the person seeking this exception. Upon MDEQ approval, the party proposing the exception shall deliver proof/notice of those MDEQ determinations to the city prior to well operation. 
(e)  Public emergencies. A well may be used in the event of a public emergency. Notice of such use shall be provided to the MDEQ within a reasonable time thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10, § 1, 9-4-2018) 
Sec. 42-169. - Enforcement. 
    The city manager, or his/her designee, shall be the official having the authority to enforce this division. After the effective date of the ordinance from which this division derives, the enforcement official shall contact all owners of restricted zone parcels, which appear to have wells prohibited under this division, giving written notice of the need to cease using such wells and of the need for (1) establishment of a domestic use and/or irrigation use water source by connecting to the city water system or (2) obtaining approval or acknowledgment of an exception under section 42-168. The owner of a restricted zone parcel shall comply with the provisions of this division with regard to the provision of domestic or irrigation use water within 60 days from the date of such notice. Any existing well in violation of this division shall be plugged or abandoned in conformance with applicable legal requirements. Where, upon information available to the enforcement official, it is suspected that a well is being used within the restricted zone in violation of this division, the enforcement official may inspect the restricted zone and serve appropriate notice and order of such violation requiring that action be taken promptly by the owner to bring the restricted zone in compliance. If the owner fails to act in accordance with such order, the enforcement official may seek remedies and penalties as provided in this division including, but not limited to, suspension or revocation of a previously granted exception. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10, § 1, 9-4-2018) 
Sec. 42-170. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this division shall be liable for a municipal civil infraction under section 38-135 of the city's code. In addition, the city may also seek an order from a court of appropriate jurisdiction requiring compliance with this division and may seek costs and attorney fees associated with such enforcement action. Any violation of this division is a public nuisance, subject to abatement, and any well in violation of this division shall be immediately taken out of service and lawfully abandoned in compliance with applicable legal requirements. A court of competent jurisdiction may order any person violating any provision of this division to properly and lawfully remove or abandon a well. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10, § 1, 9-4-2018) 
Sec. 42-171. - Administrative liability. 
    No officer, agent or employee of the city or member of the city council shall render himself or herself personally liable for any damage which may occur to any person as a result of any act or decision performed in the discharge of his or her duties pursuant to this division. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10, § 1, 9-4-2018) 
Sec. 42-172. - Notice of amendments/repeal. 
    The MDEQ, an applicant, an owner, or any other interested party may request to add parcels or delete parcels from a restricted zone or to establish an additional restricted zone or to otherwise amend or repeal this division and shall provide 30 days' advance notice to the MDEQ, including the reasons supporting such request. The city, upon 30 days' advance notice to the MDEQ, EPA and any applicant, may also take action to amend or repeal this division as it deems appropriate. The city shall also notify the MDEQ, EPA and any applicant that this division may lapse at least 30 days prior to the ordinance being allowed to lapse. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10, § 1, 9-4-2018) 
Secs. 42-173-42-181. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM 

Sec. 42-182. - Purpose. 
(a)  The city has established a water supply system (the system) for the residents and businesses of the city, and hereby amends and restates all prior ordinances of the city relating to the system and the charges, rates and fees for services of the system in amounts sufficient to pay: 
(1)  The expenses of administration and the costs of operation and maintenance of the system; and 
(2)  The cost of replacement, repairs and improvements to the system. 
(b)  The city's engineers have advised the city that the rates, charges and fees authorized hereby and the method of allocating those rates, charges and fees to users of the system are proportionate to the necessary costs of providing the service at the levels demanded by the users. 
(Prior Code, ch. 22; Ord. No. 2000-08, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-183. - Findings. 
(a)  Potable water. The city council has previously found, and currently reaffirms that the businesses, industries, governmental and charitable agencies and residents located in the city need to have potable and otherwise usable water. 
(b)  Availability. The city further has previously found, and currently reaffirms, that the supply of potable water available from private wells within the city is insufficient to assure that all businesses, industries, governmental and charitable agencies, and residents will have sufficient potable water available for their use and other water necessary for industrial and fire prevention and control unless the city offers water to all properties located within the city. 
(c)  Method of measuring use. Based on advice of its engineers, the city has previously found and currently affirms, that the most precise method of measuring for use of the water supply system by any user is by a meter or meters installed and controlled by the city. 
(d)  Continuation of service. The city has previously found, and further currently reaffirms that, in order to provide and continue to provide clean potable and other usable water to all users of the water supply system, in quantities necessary for all varieties of use, it is necessary from time to time to install improvements, enlargements, extensions and repairs to the system. 
(e)  Purpose of charges. Charges for the use of water supply system are hereby established for the purpose of recovering the cost of construction, reconstruction, maintenance, repair, and operation of the system. Such charges shall be made in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth and shall be made against all users of the system. 
(1)  All premises connected directly or indirectly to the system, except as hereinafter provided, shall be charged and shall make payments to the city in amounts computed on the basis of this article. 
(2)  The charges, rates and fees for water service by the system are established herein to adequately provide for bond requirements and to ensure that the system shall not operate at a deficit. 
(3)  The city staff or designated parties shall periodically review the charges, rates, fees, rules and regulations of the water supply system. Said review shall be completed not less than one time per fiscal year. Results of said review shall be reported to the city council with respective recommendations for any adjustments. 
(4)  The charges, rates and fees shall be set so as to recover costs from the users in reasonable proportion to the cost of serving those users. 
(f)  Proportionality, fairness, and benefits of charges, rates and fees. The city has previously found and further currently reaffirms that the fairest and most reasonable method of providing for the operation, maintenance, repair, replacement and improvement of the water supply system, is to charge each user: 
(1)  Based in all cases on amount of use for: 
a.  The cost of retiring debt secured by the net revenues of the system issued to pay for improvements and replacements to the water supply system; 
b.  The costs of ongoing repair, replacement and improvement and budgeted as part of the annual costs of the system; and 
c.  Operation, administration and maintenance costs of the system. 
(2)  The city has investigated several methods of apportioning the costs of the water supply system. Based on its investigation and on the advice of its engineers, the city council has previously found, and currently reaffirms, that to ensure the stability and viability of the system for the benefit of its users, the fairest and most accurate way to apportion the costs of operation, maintenance, replacement and improvement of the system is to charge each user: 
a.  A monthly fixed charge for water service (which varies depending on the size of the water intake pipe and meter) which fee re- flects user's proportionate share of the fixed costs of the system; and 
b.  A commodity charge for water usage which is based on the user's actual use of water supplied by the system. 
(3)  The city council has previously found, and currently reaffirms that the charges, rates and fees set forth herein fairly and accurately apportion the fixed and variable costs of the water supply system among the users of the system and that the monthly service charge and commodity charges for water service charged to each user of the water supply system provide actual benefits to such users in the form of ready access to water services that would be unavailable if such charges were not charged. The city council has previously found that the benefit charge, as provided in section 42-200, represents a fair and accurate method for apportioning the cost of mains to persons who connect to the water supply system subsequent to construction, and further is equal to the benefit conferred upon such persons. The city council has previously found and currently reaffirms that the charges for private fire protection, customer service, public fire protection, and service to nonresidents, as provided in sections 42-202 through 42-205, represent fair and accurate charges necessary to make such services available and that such charges are equal to the actual benefit conferred upon such users. 
(g)  Useful life of improvements. Based on the advice of its engineers, the city council has previously found and currently reaffirms that any improvements to or capital expenditures for the water supply system did not, at the time such improvements were constructed and financed, have an expected useful or design life that would exceed the term of the respective bonds issued to finance such improvements or capital expenditures and paid for by rates and charges. 
(h)  Charges, rates and fees for nonresidents. The city has previously found, and hereby ratifies and confirms, that the total direct and indirect costs of providing service to users outside the city jurisdiction, where no other contract exists with the governmental units where those users are located, equals at least two times the rates and charges imposed on users located in the city. Indirect costs include payment for capital improvements, extraordinary repairs and replacements for the water supply system benefiting all users of the system and paid for by users served within the corporate limits of the city or the corporate limits of other municipalities which have entered into contracts with the city for such costs, funding depreciation of the improvements comprising the water supply system, and fire and police or other protection for the water supply system paid by city taxpayers or by the governmental units with which the city has contracts for water distribution. 
(Prior Code, § 2.41; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1(2.41), 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-184. - Establishment of the system. 
    Based on the findings and purposes set forth in sections 42-182 and 42-183, the city has previously established and hereby reestablishes the city's water supply system consisting of all of the water mains, pumping and storage facilities, pressure systems, wells, and all other appurtenances to the water supply system. 
(Prior Code, § 2.42; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1(2.42), 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-185. - Extensions or improvements. 
    Extensions of and improvements to the present water supply system shall be constructed when the same become necessary or proper, in the judgment of the council. The cost of all improvements to, and extensions of, the water supply system shall be at the expense of the person or properties benefited by the improvements or extension, reasonably proportioned to the benefits received, or at the expense of the general fund of the city. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the cost of improvements to the system whose benefit cannot be attributed to particular users or groups of users of the system may be allocated proportionally among all users of the system. 
(Prior Code, § 2.43; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1(2.43), 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-186. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City water supply system means all mains, connections, pipes, meters, hydrants and appurtenances connected with or serviced by the city water system. 
    Department means the utilities department of the city. 
    Director means the director of the department or his authorized representative. 
    Limited area fire protection system means a system consisting of not more than 20 sprinkler heads for use in a room or space enclosed by construction assemblies as required by the state construction code. 
    Water main means that part of the city water supply system located within easement lines or streets designed to supply more than two water service connections. 
    Water service connection means that part of the water supply system connecting the closest available water main to the premises served and consisting of one corporation valve, one curb valve, connecting pipe, one meter and meter setting. 
(Prior Code, § 2.44; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1(2.44), 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-187. - Water service connections. 
(a)  Application for connections to the water supply system shall be made to the department on forms prescribed and furnished by it. The department may refuse to authorize a larger service pipe than reasonably required by the premises served. Water connections and water meters shall be installed in accordance with rules and regulations of the department and upon payment of the required connection fee and meter installation fee. In no event shall the size of the water service connection from the main to the curb valve be less than three-quarter inches in diameter. The water meter, setter, and service from the water main to the service curb valve, including valve, shall be the property of the city. Connection fees and meter installation charges shall not be less than the cost of materials, installation and overhead attributable to such installations. The city council shall, from time to time, fix an amount for a meter installation charge according to the size of the meter. All single-family residential water meters shall be installed by utilities department employees. All industrial, commercial and institutional water meters shall be installed by the owners of said properties or their contracted representatives. 
(b)  Installation specifications, as defined by the utilities department, shall be the guidelines for proper installation for all industrial, commercial and institutional water meters. Prior to turning on any water service, proper meter installation shall be verified by the utilities department. 
(c)  In all cases, a separate water service line shall be required for each residential building, even when more than one building occupies a single property description. In the case of industrial, commercial or institutional buildings, where a single building is already served, a utilities department permit shall be required to extend the existing service to additional buildings on the same property description. 
(Prior Code, § 2.45; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1(2.45), 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-188. - Authorized person to turn on service. 
    No person, other than an authorized employee of the department, shall turn on or off any water service, except that a licensed plumber may turn on water service for testing his work, when it must be immediately turned off, or upon receiving written order from the department; provided that upon a written permit from the department, water may be turned on for construction purposes only, prior to the granting of a certification of occupancy for the premises, and upon payment of the charges applicable thereto, which shall include the connection fee, meter installation fee and deposit. 
(Prior Code, § 2.46; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1(2.46), 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-189. - Water meters. 
    All premises using water shall be metered, except as otherwise provided in this Code. No person except a department employee shall break or injure the seal or change the location of, alter or interfere in any way with any water meter. The director, with approval of the city manager, may authorize service on flat rate charges where it is not practical to install a meter. 
(Prior Code, § 2.47; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1(2.47), 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-190. - Meter location. 
    Meters shall be set in an accessible location and in a manner satisfactory to the director. Where the premises contain no basement or cellar or other satisfactory inside location, the meter shall be installed outside in a meter pit or box, the location of which shall be approved by the director. Where it is necessary to set the meter in a pit or box, such pit or box shall be built at the expense of the owner as directed by the director. 
(Prior Code, § 2.48; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1(2.48), 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-191. - Access. 
    The department shall have the right to shut off the supply of water to any premises where the department is not able to obtain access to the meter. Any qualified employee of the department shall at all reasonable hours, have the right to enter the premises where such meters are installed for the purpose of reading, testing, removing, or inspecting the same, and no person shall hinder, obstruct, or interfere with such employee in the lawful discharge of his duties in relation to the care and maintenance of such water meter. 
(Prior Code, § 2.49; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1(2.49), 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-192. - Reimbursement for damage. 
    Any damage which a meter may sustain resulting from carelessness of the owner, agent, or tenant or from neglect of either of them to properly secure and protect the meter, as well as any damage which may be wrought by frost, hot water, or steam backing from a boiler, and including any costs incurred by the department where a meter has been made inaccessible through construction and/or remodeling, shall be paid by the owner of the property to the city on presentation of a bill which shall be based on time and materials, and shall be collected as specified herein for the collection of service charges. 
(Prior Code, § 2.50; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1(2.50), 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-193. - Water leakage. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the owner to repair any leaks between the meter and the curb valve within 72 hours of notice by the city, or an additional fee shall be charged for water loss. 
(Prior Code, § 2.51; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1(2.51), 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-194. - Inaccurate meters. 
    A user may require that the meter be tested. If the meter is found accurate, a charge equal to all costs of labor and transportation incurred during testing shall be made. If the meter is found defective, it shall be repaired or an accurate meter installed and no charge shall be made. 
(Prior Code, § 2.52; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1(2.52), 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-195. - Hydrant use. 
    No person shall open or use any fire hydrant connected with the city water supply system unless duly authorized by the city. 
(Prior Code, § 2.53; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1(2.53), 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-196. - Additional regulations. 
    The city manager may make and issue additional rules and regulations concerning the water supply system, connections thereto, meter installations and maintenance, connection and meter installation fees, hydrants and water mains and the appurtenances thereto, not inconsistent herewith. Such rules and regulations shall be effective upon approval by the city council. The rules and regulations now in effect shall continue until changed in accordance with this section. 
(Prior Code, § 2.54; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1(2.54), 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-197. - Damage to facilities. 
    No person, except an employee of the city in the performance of his duties, shall willfully or carelessly break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the city water supply system. 
(Prior Code, § 2.55; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1(2.55), 5-15-2000) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief generally, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 42-198. - Water conservation. 
(a)  Emergency conditions. The city manager shall have the right to alter the watering schedule included herein or to entirely prohibit all watering and nonessential uses of water whenever an emergency exists and such action is deemed necessary to protect the necessary supply of water as required for the health and safety of the citizens of the city. 
(b)  Determination of use. Whenever city water shall be unlawfully used for outdoor watering, as defined herein, such use shall be prima facie proof that it was so used, or that such use was consented to, approved by or directed by the person or persons to whom such water was billed at the time of such use as appears from the records of the city utilities department. 
(c)  Special conditions. Special consideration shall be given to owners and/or occupants of parcels exceeding 8,000 square feet that require irrigation beyond that allowed by this section, by the city water department. Application for an extra use permit must be accompanied with a site plan showing the dimensions of the area, describing the system used for watering the area, stating the reason for requiring extra water use and requesting specific amounts in extra days and/or hours of watering. A $15.00 fee shall be charged for each permit granted. Special consideration shall also be given to owners and/or occupants of parcels where new lawns, sodding or shrubs are being established. Application for an extra use permit must be accompanied with a site plan showing the dimensions of the area, the dates of the new plantings and the number of days extra use will be required. A maximum of 60 days of daily watering within the hours permitted by this section will be allowed. A $15.00 fee shall be charged for each permit granted. 
(Prior Code, § 2.56; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1(2.56), 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-199. - Cross connections. 
(a)  The City of Cadillac adopts by reference the Water Supply Cross Connection Rules of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality being R325.11401 to R325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative Code. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the city to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public drinking water supply where cross connections with the public drinking water supply are deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and re-inspections based on the potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the City of Cadillac Cross Connection Control Plan and as approved by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
(c)  The representative of the city shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public drinking water supply of the city for the purpose of inspecting the piping system(s) thereof for cross connections. On request, the owner, lessees, or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system(s) on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of a cross connection. 
(d)  The city is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any cross connection is found to exist in violation of this section, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public drinking water supply. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connection(s) has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(e)  All testable backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested at the time of installation, relocation, repairs, or put back into service in warm months. Subsequent testing of assemblies shall be conducted at a time interval specified by the city and in accordance with Michigan Department of Quality and Plumbing Code requirements. Only individuals that hold a valid Michigan Certification and have successfully passed an American Society of Sanitary Engineer (ASSE) approved backflow testing class shall perform such testing. Each tester shall also be approved by the City of Cadillac. Individual(s) performing assembly testing shall certify the results of his/her testing. 
(f)  The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public drinking water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by this section and by the state plumbing code. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: 
"WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING" 
(g)  This section does not supersede the state plumbing code but is supplementary to it. 
(h)  Any person or water customer found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section or any written order by the City of Cadillac, in pursuance thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each violation that has not been corrected within the time frame as outlined by the city in written form. Each day upon which a violation of the provisions of this section shall occur shall be deemed a separate and additional violation for the purpose of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 2.57; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1(2.57), 5-15-2000; Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1, 3-17-2014) 
Sec. 42-200. - Benefit charge. 
    Whenever any person shall seek any connection to any water main constructed after September 8, 1968, except replacements and repairs to existing mains, he shall pay a benefit charge representing the cost of constructing such main attributable to, and which has been allocated to, the premises for which the connection is sought, except in those cases where the cost of construction has been financed by special assessment to said premises and paid or payable by the owner thereof. Immediately after the construction of any such water main and acceptance thereof by the city, the city council shall, by resolution, determine the cost to be borne by all premises which will benefit by any connection, thereto. The city council shall determine the cost of construction and what part, thereof, if any, shall be borne by the city and the remaining cost shall be divided between the premises benefiting, or to be benefited, therefrom. The city council shall direct the assessor and treasurer to suitably record the amount of any benefit charge allocated to any premises within the city so that any person examining such re 
cord can determine the amount of the benefit charge payable upon application for any connection to any public water main. 
(Prior Code, § 2.58; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1(2.58), 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-201. - Service rates. 
    The rates for water service furnished by the city water supply system shall be as follows: 
(1)  Monthly service charges. 
Meter Size 
(in inches) Charge 
(per month) 5/8$  6.58 3/4 9.68 1 16.13 11/2 32.33 2 51.56 3 112.92 4 193.59 6 403.36 8 580.82  
(2)  Commodity charge. 
Volume 
(100 cubic-foot unit) Per Month 
(per unit) 0 to 600 cu. ft. $ 1.38 601 to 10,000 cu. ft. 1.17 10,001 to 100,000 cu. ft. 1.04 100,001 to 250,000 cu. ft. 0.91 250,001 and above 0.79  
(Prior Code, § 2.59; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1(2.59), 5-15-2000; Ord. No. 2001-03, 5-21-2001; Ord. No. 2002-09, 5-6-2002; Ord. No. 2003-11, 5-19-2003; Ord. No. 2004-09, 4-19-2004; Ord. No. 2005-08, 5-2-2005; Ord. No. 2006-06, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 2007-03, § 5-7-2007; Ord. No. 2008-03, § 1, 4-21-2008; Ord. No. 2009-05, § 1, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 4-19-2010; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 4-18-2011; Ord. No. 2015-07, § 1, 4-20-2015; Ord. No. 2016-07, § 1, 5-2-2016; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 4-2-2018) 
Sec. 42-202. - Private fire protection; sprinkling systems. 
    All private fire protection service lines shall be dedicated, separate lines except as herein described: 
(1)  Nondedicated fire protection lines. 
a.  Domestic/industrial service lines may be used for limited fire suppression systems when no more than 20 sprinkler heads will be connected. 
b.  When a domestic/industrial service line is used, the supply line for sprinkler service shall be taken off the city side of the water meter. This line shall be provided with an approved gate valve for isolation purposes. The operation of this valve shall be the responsibility of the property owner. A separate billing will be provided in accordance with the rates found in this section. 
c.  Prior to connection of any limited area fire suppression system to any domestic/industrial service line, a permit shall be obtained from the utilities department. 
d.  Permit approval shall be based on a usage/supply profile and system plan approval by the appropriate city officials, including but not limited to, the utilities department, public safety director, fire marshal, fire chief or their designees. 
e.  The fire protection line shall have installed a spring loaded double check valve of a type approved by the utilities department. 
f.  The utilities department will provide and install during final inspection a tag to be placed on the fire line gate valve with the wording: "Fire Line-No Domestic Usage." 
g.  No chemical additives or booster pumping shall be permitted in a nondedicated fire suppression system unless protected by an approved reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. 
(2)  Dedicated fire protection lines. All private fire protection lines requiring a volume necessary to supply 21 or more sprinkler heads or exceeding a total volume of 200 gallons per minute shall be a dedicated, separate line from the city water main. These lines shall be as a minimum provided with the following: 
a.  A utilities department approved detector check valve which is located so as to be accessible to city employees. The city reserves the authority to require vault installation of this valve if it deems necessary. 
b.  Each detector check valve shall be supplied with properly installed valves and piping to accept a meter of the size approved by the utilities department. 
c.  When it is determined by the utilities department that additional protection is needed, the owner shall be directed to install either an approved spring loaded double check valve or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow preventer in the fire protection line. Approved units shall be those approved by the state department of public health. 
d.  In the event the nondedicated and/or dedicated fire suppression systems are turned off due to delinquency of payment, the city shall not be liable for damages. For the case of nondedicated fire systems, the fire system would be inactivated when the domestic service is shut off at the curb valve. 
e.  All dedicated fire protection system installations must be chlorinated prior to the service being turned on. The city will also require fire line testing using a pigging method or flow test, at the utilities department's discretion. 
(3)  The rates for providing fire protection sprinklers shall be as follows: 
Line Size 
(in inches) Charges 
(per month) 3/4 $ 2.35 1 4.03 11/2 8.00 2 12.91 3 28.04 4 48.22 6 100.63 8 145.00 10 233.54 12 346.16  
(Prior Code, § 2.60; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1(2.60), 5-15-2000; Ord. No. 2001-03, 5-21-2001; Ord. No. 2002-09, 5-6-2002; Ord. No. 2003-11, 5-19-2003; Ord. No. 2004-09, 4-19-2004; Ord. No. 2005-08, 5-2-2005; Ord. No. 2006-06, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 2007-03, § 2, 5-7-2007; Ord. No. 2008-03, § 2, 4-21-2008; Ord. No. 2009-05, § 2, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 2010-05, § 2, 4-19-2010; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 14, 8-2-2010; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 2, 4-18-2011; Ord. No. 2015-07, § 2, 4-20-2015; Ord. No. 2016-07, § 2, 5-2-2016; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 2, 4-2-2018) 
Sec. 42-203. - Service charges. 
(a)  Residential service line installation (three-fourths-inch). 
During main installation $400.00 Unpaved street $850.00 Paved street $1,975.00  
(b)  Meter installation fees, residential. 
Meter Horn Greater of $50.00 or actual cost Meter (typically five-eighths-inch) Greater of $210.00 or actual cost MXU Greater of $170.00 or actual cost Vault Greater of $80.00 or actual cost  
(c)  Service call fees. 
Service Working Hours Fee Turn-on Scheduled $15.00 Turn-on Nonscheduled $60.00 Turn-off Scheduled $30.00 Turn-off Nonscheduled $60.00 Turn-off Delinquent $75.00  
(d)  Fire hydrant flow test fee. 
Flow test and documentation ..... $400.00 
Previous flow test data only ..... $100.00 
(Prior Code, § 2.61; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1(2.61), 5-15-2000; Ord. No. 2001-03, 5-21-2001; Ord. No. 2002-09, 5-6-2002; Ord. No. 2003-11, 5-19-2003; Ord. No. 2008-03, § 3, 4-21-2008; Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1, 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 42-204. - Public fire protection rates. 
    For the use of water through fire hydrants and for the availability of such water, the city shall pay in equal quarterly installments the sum of $50.00 per hydrant per year, said payments to be made from funds legally available for such purpose or from the proceeds of taxes which the city shall levy within applicable charter tax rate limitations, which rate the city council has previously found, and currently reaffirms to be fair and equitable, and represents the actual cost of the use of water which is made available for fire hydrants in the city. 
(Prior Code, § 2.62; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1(2.62), 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-205. - Service to nonresidents. 
(a)  Contracts for water service. The city has previously entered into contracts with municipalities adjacent to the city, whereby the city has received consideration in exchange for providing certain of the capital costs, and other indirect costs, of providing water distribution service to users located in those municipalities. Rates and charges billed for use by the residents of those municipalities shall be in accordance with the applicable contract. 
(b)  Charges for service to users outside city where no other contract compensates the city for indirect costs. Users who reside outside the city where no contract exists with the governmental unit where such user is located shall pay charges, rates and fees equal to two times the charges, rates and fees imposed on users located within the city. 
(Prior Code, § 2.63; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1(2.63), 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-206. - Billing. 
(a)  Monthly billing. Regular user charge bills shall be rendered on a monthly basis and shall be due and payable on the date indicated. Bills for installation, service, repair and materials shall be rendered at the end of the month and shall be due and payable within 30 days after the date of the bill. 
(b)  Penalties. If bills for regular user charges are not paid by the due date indicated on the monthly bill, a penalty of five percent of the outstanding balance will be added to the amount due. Pursuant to section 42-373 of the City Code, this penalty shall also apply to bills for wastewater services. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a regular user has paid its charges on a timely basis each month for a continuous 12-month period, then the utilities department may waive one late fee per continuous 12-month period. 
(Prior Code, § 2.64; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1(2.64), 5-15-2000; Ord. No. 2015-09, § 2, 6-1-2015; Ord. No. 2017-02, § 1, 2-6-2017) 
Sec. 42-207. - Collection. 
    The utilities department is hereby authorized to enforce the payment of charges for water service to any premises by discontinuing the water service to such premises and the payment of charges for sewage disposal service to any premises may be enforced by discontinuing either the water service or the sewage disposal service to such premises, or both, and an action may be instituted by the city against the user. The charges for water service, which, under the provisions of Public Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq.), are made a lien on the premises to which furnished, and the director shall, annually, on June 1, certify all unpaid charges for such services furnished to any premises which, on March 31 preceding, have remained unpaid for a period of six months, to the city assessor who shall place the same on the next tax roll of the city. Such charges so assessed shall be collected in the same manner as general city taxes. In cases where the city is properly notified in accordance with said Act 94 of 1933, as amended, that a tenant is responsible for water service charges, no such service shall be commenced or continued to such premises until there has been deposited with the department, a sum equal to the last three month's billing for water based on the average residential usage for the previous calendar year, such deposit to be in no case less than $40.00, plus the deposit required in article II of chapter 32, pertaining to solid waste, and article IV of this chapter, pertaining to sewer service. The city will allow up to seven calendar days for payment of such deposit where the tenant has been residing for at least 30 days prior to notification of responsibility. When the water service to any premises is turned off to enforce the payment of water service charges or sewage disposal charges, the water service shall not be restored until all delinquent charges have been paid and a deposit, as in the case of tenants, is made, and there shall be a water turn-on charge as herein specified. In any other case where, in the discretion of the director, the collection of charges for water or sewage disposal service is difficult or uncertain, the director may require a deposit. Such deposit as described in this section may be applied against any delinquent water or sewage disposal service charges and the application thereof shall not affect the right of the department to turn off the water service and/or sewer service, to any premises for any delinquency thereby satisfied. No such deposit shall bear interest and such deposit, or any remaining balance thereof, shall be returned to the user making the same when he shall discontinue receiving water and sewage disposal service. Said refunds will be made only upon completion of appropriate refund requests forms and the refund amount will be determined and a check drawn within 14 days of the date of the refund request. 
(Prior Code, § 2.65; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1(2.65), 5-15-2000; Ord. No. 2003-11, 5-19-2003) 
Secs. 42-208-42-237. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWER SERVICE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-238. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  Necessity. The city council has previously found, and currently reaffirms that the use of septic tanks, privies, privy vaults, cesspools, or similar private sewage disposal facilities, is deleterious to the health, safety and welfare of the businesses, industries, governmental and charitable agencies, and residents of the city and that the health, safety and welfare of the businesses, industries, governmental and charitable agencies and residents is enhanced by the creation of a public sewer system and treatment plant, with regulation by the city of pollutants and other harmful materials according to state and federal standards. 
(b)  Method of measuring use. Based on advice of its engineers, the city council has previously found, and currently reaffirms, that the most practical, cost effective and accurate method, given available technology, of measuring the use of the system's sewers and treatment plant by any user is by the meter or meters used to measure water usage. 
(c)  Continuation of service. The city has previously found and, further currently reaffirms that, in order to provide and continue to provide for the safe and uninterrupted removal and treatment of sewage, pollutants and other harmful materials, it is necessary from time to time to install improvements, enlargements, extensions and repairs to the sewage disposal system. 
(d)  Purpose of charges. Charges for the use of the system are hereby established for the purpose of recovering the cost of construction, reconstruction, maintenance, repair, and operation of the sewage disposal system. Such charges shall be made in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth and shall be made against all users of the sewage disposal system. 
(1)  All premises connected directly or indirectly to the sewage disposal system, except as hereinafter provided, shall be charged and shall make payments to the city in amounts computed on the basis of this article. 
(2)  The charges, rates and fees for service by the sewage disposal system are established herein to adequately provide for bond requirements and to ensure that the system shall not operate at a deficit. 
(3)  The city staff or designated parties shall periodically review the charges, rates, fees, rules and regulations of the sewage disposal system. Said review shall be completed not less than one time per fiscal year. Results of said review shall be reported to the city council with respective recommendations for any adjustments. 
(4)  The charges, rates and fees shall be set so as to recover costs from users in reasonable proportion to the cost of serving those users. 
(e)  Proportionality, fairness, and benefits of charges, rates and fees. 
(1)  The city has previously found and further currently reaffirms that the fairest and most reasonable method of providing for the operation, maintenance, repair, replacement and improvement of the sewage disposal system, is to charge each user, based in all cases on amount of use, for the: 
a.  Cost of retiring debt secured by the net revenues of the system issued to pay for improvements and replacements to the system; 
b.  Costs of ongoing repair, replacement and improvement and budgeted as part of the annual costs of the system; and 
c.  Operation, administration and maintenance costs of the system. 
(2)  The city has investigated several methods of apportioning the cost of the system. Based on its investigation and on the advice of its engineers, the city council has previously found, and currently reaffirms, that to ensure the stability and viability of the system for the benefit of its users, the fairest and most accurate way to apportion the costs of operation, maintenance, replacement and improvement of the system is to charge each user: 
a.  A monthly service charge for sewer service (which varies depending on the size of the water intake pipe and meter) which fee reflects each user's proportionate share of the costs of the system; 
b.  A commodity charge for sewer service which is based on the user's actual use of water supplied by the system or, in the case of users whose water service is unmetered, a flat monthly fee based upon the number of rooms of such user. 
(3)  The city council has previously found, and currently reaffirms that the charges, rates and fees set forth herein fairly and accurately apportion the fixed and variable costs of the system among the users of the system and that the monthly service charge for sewer service charged to each user of the system provides actual benefits to such users in the form of ready access to sewer services that would be unavailable if the monthly service charge was not charged. 
(f)  Useful life of improvements. Based on the advice of its engineers, the city council has previously found and currently reaffirms that any improvements to or capital expenditures by the system did not, at the time of such construction and financing, have an expected useful or design life that would exceed the term of the bonded indebtedness issued to finance such improvement or capital acquisition and paid for by rates and charges. 
(g)  Charges, rates and fees for nonresidents. The city has previously found, and hereby ratifies and confirms, that the total direct and indirect costs of providing service to users outside the city jurisdiction, where no other contract exists with the governmental units where those users are located, equals at least two times the rates and charges imposed for direct services and debt service cost to users located in the city. Indirect costs include payment for capital improvements, extraordinary repairs and replacements for the system benefiting all users of the system and paid for by users served within the corporate limits of the city or the corporate limits of other municipalities which have entered into contracts with the city for such costs, funding depreciation of the improvements comprising the system, and fire and police or other protection for the system paid by city taxpayers or by the governmental units with which the city has contracts for sewage disposal service. 
(Prior Code, § 2.81; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-239. - Establishment of the system. 
    Based on the findings and purposes set forth in section 42-238, the city has previously established and hereby reestablishes the city sewage disposal system (the system) consisting of all of the sewers, drains, the POTW treatment plant, and all other appurtenances to the system. 
(Prior Code, § 2.82; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-240. - Extensions or improvements. 
    Extensions of and improvements to the system shall be constructed when the same become necessary or proper, in the judgment of the council. The cost of all improvements to, and extensions of, the system shall be at the expense of the person or properties benefiting by the improvements or extension, reasonably proportioned to the benefits received, or at the expense of the general fund of the city. Notwithstanding the foregoing, improvements to the system that cannot be attributed to particular users of the system may be allocated proportionally among all users of the system. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the cost of improvements to the system whose benefit cannot be attributed to particular users or groups of users of the system may be allocated proportionally among all users of the system. 
(Prior Code, § 2.83; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-241. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accidental discharge means the loss of any toxic, hazardous or other potential pollutant into the sanitary sewer system by a discharger as a result of an accident or failure of a facility within the plant or pretreatment facility. 
    Act or the act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
    Approval authority means the director in a NPDES state with an approved state pretreatment program and the administrator of the EPA in a nonNPDES state or NPDES state without an approved state pretreatment program. 
    Authorized representative of industrial user means: 
(1)  A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president, if the industrial user is a corporation; 
(2)  A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; 
(3)  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in subsections (1) and (2) of this definition, if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in terms of weight and concentration, milligrams per liter or mg/l. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside of walls of the building and conveys to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
    Categorical pretreatment standards means national pretreatment standards specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be discharged into a POTW by a specific category of industrial users described in such standards. The term "categorical pretreatment standards" includes the following categorical standards and those which are hereafter promulgated by U.S. EPA, along with amendments to the existing or hereafter promulgated standards of EPA effluent guidelines and standards for: 
(1)  Aluminum forming. 
(2)  Battery manufacturing. 
(3)  Coil coating (phase 1) and (canmaking). 
(4)  Copper forming. 
(5)  Electrical and electronic components (phases 1 and 2). 
(6)  Electroplating. 
(7)  Inorganic chemicals (phases 1 and 2). 
(8)  Iron and steel. 
(9)  Leather tanning and finishing. 
(10)  Metal finishing. 
(11)  Metal molding and castings (foundries). 
(12)  Nonferrous metals forming and metal powders. 
(13)  Nonferrous metals manufacturing (phases 1 and 2). 
(14)  Organic chemicals, plastics and synthetic fibers. 
(15)  Pesticide chemicals. 
(16)  Petroleum refining. 
(17)  Pharmaceuticals manufacturing. 
(18)  Porcelain enameling. 
(19)  Pulp, paper, paperboard. 
(20)  Steam electric power generation. 
(21)  Timber products processing. 
    COD means chemical oxygen demand or the measure of the oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in water or wastewater, expressed as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specified test; it does not differentiate between stable and unstable organic matter, and thus does not necessarily correlate with BOD. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Control authority means and shall refer to the approval authority or the director if the city has an approved pretreatment program under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.11. 
    Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
    Daily average means the sum of the concentrations of a constituent for the measurement period divided by the number of days on which the discharge was sampled and analyzed in such period. The concentrations which are added are single numbers for single days for all days for which analyses are obtained (whether by the user or the city), but such concentrations may be based upon a sample or samples taken over either all or part of that day and upon single or multiple analyses for that day as determined by the city. Sampling for daily average shall be a 24-hour flow proportioned composite sample, except that a minimum of four grab samples shall be taken in lieu of a 24-hour flow proportioned composite sample for a single day for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organic compounds. If it is not feasible to obtain a flow proportioned composite sample, a time proportioned composite sample or a minimum of four grab samples may be used in lieu of the flow proportioned composite sample if the user demonstrates to the city director that representative samples will be obtained. 
    Daily maximum means the concentration which shall not be exceeded on any single calendar day. Sampling for daily maximum shall be a 24-hour flow proportioned composite sample except that a minimum of four grab samples shall be taken in lieu of a 24-hour flow proportioned composite sample for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organic compounds. If it is not feasible to obtain a flow proportioned composite sample, a time proportioned composite sample or a minimum of four grab samples may be used in lieu of the flow proportioned composite sample if the user demonstrates to the city director that a representative sample will be obtained. 
    Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
    Director means the person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the publicly owned treatment works and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or his duly authorized representative. 
    Domestic waste means that waste originating mainly from residential sources. 
    Environmental protection agency (EPA) means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
    Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a wastestream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the wastestream and without consideration of time. 
    Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
    Indirect discharge means the discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under section 307(b) or (c) of the act (33 USC 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the system). 
    Industrial user means a source of indirect discharge, which does not constitute a discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant to section 402 of the act (33 USC 1342.) 
    Industrial waste means the liquid waste from industrial processes as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Interference means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both: 
(1)  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and 
(2)  A cause of a violation of any requirement of the NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): 
a.  Section 405 of the Clean Water Act; 
b.  The Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA; 
c.  The Clean Air Act; 
d.  The Toxic Substances Control Act; and 
e.  The Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
    MDEQ means the state department of environmental quality or its successor. 
    Medical waste means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood byproducts, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, fomites, etiologic agents, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes. 
    Mg/l means milligrams per liter, or parts per million (ppm). 
    National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit means a permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342). 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    New source means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may be a discharge, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge at an existing source; or 
c.  The production of wastewater generating processes of the building; structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source, if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsections (1)b or c of this definitions, but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source, as defined herein, has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
3.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. 
b.  Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection. 
    Operation and maintenance means the satisfactory provision for ensuring proper and efficient functioning of the treatment works in accordance with the NPDES permit and U.S. EPA grant conditions. 
    Operational upset means an exceptional incident in which the discharger unintentionally and temporarily is in a state of noncompliance with the terms of the discharge permit or with various federal or state parameters and as a result of factors not under reasonable control of the discharger. 
    Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
    Person means any individual, firm, municipality, company, association, society, corporation, partnership, or group, including their officers and employees who have responsibility for or actual involvement in the matters regulated by the chapter. 
    pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
    Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
    Pollution means the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water. 
    POTW treatment plant means the portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
    Pretreatment or treatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes, or by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
    Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such degree that all parties will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by a public authority. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act, (33 USC 1292) which is owned in this instance by the city. The term "publicly owned treatment works" includes any sewer that conveys wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. The term "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's POTW. 
    Replacement means expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance, for which such works were designed and constructed. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
    Significant industrial user means: 
(1)  Any industrial user subject to categorical standards. 
(2)  Any industrial user of the city's wastewater disposal system who: 
a.  Discharges 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater; 
b.  That contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW; or 
c.  Has a reasonable potential, in the opinion of the control authority, to adversely affect the POTW. 
    Significant noncompliance (SNC) means: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined herein, as those in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter. 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined herein, as those in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH). 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum, or longer-term average) that the control authority determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public). 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority under this article. 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance. 
(6)  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90 day compliance reports, periodic self monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules. 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance. 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations which the control authority determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
    Slug discharge means a discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge. 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer which carries stormwater and surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
    Suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    User means any person, who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the city's POTW. 
    User charge means a charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of operation and maintenance of such works. 
    Wastewater means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions together with any groundwater or surface water that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW. 
    Wastewater contribution permit. As set forth in division 10 of this article. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
    Waters of the state means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 2.84; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-242. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations shall have the following designated meanings: 
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand CFR Code of Federal Regulations COD Chemical oxygen demand EPA Environmental Protection Agency l Liter mg Milligrams mg/l milligrams per liter NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System POTW Publicly owned treatment works SIC Standard industrial classification SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC 6901 et seq. USC United States Code TSS Total suspended solids  
(Prior Code, § 2.85; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Secs. 42-243-42-255. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED 

Sec. 42-256. - Waste deposits. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(Prior Code, § 2.86; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-257. - Water pollution. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharged into any storm sewer, natural watercourse, or artificial watercourse, any sewage or other polluted waters other than stormwater or uncontaminated industrial waters as heretofore defined; or to increase an approved use, except upon special agreement or arrangement with the city manager and in accordance with rules and procedures of appropriate agencies of the state. 
(Prior Code, § 2.87; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-258. - Privies and septic tanks. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Prior Code, § 2.88; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-259. - Sewer connection required. 
    The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purpose, (where liquid wastes are produced), situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or other public right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby required, at their expense, to install suitable toilet facilities and connect such facilities directly to the proper public sanitary sewer. Said connection shall be preceded by proper application for and receipt of a sanitary sewer connection permit. The city council may require any such owner, pursuant to the authority conferred upon it by law or ordinance, to make such installations and connections. Said connections shall be completed and inspected prior to occupancy. 
(Prior Code, § 2.89; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Secs. 42-260-42-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL 

Sec. 42-271. - Public system unavailable. 
    When a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provision of section 42-259 the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system constructed in compliance with state law and the regulations of the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 2.90; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-272. - Location requirements. 
    Where private sewage disposal systems are constructed, they must be located at least 50 feet from any surface water, natural or artificial drain, or open joint, subsurface groundwater, or tile drain unless otherwise approved by the city. All installations shall comply with the existing state laws and regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 2.91; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-273. - Discontinuance when public system available. 
(a)  At such time as a public sanitary sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, and unless established by council to the contrary, all buildings as described in section 42-259 shall make proper installation and connection to said public sewer when one of the following occurs: 
(1)  Failure of an existing private sewage disposal system. Said failure shall be confirmed by either the appropriate city official or the local health department sanitarian. 
(2)  Action by the city council to establish a date certain for connections to be made. Said action may be applied to individual buildings or to defined areas or districts. 
(b)  All connections shall be preceded by a proper application and receipt of a sanitary sewer connection permit. 
(c)  All component parts of any private sewage disposal system shall be abandoned in accordance with city regulations and shall be inspected and approved by designated city officials. 
(Prior Code, § 2.92; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-274. - Maintenance. 
    The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(Prior Code, § 2.93; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-275. - Additional requirements. 
    No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the city council or health department with respect to private sewage disposal. 
(Prior Code, § 2.94; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Secs. 42-276-42-298. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 42-299. - Authorized persons. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the manager or from such official as he may designate. 
(Prior Code, § 2.95; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-300. - Permit required. 
    All connections with any sewer or the city shall be made only on written authorization and permits issued by the city and on such forms and on payment of such fees as shall be established from time to time by ordinance. 
(Prior Code, § 2.96; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-301. - Costs borne by owner of property. 
    All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner of said property. The owner shall indemnify the city from all loss or damage that may directly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Prior Code, § 2.97; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-302. - Application; plans required. 
    All applicants for sewer connection permits shall, when required, submit plans and specifications of all plumbing construction within such building or premises and such plans and specifications shall meet the requirements of the state construction code, and all orders, rules and regulations of the department of health. The approval of a connection permit shall also be contingent upon the availability of the capacity in all downstream sewers, lift stations, force mains, and the sewage treatment plant and including such limitations as may be applied under division 9 of this article. When such plans and specifications have been approved by the city council or by such officials as they may designate, a sewer or plumbing permit shall be issued, subject to final inspection and approval when construction is completed. Final approval will be subject to compliance with the state construction code, and all orders, rules and regulations of the local department of health and MDEQ. 
(Prior Code, § 2.98; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-303. - Inspection. 
    The applicant for a building sewer permit shall notify the city engineer when the building sewer is ready for inspection. The city engineer or his designated representative shall then inspect said building and plumbing construction therein and if such construction meets the previous requirements as so approved in the construction permit, a sewer connection approval shall be issued, subject to the applicable provisions of this article. Upon final approval of any sewer connection, all sewer supports, testing of the sewer, back filling of sewer, including material and other elements contingent on completion of installation, shall comply with the state construction code. 
(Prior Code, § 2.99; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-304. - Maintenance responsibility of owner. 
    The costs of all repairs, maintenance and replacements of existing building sewers and their connection to public sewers shall be borne by the property owner. Such owner shall make application for a permit to perform such work to the city through the designated representative. 
(Prior Code, § 2.100; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-305. - Connections to public sewer by approved representative. 
    All connections to existing or new sewers will be made by employees of the city or their approved representatives. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "y" branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. 
(Prior Code, § 2.101; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-306. - Notice to inspect. 
    The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. 
(Prior Code, § 2.102; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-307. - Excavation precautions. 
    All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Prior Code, § 2.103; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-308. - Separate connections required. 
    Each building connected to any public sewer shall be connected by means of a separate building sewer. The use of multiple building sewers is prohibited. 
(Prior Code, § 2.104; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Secs. 42-309-42-334. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS 

Sec. 42-335. - Unpolluted water. 
    No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(Prior Code, § 2.105; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-336. - Stormwater and unpolluted drainage. 
    Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the city, and in compliance with rules and procedures of various agencies of the state. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon approval of the city, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. The city has the right to exclude industrial or commercial waste in whole or in part, for any reason from storm sewers. The city shall issue permits for all direct connections to designated storm sewers prior to allowing said connections. 
(Prior Code, § 2.106; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-337. - Prohibited uses. 
(a)  No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  A user may not contribute the following substances to any POTW: 
(1)  Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the POTW which exceeds 40 degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit) unless the POTW treatment plant is designed to accommodate such temperature. 
(2)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Celsius using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. 
(4)  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastic, wood, paunch manure, or any other solid or viscous substance of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works. 
(5)  Any wastes having any other corrosive properties capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works. 
(6)  Any waters, or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, fish or aquatic life, or create any hazard in the receiving waters or in the POTW. 
(7)  Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant. 
(8)  Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance. 
(9)  Any waters and/or wastes not complying to all NPDES permit requirements, pretreatment standards, and all other unspecified state and federal regulations. 
(10)  Any waters or wastewaters having chlorine demand in excess of 15 mg/l. 
(11)  Any waters or wastes having a pH less than 5.5 and greater than 9.5. 
(12)  Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation process. In no case, shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause to the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(13)  Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(14)  Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which a user knows or has reason to know will cause interference to the POTW. In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentration or qualities of pollutants that exceed, for any time period longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration, quantities, or flow during normal operation. 
(15)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(16)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(17)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health safety problems. 
(18)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except as provided by division 9 of this article. 
(c)  When the director determines that a user is contributing to the POTW, any of the above enumerated substances in such amounts as to interfere with the operation of the POTW, the director shall: 
(1)  Advise the user of the impact of the contribution on the POTW; 
(2)  Develop effluent limitations for such user to correct the interference with the POTW; 
(3)  Set a time limit for compliance with subsections (c)(1) and (2) of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 2.107; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-338. - Interceptors. 
    Grease, oil, sand interceptors, and conventional grease traps shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight. 
(Prior Code, § 2.108; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-339. - Maintenance by owner. 
    Where installed, all grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times and shall be accessible for inspection by city employees at all reasonable times. 
(Prior Code, § 2.109; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-340. - Agreements. 
    No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefore by the industrial concern. 
(Prior Code, § 2.110; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Secs. 42-341-42-368. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - USER RATES AND CHARGES FOR WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SERVICES 

Sec. 42-369. - Authorization as public utility. 
    The system shall, as far as possible, be operated and maintained on a public utility basis as authorized by Public Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq.). Each premises within the city connected to and using facilities of the system shall pay user rates and charges as fixed and established from time to time by the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 2.111; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-370. - User rates and charges determined by resolution. 
    The user rates and charges for wastewater treatment shall be as tabulated in section 42-374. Charges for wastewater treatment furnished to premises outside the corporate limits of the city shall be fixed by the city council by ordinance or resolution prior to the rendering of such services. 
(Prior Code, § 2.112; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-371. - Miscellaneous users for special consideration. 
    Where sewage disposal service is furnished to users not connected to the water supply system, or in cases where users make use of large quantities of water which may be discharged into storm sewers or an approved outlet other than the system, or for other miscellaneous users of water for which special consideration should be given, special rates may be fixed by the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 2.113; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-372. - Burden to system consideration for denial. 
    If the character of sewage from any manufacturing or industrial plant, or from any other building or premises is such that it imposes an unreasonable burden upon the system, in the discretion of the city council, such owner may be required to separately and satisfactorily treat such sewage before being emptied into any public sewer, or the right to discharge said sewage may be denied, if necessary, for the protection of the system, public health and safety. 
(Prior Code, § 2.114; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-373. - Monthly billing along with water service. 
    Bills shall be payable monthly and simultaneously with payments made for water consumed and/or used and shall be subject to such penalties and/or discounts as may apply to payment of bills for water service. 
(Prior Code, § 2.115; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-374. - Monthly wastewater user service charges. 
    No free service shall be furnished by the system to the city or to any person, firm or corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality. 
(1)  Metered users. 
a.  Base rate. The base rate for metered users is as follows: 
Meter Size 
(in inches) Service Charge 
(per month) 5/8$ 10.61 3/4 15.95 1 26.56 11/2 53.11 2 85.00 3 186.08 4 318.79 6 664.27 8 956.51  
b.  Commodity charges . A charge of $2.46 per 100 cubic feet of metered water used will be charged each month. 
(2)  Unmetered users (flat rate). Unmetered users will be charged according to the following rate schedule: 
a.  Room charge: Count living, dining, bedrooms and kitchens. DO NOT COUNT bathrooms, halls, storage closets. This charge includes lavatories, dishwashing, laundry, and all other domestic uses except bathtubs, showers and toilets. 
Rooms Per Month 1 to 3, inclusive $ 9.18 4 to 6, inclusive 10.29 7 to 8, inclusive 12.14 Each additional room 1.68  
b.  For each additional bathtub or shower, add $4.40 per month. 
c.  For each additional toilet, add $4.84 per month. 
(3)  Surcharges. Additional charges will be in accordance with the following schedule: 
Parameter Parameter Surcharge
(per month-per pound) Base Concentration
(in mg/L) Suspended Solids $0.35 215 Biochemical oxygen demand $0.51 185 Phosphorus $3.44 10 Nitrogen $8.04 20 Total organic carbon $2.89 600 Chemical oxygen demand $1.24 600 Total chlorides $0.65 600  
(4)  Unmetered users with private water systems. The monthly wastewater user service charges for those homes, businesses and other customers who do not have city water available, and are using a private water supply system shall be as follows: 
a.  All commercial, industrial, and institutional accounts shall have a water meter installed. The meter shall be installed under the direction of the city utilities department. The cost of installation shall be borne by the owner. The cost of replacement shall be borne by the utilities department. 
b.  All residential customers shall be given the option of having a water meter installed as provided for above, or the residential customer shall be billed a flat rate sewer charge equal to the average billing as determined on an annual basis. 
c.  The average monthly residential sewer bill, as of July 1, 2018, is a charge of $27.83. 
(5)  Watering adjustment basis . 
a.  For all residential users, charges for sewer for the months of May, June, July, August and September shall be computed for each account based on the average metered water consumption for the base period of the preceding October, November, December January and February. If no previous base history is available, a citywide residential average will be used. 
b.  For all other users, a separate meter may be purchased and installed at owner's expense, which will be utilized for watering only with the billing to reflect that amount. 
(Prior Code, § 2.116; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000; Ord. No. 2001-04, 5-21-2001; Ord. No. 2002-10, 5-6-2002; Ord. No. 2003-12, 5-19-2003; Ord. No. 2004-10, 4-19-2004; Ord. No. 2005-09, 5-2-2005; Ord. No. 2006-07, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 2007-04, § 1, 5-7-2007; Ord. No. 2008-04, § 1, 4-21-2008; Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 2010-06, § 1, 4-19-2010; Ord. No. 2011-02, § 1, 4-18-2011; Ord. No. 2015-06, § 1, 4-20-2015; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 1, 5-2-2016; Ord. No. 2018-04, § 1, 4-2-2018) 
Sec. 42-375. - Providing service to nonresidents. 
(a)  Contracts for wastewater treatment. The city has previously entered into contracts with townships adjacent to the city, whereby the city has received consideration in exchange for providing certain of the capital costs, and other indirect costs, of providing wastewater treatment service to users located in those townships. Rates and charges billed for use by the residents of those townships shall be in accordance with the applicable contract. 
(b)  Charges where no other contract compensates the city for indirect costs. Users who reside outside the city where no contract exists with the governmental unit where such user is located shall pay charges, rates and fees equal to two times the charges, rates and fees imposed on users located within the city. 
(Prior Code, § 2.117; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Secs. 42-376-42-393. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS 

Sec. 42-394. - Authority to enter property. 
    The duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 2.119; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-395. - Discharge records of nondomestic users-Right to copy. 
    Inspectors or other authorized employees shall have the right to have access to and make copies of any discharge related records of any nondomestic user. This right is in compliance with section 308 of the Clean Water Act. 
(Prior Code, § 2.220; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-396. - Same-Right to request specific information. 
    The city shall have the right to request and receive certain specific information from all nondomestic users. This information is not limited to those items listed in section 42-485, but may include specific additional information which may be used to classify users or identify potential hazardous waste sources. 
(Prior Code, § 2.221; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Secs. 42-397-42-420. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 42-421. - Collection of rates. 
    The utilities department is hereby authorized to enforce the payment of charges for sewer service to any premises by discontinuing the water service to such premises and the payment of charges for sewage disposal service to any premises may be enforced by discontinuing either the water service or the sewage disposal service to such premises, or both, and an action of assumpsit may be instituted by the city against the customer. The charges for water services and sewage disposal service, which, under the provisions of Public Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq.), are made a lien on the premises to which furnished, are hereby recognized to constitute such lien; the director shall annually, on June 1, certify all unpaid charges for such services furnished to any premises which, on March 31 preceding, have remained unpaid for a period of six months, to the city assessor who shall place the same on the next tax roll of the city. Such charges so assessed shall be collected in the same manner as general city taxes. In cases where the city is properly notified in accordance with said Act 94, as amended, that a tenant is responsible for water and sewage disposal service charges, no such service shall be commenced or continued to such premises until there has been deposited with the utilities department a sum equal to the last three months bill for sewer service based on the average residential usage for the previous calendar year, such deposit to be in no case less than $80.00, plus the deposit required in article II of chapter 32 and article III of this chapter. The city will allow up to seven calendar days for payment of such deposit where the tenant has been residing for at least 30 days prior to notification of responsibility. When the water service to any premises is turned off to enforce the payment of water service charges or sewage disposal charges, the service shall not be restored until all delinquent charges have been paid and a deposit as in the case of tenants is made, and there shall be a water turn-on charge as hereby specified. In any other case where in the discretion of the director, the collection of charges for water or sewage disposal service may be difficult or uncertain, the director may require a deposit. Such deposits may be applied against any delinquency, as described above, water or sewage disposal service charges and the application thereof shall not affect the right of the department to turn off the water service and/or sewer service to any premises for any delinquency thereby satisfied. No such deposit shall bear interest and such deposit, or any remaining balance thereof, shall be returned to the customer making the same when he shall discontinue receiving water and sewage disposal service. Said refunds will be made only upon completion of appropriate refund request forms; the refund amount will be determined and a check drawn within 14 calendar days of the date of refund request. 
(Prior Code, § 2.122; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000; Ord. No. 2003-12, 5-19-2003) 
Sec. 42-422. - Water shutoff. 
    In addition to other remedies provided, the city shall have the right to shut off and discontinue the supply of water to any premises for the nonpayment of sewer rates when due. If such charges are not paid within 30 days after the due date thereof, then water services to such premises shall be discontinued. Water services so discontinued shall not be restored until such time as all charges and penalties are paid. Water shutoff shall be preceded by adequate notification by the utilities department. 
(Prior Code, § 2.123; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Secs. 42-423-42-442. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - HAULED WASTE 

Sec. 42-443. - Purpose and policy. 
    This division sets forth the policy for accepting vehicle transported wastes into the city sewage disposal system. 
(Prior Code, § 2.124; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000; Ord. No. 2016-03, § 1, 3-21-2016) 
Sec. 42-444. - Background. 
(a)  The sewage disposal system has made it a practice for many years not to accept any hauled waste under any conditions. These wastes have been viewed as potential threats to the treatment plant through the inclusion of toxic, hazardous or other undesirable constituents. Additionally, to provide the degree of control necessary to properly screen and monitor these wastes would require extensive preliminary sampling and lab analysis, review of load manifests and trip tickets and a complete recordkeeping system. Lastly, once wastes are accepted into the system, they and any environmental problems they may cause become the responsibility of the sewage disposal system. 
(b)  Requests have come from septage haulers, public institutions, private industrial waste haulers and private industrial and commercial firms. Each request would require a significant amount of time to properly evaluate prior to acceptance or rejection. Requests by waste generators are made for one reason only, to reduce their costs of disposal and, thus, the costs of doing business. 
(Prior Code, § 2.125; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000; Ord. No. 2016-03, § 1, 3-21-2016) 
Sec. 42-445. - Management of hauled waste. 
    The following are waste acceptance criteria: 
(1)  The city will accept hauled waste from destinations that originate from within or outside the city. This policy will include accepting leachate from a type II landfill that accepts the solid waste from the city's contracted waste haulers. 
(2)  The city will accept hauled waste by permitted waste haulers only. Anyone from inside or outside the city wishing to discharge any material into the city sewage disposal system via truck will be required to obtain a permit application from the city utilities department located in the municipal complex. The permit will be issued for one specific class or type of waste only. The city shall maintain the right to reject any particular waste hauler if the proposed waste would damage or cause any other problem to the city sewage disposal system. 
(3)  The hauled waste permit will be issued for a maximum period of one year. There will be a permit fee of $200.00. 
(4)  Applicants will be notified within 30 days as to acceptance or rejection of the permit. 
(Prior Code, § 2.126.1; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000; Ord. No. 2015-09, § 3, 6-1-2015; Ord. No. 2016-03, § 1, 3-21-2016) 
Sec. 42-446. - Administration. 
    To ensure that the integrity of the wastewater treatment plant is maintained, and that a complete record of each hauled waste load is available, the following requirements must be met prior to the acceptance of each load: 
(1)  The only site approved for waste hauler discharge will be located at the city wastewater treatment plant. Any discharge to the city sewage disposal system other than the approved site will constitute a violation of section 42-299. The discharge site will be open only during normal working hours that the plant is staffed. Any after hours request will be assessed an additional fee. 
(2)  Any hauled waste discharger will be required, prior to discharge into the plant, to submit a copy of the load manifest to the wastewater treatment plant superintendent or his appointed representative. The load manifest shall contain the following information: 
a.  Origin of waste. 
b.  Waste hauler's name, address, etc. 
c.  Date/time of pickup and date/time of discharge off-loading at WWTP. 
d.  Volume of waste. 
e.  A certification statement that the waste is not a RCRA hazardous waste or a prohibited discharge. This certification statement must be signed before any discharge will be allowed. 
(3)  The manifest shall be completed in triplicate for the following: 
a.  One copy for the waste hauler; 
b.  One copy for the WWTP; and 
c.  One copy for the utilities billing clerk. 
(Prior Code, § 2.126.2; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000; Ord. No. 2016-03, § 1, 3-21-2016) 
Sec. 42-447. - Inspection, sampling and load analysis. 
(a)  The city shall have the right to collect samples of the waste for analysis at any time. The purpose of the analysis shall be for billing surcharges and compliance monitoring. All analysis costs shall be paid by the generator of the waste. 
(b)  The city shall maintain the right to deny discharge of any material that may cause any treatment plant interference. The city shall also have the right to request load analysis before accepting any material from an unknown source. 
(Prior Code, § 2.126.3; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000; Ord. No. 2016-03, § 1, 3-21-2016) 
Sec. 42-448. - Compliance with industrial pretreatment. 
    Waste hauler discharges fall within the scope of the general pretreatment regulations, 40 CFR 403.1(b). Therefore, the local limits and general prohibited discharge standards (40 CFR 403.5(b)) apply as well as any categorical limits if the waste comes from a categorical industry. 
(Prior Code, § 2.126.4; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000; Ord. No. 2016-03, § 1, 3-21-2016) 
Sec. 42-449. - Hazardous waste. 
    The discharge of any hazardous waste, as defined by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 USC 6901 et seq. (RCRA), is expressly prohibited. Any violation of this section will result in an immediate fine of $10,000.00 per occurrence and the discharger shall be held responsible for any fines, damage, litigation cost, etc., that could result from such acts. 
(Prior Code, § 2.126.5; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000; Ord. No. 2016-03, § 1, 3-21-2016) 
Sec. 42-450. - Fee schedule and classification. 
(a)  The fees charged for approved wastes transported to the city wastewater treatment plant shall be assessed based on classification, volume, strength and treatability characteristics. 
(b)  Wastes will be identified by the following classifications: 
(1)  Class I: septage from domestic origins; 
(2)  Class II: septage from non-domestic origins; 
(3)  Class III: leachate from type II landfills only; 
(4)  Class IV: industrial/commercial wastes, groundwater decontamination project wastewaters, underground tank removal waste products and other nondramatic wastes as defined by federal, state and local laws. 
(c)  The manifest shall be completed in triplicate for the following: 
(1)  One copy for the waste hauler; 
(2)  One copy for the WWTP; and 
(3)  One copy for the utilities billing clerk. 
(d)  Bills will be provided on a monthly basis and will be due within 30 days of the billing date. Billings in arrears shall be cause to void the permit. 
(e)  In cases where circumstances warrant, the city may require a deposit as prepayment. Such deposit shall be equal to the total estimated costs plus $25.00. Any balance shall be returned at the conclusion of the permit period or of the project. 
(Prior Code, § 2.127; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000; Ord. No. 2016-03, § 1, 3-21-2016) 
Secs. 42-451-42-468. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - INDUSTRIAL MONITORING AND PRETREATMENT 

Sec. 42-469. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  This division sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater and treatment system, for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the general pretreatment regulations 40 CFR 403, as found in part 400 to 424, dated July 1, 1991. 
(b)  The objectives of this division are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system; and 
(4)  To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the system. 
(c)  This division provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the system through the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user reporting, assumes that existing user's capacity will not be preempted, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(Prior Code, § 2.131; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-470. - Interjurisdictional agreement. 
    This section acknowledges the existence of an interjurisdictional agreement between the City of Cadillac, Wexford County DPW, and the Townships of Haring, Selma, Cherry Grove and Clam Lake for the operation of the industrial pretreatment program in these townships. This interjurisdictional agreement gives the city the authority to regulate and monitor industrial wastewater discharged into its treatment facility. 
(Prior Code, § 2.132; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-471. - Federal categorical pretreatment standards. 
    Upon the federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this division for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this division. The director shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. 
(Prior Code, § 2.133; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-472. - Modification of specific limits. 
    Where the system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the city may apply to the approval authority for modification of specific limits in the federal pretreatment standards. The term "consistent removal" means reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is achieved in 95 percent of the samples taken when measured according to the procedures set forth in 40 CFR 403.7(c)(2), the general pretreatment regulations for existing and new sources of pollution promulgated pursuant to the act. The city may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the federal pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR 403.7 are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval authority is obtained. 
(Prior Code, § 2.134; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-473. - City's right to establish more stringent limitations. 
    The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance, more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in section 42-469. 
(Prior Code, § 2.135; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-474. - Dilution not adequate treatment. 
    No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the federal categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or state. 
(Prior Code, § 2.136; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-475. - Protection from accidental discharges and operational upsets required. 
    Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances prohibited by this division. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be approved by the city before construction of the facility. All existing users shall complete such a plan within 180 days of enactment of the ordinance from which this division is derived. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this division. In the case of an accidental discharge or an operational upset, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include the location of the discharge, the type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. 
(Prior Code, § 2.137; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-476. - Written report following accidental discharge; liability for damage. 
    Within five days following an accidental discharge or operational upset, the user shall submit to the director a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other liability which may be imposed by this division or other applicable law. 
(Prior Code, § 2.137.1; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-477. - Notification procedure posted. 
    A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent location advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Prior Code, § 2.137.2; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-478. - Discharge limitations; purpose. 
    In addition to the wastewater discharge prohibitions listed in division 5 of this article, the city shall enforce the limitation specified by any pertinent categorical pretreatment standards and any city specific local limits. 
(Prior Code, § 2.138.1; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-479. - Categorical pretreatment standards. 
    All federal categorical industries, as identified in the definition of categorical pretreatment standards, section 42-241, shall be required to meet the pretreatment discharge limits for their classification as described in 40 CFR 403.6. 
(Prior Code, § 2.138.2; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-480. - Local limits. 
    The city retains the right to publish specific local limits as listed in section 42-481 for the purpose of protecting the POTW from harmful nondomestic discharges. These local limits are generated under the authority of 40 CFR 403.5. The local discharge limits shall be deemed pretreatment standards and supersede categorical standards if they are more restrictive. 
(Prior Code, § 2.138.3; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-481. - Numerical local limits. 
    Numerical local limits are derived using development rationale outlined by U.S. EPA contract document 68-01-7043 and the city utilities department's local discharge limits development rationale. The numerical values derived by the above methods are found in separate documents and are subject to regulatory modification. The city has the authority to convert mass limits to concentration limits as defined in 40 CFR 403.6c. 
(Prior Code, § 2.138.4; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-482. - Recovery of cost program. 
    It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the system for the implementation of the program established herein. The applicable charges for fees shall be set forth in the city's schedule of charges and fees. 
(Prior Code, § 2.139.1; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-483. - Charges and fees. 
(a)  The city may adopt charges and fees which may include fees for: 
(1)  Reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program; 
(2)  Monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures; 
(3)  Reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(4)  Permit applications; 
(5)  Filing appeals; 
(6)  Consistent removal, by the city, of pollutants otherwise subject to federal pretreatment standards; 
(7)  As the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. 
(b)  These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this division and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the city. 
(Prior Code, § 2.139.2; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-484. - Wastewater contribution permit-Users identified. 
    All significant industrial users proposing to connect or to contribute to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or contributing to the POTW. All existing significant industrial users connected to or contributing to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater contribution permit within 180 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived. Significant industrial user shall be taken to include all those identified under the definition of significant industrial user in section 42-241 and any other source whom the city feels has any potential to deliver any hazardous or toxic waste to the POTW. 
(Prior Code, § 2.140.1; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-485. - Same-Application. 
(a)  Users required to obtain a wastewater contribution permit shall complete and file with the city, an application in the form prescribed by the city. Proposed new users shall apply at least 60 days prior to connecting to or contributing to the POTW. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and location, (if different from the address); 
(2)  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Office of Management and Budget, 1972, as amended; 
(3)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not limited to, those mentioned in section 42-337(b) as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the act and contained in 40 CFR 136 as amended; 
(4)  Average daily and 30-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any; 
(5)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation; 
(6)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be discharged; 
(7)  Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any city, state, of federal pretreatment standard, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O & M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards; 
(8)  If additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in said schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
a.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.). 
b.  No increment referred to in subsection (a)(8)a of this section, shall exceed nine months. 
(9)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate or production; 
(10)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(11)  Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of the plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of the pretreatment system; 
(12)  Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
(b)  The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the city may issue a wastewater contribution permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein. 
(Prior Code, § 2.140.2; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-486. - Same-Modifications. 
    Within nine months of the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater contribution permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater contribution permit as required by section 42-485, the user shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard. In addition, the user with an existing wastewater contribution permit shall submit to the director within 180 days after the promulgation of an applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard, the information required by section 42-485(a)(8) and (9). 
(Prior Code, § 2.140.3; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-487. - Discharge conditions. 
    Wastewater discharge shall be expressly subject to provisions of this division and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. Permits may contain the following: 
(1)  Designation of types and sizes of containment facilities to control process spills to the designated sewers; 
(2)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Limits on the average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
(4)  Requirements for the installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
(5)  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule; 
(6)  Compliance schedules; 
(7)  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports (see sections 42-492 through 42-495); 
(8)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records, relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the city, and affording city access thereto; 
(9)  Requirements for notification of the city of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system; 
(10)  Requirements for notification of slug discharges as per section 42-503; 
(11)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this division. 
(Prior Code, § 2.140.4; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-488. - Permit duration. 
    Permits shall be issued for a specific time period, not to exceed two years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The terms and conditions of the permit nay be subject to modification by the city during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in section 42-487 are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in this permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(Prior Code, § 2.140.5; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-489. - Discharge permits nontransferable. 
    Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the city. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit. 
(Prior Code, § 2.140.6; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-490. - Monitoring. 
    The city shall retain the right to perform the required industrial monitoring and analysis as given in 40 CFR 403.12(g), or require the industry to meet the permit requirements. 
(Prior Code, § 2.140.7; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-491. - Penalty provision. 
    A permitted user shall comply with all of the provisions of its permit. A violation of any provision of a permit is a violation of this division, subject to the penalty, damage, surcharge, and other enforcement provisions of this division. 
(Prior Code, § 2.140.8; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-492. - Reporting requirements for permittee; compliance data report. 
    Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O & M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, and certified to by a qualified professional. 
(Prior Code, § 2.141.1; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-493. - Compliance reports. 
    Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the director, at frequencies indicated in the user permit, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flow which during the reporting period exceeded the average daily flow reported in section 42-485(a)(4). At the discretion of the director and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the director may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted. 
(Prior Code, § 2.141.2; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-494. - Maintenance of records. 
    Any nondomestic user subject to the sampling, analysis, or reporting requirements in this division, including reports under 40 CFR 403.12, as amended, shall maintain copies of the reports and records pertaining to those reports. Such reports and records shall be retained by such user, and by the city, for at least three years. This period shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the discharges of the user or the POTW pretreatment program or when requested by the city director, the state director, or U.S. EPA. 
(Prior Code, § 2.141.3; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-495. - Control authority program control. 
(a)  Where the city maintains the monitoring and sampling program, the industrial user shall not be required to submit the reports outlined in 40 CFR 403.12, at the city's discretion. 
(b)  All industrial users are required to report to the city substantial changes in discharge as listed in (40 CFR 403.12(j)). 
(Prior Code, § 2.141.4, 2.141.5; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-496. - Monitoring facilities. 
(a)  The city shall require to be provided and operated at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the city may, when such location would normally be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area, located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
(b)  There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
(c)  Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following written notification by the city. 
(Prior Code, § 2.142; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-497. - Inspection and sampling. 
    The city shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this division is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city or their representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination or in the performance of any of their duties. The EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, approval authority and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(Prior Code, § 2.143; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-498. - Pretreatment; plans required. 
    Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this division and shall achieve compliance with all federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this division. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
(Prior Code, § 2.144.1; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-499. - Bypass notice requirements. 
    If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the POTW if possible, at least ten days before the date of the bypass. A user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable categorical pretreatment standards and other applicable limits to the POTW within one hour from the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. 
(Prior Code, § 2.144.2; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-500. - Bypass prohibited; exceptions. 
    Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW may take enforcement action against a user for a bypass unless: 
(1)  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
(2)  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and 
(3)  The user submitted notices as required under section 42-499. 
(Prior Code, § 2.144.3; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-501. - Confidential information. 
(a)  Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. 
(b)  When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this division. The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(c)  Information accepted by the city as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the city until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the user. 
(Prior Code, § 2.145; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-502. - Suspension of permit procedure. 
(a)  The city may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater contribution permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the city, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, causes interference to the POTW or causes the city to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. 
(b)  Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater contribution permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take such steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The city shall reinstate the wastewater contribution permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any further occurrence shall be submitted to the city within 15 days of the date of occurrence. 
(Prior Code, § 2.146.1; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-503. - Revocation of permits. 
    Any user who violates the following conditions of this division, or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having his permits revoked in accordance with the procedures of section 42-502, this section, and sections 42-504-42-509: 
(1)  Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge; 
(2)  Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or 
(4)  Violation of conditions of the permit. 
(Prior Code, § 2.146.2; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-504. - Notification of violation. 
    Whenever the city finds that any user has violated or is violating this division, wastewater contribution permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained here, the city may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation and indicating a time limit for the correction of the violation. 
(Prior Code, § 2.146.3; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-505. - Compliance schedule. 
    The city may issue a compliance schedule which shall be signed by both the city and user that is in significant violation of this division. A compliance schedule is used when serious or longterm violations of discharge limits or conditions occur that require the design and installation of new or additional pretreatment equipment. 
(Prior Code, § 2.146.4; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-506. - Administrative order. 
    The city may issue an administrative order for a major violation and an order for compliance. Prior to receiving an administrative order, the violator usually has received a series of noncompliance notifications, a compliance schedule, or other enforcement actions. The order will be followed by litigation and penalties if the violator does not come into compliance with the order. 
(Prior Code, § 2.146.5; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-507. - Annual public notification of significant violations. 
    The city shall annually publish in the city newspaper a list of the users which were in significant noncompliance with their respective industrial discharge permits during the previous 12 months. For the purposes of this provision, an industrial user is in significant noncompliance if its violations meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter. 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC; TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH. 
(3)  Any other violations of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer-term average) that the city determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of the POTW personnel or the general public). 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(b) to halt or prevent such a discharge. 
(5)  Failure to meet within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance. 
(6)  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports as contained in user permits. 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance. 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations which the city determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the pretreatment program. 
(Prior Code, § 2.146.6; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-508. - Show cause hearing. 
(a)  The city may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW to show cause before the city council why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the city council regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before the city council why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation. 
(b)  The city council may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any of its members or any officer or employee of the assigned department to: 
(1)  Issue in the name of the city council, notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings; 
(2)  Take the evidence; 
(3)  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the city council for action thereon. 
(c)  At any hearing held pursuant to this division, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof. 
(d)  After the city council has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed on existing treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directive as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
(Prior Code, § 2.146.7; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-509. - Legal action. 
    If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the city's wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this division, state or federal pretreatment requirements, or any order of the city, the city attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the circuit court of this county. 
(Prior Code, § 2.146.8; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Secs. 42-510-42-526. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 42-527. - Violations. 
    Any user who is found to have violated any order of the city council, or who willfully or negligently, failed to comply with any of the provisions of this article, and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, shall be punished for violation of a misdemeanor. In addition to the penalties provided therein, the city may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this article, or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder. In addition, should it be determined that the POTW or any of the connecting sewer lines or lift stations have incurred damage as a result of any violation of this article, the city shall have the right to recover any and all damages from those parties in violation. 
(Prior Code, § 2.147.1; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Sec. 42-528. - Falsifying information. 
    Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article or wastewater contribution permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall, upon conviction, be punished for violation of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior Code, § 2.147.2; Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-15-2000) 
Chapter 44 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 44-1-44-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS 

Sec. 44-23. - License required; additional licensure requirements imposed. 
(a)  No person may keep or operate upon any public street or alley any conveyance, automobile or other vehicle for the transportation of passengers for hire; nor may any person transport for hire another in a vehicle without having first obtained a license in compliance with chapter 10, article II, pertaining to licenses and permits, and this article. 
(b)  This chapter does not apply to public mass transportation services. 
(Prior Code, § 7.101; Ord. No. 2008-02, § 2(7.101), 3-17-2008) 
Sec. 44-24. - Application. 
(a)  In addition to the application requirements imposed by chapter 10, article II, pertaining to licenses and permits, an application for a license to operate a passenger vehicle for hire must furnish the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's experience in the transportation of passengers; 
(2)  A signed statement by the applicant giving the city permission to conduct a criminal history review of the applicant; 
(3)  Proof of liability insurance, as required by section 44-25; 
(4)  The number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the applicant and the location of the proposed cab stands; and 
(5)  Any further information that the city manager may require. 
(b)  The city clerk may deny an application for a license to operate a vehicle for hire if it fails to provide the information required under this section. 
(Prior Code, § 7.102; Ord. No. 2008-02, § 2(7.102), 3-17-2008) 
Sec. 44-25. - Liability insurance. 
(a)  The city manager may set by administrative policy the minimum liability insurance requirements for operation of a passenger vehicle for hire. 
(b)  The city may not issue a license until the applicant furnishes at least one insurance policy, prepaid for the period of the certificate, and issued by a responsible insurance company within the limits established by administrative policy under this section. 
(Prior Code, § 7.105; Ord. No. 2008-02, § 2(7.103), 3-17-2008) 
Sec. 44-26. - Drivers to be licensed. 
(a)  No person may operate a passenger vehicle for hire, or allow a vehicle that he owns be operated as a passenger vehicle for hire, unless the vehicle's driver has a currently-valid chauffeur's license issued under state law. 
(b)  The chauffer's license and city license, along with a two-inch by two-inch photograph of the driver's face, must be prominently displayed inside the vehicle. 
(Prior Code, § 7.108; Ord. No. 2008-02, § 2(7.104), 3-17-2008) 
Sec. 44-27. - Rates displayed. 
    Rates must be prominently displayed on an appropriate card within the body of the vehicle in full view of all occupants at all times. 
(Prior Code, § 7.109; Ord. No. 2008-02, § 2(7.105), 3-17-2008) 
Sec. 44-28. - Vehicle equipment inspection; license posted; expiration. 
(a)  Before using a vehicle under this article, the vehicle must be thoroughly examined and inspected by the police department to determine that it complies with this article. When conducting the inspection, the police department may evaluate its cleanliness, appearance, mechanical condition, and general safety for transporting passengers for hire. If the police department finds that the vehicle is unclean, unsanitary, unsightly, otherwise fails to comply with this chapter, or is unsafe for the transportation of passengers for hire, it may not be used as a passenger vehicle for hire in the city. 
(b)  Every vehicle licensed under this article must be inspected by the police department every six months to determine that it continues to meet this article's requirements. If a vehicle fails to meet these standards, the city manager or his designee may suspend or revoke its license. The police department is entitled to make more frequent inspections as it deems necessary. 
(c)  Every vehicle licensed must have a card carried in the vehicle at all times showing its make, motor, and serial number, the date of original inspection and approval by the police department, together with the date of expiration of each approval. The police department will maintain a duplicate of this card on file. 
(d)  No person may operate a vehicle that is unapproved or that has an expired approval. 
(Prior Code, § 7.110; Ord. No. 2008-02, § 2(7.106), 3-17-2008) 
Sec. 44-29. - Administrative policies. 
(a)  The city manager may create administrative policies to further this article's policies. 
(b)  The city manager will notify all persons licensed to own or operate a vehicle by hire by mail at least 14 days before creating or changing an administrative policy under this article. The city manager may, at a current licensee's written request, hold a public hearing before making the change. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, § 2(7.107), 3-17-2008) 
Chapter 46 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, MCL 125.3101 et seq.; Michigan Planning Enabling Act, MCL 125.3801 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Purpose. 
    Ord. No. 752, as amended, was adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by the public acts of the state, in such case, made and provided for the purpose of promoting, and protecting the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city, by protecting and conserving the character and social and economic stability of the residential, commercial, industrial and other use areas; by securing the most appropriate use of land; preventing overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population; providing adequate light, air, and reasonable access; and facilitating adequate and economic provision of transportation, water, sewers, schools, recreation, and other public requirements, and by other means, all in accordance with a comprehensive plan. 
(Prior Code, § 5.1) 
Sec. 46-2. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the city zoning ordinance. 
(Prior Code, § 5.2) 
Sec. 46-3. - Construction of language. 
    The following rules of construction apply to the text of this chapter: 
(1)  The particular shall control the general. 
(2)  In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this chapter and any caption or illustration, the text shall control. 
(3)  The term "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The term "may" is permissive. 
(4)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(5)  A building or structure includes any part thereof. 
(6)  The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," or "occupied for." 
(7)  The term "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity. 
(8)  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or," or "either...or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
a.  "And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 
b.  "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
c.  "Either...or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
(9)  Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them. 
(Prior Code, § 5.5) 
Sec. 46-4. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory use or accessory means a use which is clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with, and, except in the case of accessory off-street parking spaces or loading, located on the same zoning lot as the principal use to which it is related. When accessory is used in this text, it shall have the same meaning as accessory use. 
    Alley means any dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Alteration means any change, addition, or modification in construction or type of occupancy, or in the structural members of a building, such as walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, the consummated act of which may be referred to herein as altered or reconstructed. 
    Antenna means any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies, excluding radar signals, wireless telecommunications signals or other communications signals. 
    Apartments means dwelling units intended for longterm rental to one family as defined in this chapter. 
    Assisted living means a dwelling unit where the furnishing of medical care, nursing, housekeeping, personal care and/or meals is available to the occupants. 
    Auto repair station means a place where, along with the sale of engine fuels, the following services may be carried out: general repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles, collision service, such as body, frame, or fender straightening and repair; overall painting and undercoating of automobiles. 
    Backhaul network means the lines that connect providers towers, cell sites and antennas to one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long distance providers, or the public telephone network. 
    Basement means that portion of a building which is partly or wholly below grade, but so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the ceiling. A basement shall not be counted as a story. 

    Bed and breakfast means a single-family dwelling unit in which the innkeeper resides and has up to eight rooms available for rent to transient tenants, for fewer than 30 days. The term "bed and breakfast" is also known as a "tourist home." 
    Block means the property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets, (crossing or terminating) or between the nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, lake, river or live stream; or between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of development, or corporate boundary lines of the municipality. 
    Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof supported by columns or walls, and intended for the shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind. 
    Building height means the vertical distance measured from the established grade to the highest point of the roof surface for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs and to the average height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 

    Building line means a line formed by the face of the building and for the purposes of this chapter, a minimum building line is the same as a front setback line. 

    Club means an organization of persons for special purposes or for the promulgation of sports, arts, sciences, literature, politics, or the like, but not operated for profit. 
    Combination group/family shelter shall mean a homeless shelter that shelters some combination of a family or group of unrelated persons of differing genders under one roof and with centralized management. 
    Commercial wireless telecommunication services (CWTS) means licensed telecommunication services including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhances specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging and similar services that are marketed to the general public. 
    Condominium means a form of ownership of real property in accordance with Public Act No. 59 of 1978 (MCL 559.101 et seq.), including site condominiums. 
    Convalescent or nursing home means a structure with sleeping rooms, where persons are housed or lodged and are furnished with meals, nursing and medical care. 
    Crematorium means an enclosed facility wherein human remains are cremated in a cremation retort. 
    Development means the construction of a new building or other structure on a zoning lot, the relocation of an existing building on another zoning lot, or the use of open land for a new use. 
    District means a portion of the incorporated area of the municipality within which certain regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Dormitory means a group of three or more rooming units owned by an institution used for temporary housing. 
    Drive-in means a business establishment so developed that its retail or service character is dependent on providing a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while in the motor vehicle rather than within a building or structure, and shall include such titles as walk-in, takeout, drive-by, drive-through or similar names. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family, means a building, or portion thereof, designed exclusively for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other. 
    Dwelling, one-family, means a building designed exclusively for and occupied exclusively by one family. 
    Dwelling, two-family, means a building designed exclusively for occupancy by two families living independently of each other. 
    Dwelling unit means a building, or portion thereof, designed for nontransient occupancy by one family for residential purposes, having permanent living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
    Erected means built, constructed, altered, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on the premises which are required for construction, excavation, fill, drainage, and the like. 
    Essential services means the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments or commissions, of overhead, surface or underground gas, electrical, steam, or water distribution or transmission systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, tunnels, wires, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, towers, poles, electrical substations, gas regulator stations and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public or municipal department or commission for the public health, safety and general welfare. The term "essential services" does not include commercial telecommunication equipment or cell towers. 
    Excavation means any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and ground care. 
    Family means a single individual or a collective body of persons doing their own cooking and living together upon the premises as a separate housekeeping unit in a permanent relationship based upon birth, marriage or other domestic bonds. The term "family" shall not include a group occupying a boardinghouse or lodginghouse, clubs or other associations of a temporary, transient or seasonal character. 
    Family shelter shall mean a single family dwelling that shelters a family who are persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or no more than four individuals occupying a dwelling unit who are committed to living together as a single housekeeping unit, in harmony with the surrounding neighborhood, responsible for maintaining a common household. 
    Fence/wall mean any artificial barrier, partition or structure erected as a dividing structure between adjoining lots either wholly or in part. An exception to the terms "fence/wall" are "privacy screens," as defined in this section. 
    Floor area, gross, means, for the purposes of computing parking, that area used for or intended to be used for the sale of merchandise or services, or for use to serve patrons, clients, or customers. Measurement of usable floor area shall be the sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls. 

    Floor area, residential , means, for the purpose of computing the minimum allowable floor area in a residential dwelling unit, the sum of the horizontal areas of each story of the building shall be measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two dwellings. The floor area measurement is exclusive of areas of basements, unfinished attics, attached garages, breezeways and enclosed and unenclosed porches. 
    Funeral home (mortuary) means a building or part thereof used for human funeral services. Such building may contain space and facilities for (a) embalming and the performance of other services used in the preparation of the dead for burial, (b) the performance of autopsies and other surgical procedures, (c) the storage of caskets, funeral urns and other related funeral supplies, and (d) the storage of funeral vehicles. 
    Garage, private, means an accessory building or portion of a main building designed or used solely for the storage of motor-driven vehicles, boats and similar vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory. 
    Garage, service, means any premises used for the storage or care of motor-driven vehicles, or where any such vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired, or kept for remuneration, hire or sale. 
    Gasoline service station means a place for the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale of motor fuels directly to users of motor vehicles, together with the sale of minor accessories and services for motor vehicles, but not including major automobile repair. 
    Grade means the ground elevation established for the purpose of regulating the number of stories and the height of buildings. The building grade shall be the level of the ground adjacent to the walls of the building if the finished grade is level. If the ground is not entirely level, the grade shall be determined by averaging the elevation of the ground for each face of the building. 
    Group shelter shall mean a type of homeless shelter that shelters multiple people of the same gender who are unrelated. In a women's shelter, this could also include a single mother with children. Group shelters are supervised at all hours that the residents are present. 
    Habitable room shall mean any room that meets adopted building code requirements for a habitable room, including minimum room proportions, minimum egress requirements, and minimum standards for lighting, ventilation, electricity, and public safety requirements. 
    Home occupation means an accessory business use of a dwelling unit, for gainful employment, which is clearly incidental to the residential use, conducted entirely within the dwelling unit, and carried on only by persons who reside within the dwelling unit. 
    Homeless person shall mean an individual who, or family which, lacks a fixed, regular and/or adequate nighttime residence. 
    Homeless shelter shall mean emergency housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is intended for occupancy of three months or less in a given year by a homeless person. 
    Hotel means a building or part of a building, with a common entrance or entrances, in which the dwelling units or rooming units are used primarily for transient occupancy, and in which one or more of the following services are offered: maid service, furnishing of linen, telephone, secretarial, or desk service, and bellboy service. The term "hotel" may include a restaurant or cocktail lounge, public banquet halls, ballrooms, or meeting rooms. 
    Junkyard means an open area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including but not limited to: scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, and bottles. The term "junkyard" includes automobile wrecking yards and includes any area of more than 200 square feet for storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, but does not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings. 
    Kennel, commercial, means any lot or premises on which three or more dogs, cats or other household pets over six months of age are either permanently or temporarily boarded. The term "kennel" shall also include any lot or premises where such household pets are bred or sold. 
    Loading space means an off-street space on the same lot with a building, or group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials. 
    Lodge means a structure used by a fraternal or nonprofit organization for the temporary use of its members, and containing sleeping and common dining facilities. 
    Lot means a parcel of land occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a main building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for the principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such yards and open spaces as are required under the provisions of this chapter. The term "lot" may or may not be specifically designated as such on public records. 
    Lot area means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot where the interior angle of two adjacent sides at the intersection of two streets is less than 135 degrees. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot for the purposes of this chapter if the arc is of less radius than 150 feet and the tangents to the curve, at the two points where the lot lines meet the curve or the straight street line extended, form an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
    Lot coverage means the part or percent of the lot occupied by a building including accessory buildings. 
    Lot depth means the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured along the median between the side lot lines. 
    Lot, interior, means any lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot as defined herein: 
(1)  Front lot line means in the case of an interior lot, that line separating said lot from the street. In the case of a through lot, is that line separating said lot from either street. 
(2)  Rear lot line means that lot line opposite the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten feet long lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot. 
(3)  Side lot line means any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line. 
    Lot of record means a parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a document or map on file with the county register of deeds or in common use by municipal or county officials, and which actually exists as so shown, or any part of such parcel held in a record ownership separate from that of the remainder thereof. 
    Lot, through means an interior lot having frontage on two more or less parallel streets as distinguished from a corner lot. In the case of a row of double frontage lots, all yards of said lots adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and front yard setbacks shall be provided as required. 

    Lot width means the horizontal straight line distance between the side lot lines, measured between the two points where the front setback line intersects the side lot lines. 
    Lot, zoning, means a single tract of land, located within a single block, which, at the time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit. The term "zoning lot" shall satisfy this chapter with respect to area, size, dimensions, and frontage as required in the district in which the zoning lot is located. The term "zoning lot," therefore, may not coincide with a lot of record as filed with the county register of deeds, but may include one or more lots of record. 
    Main building means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot upon which it is situated. 
    Major thoroughfare means an arterial street which is intended to serve as a large volume trafficway for both the immediate municipal area and the region beyond, and is designated as a major thoroughfare, parkway, freeway, expressway, or equivalent term on the major thoroughfare plan to identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the major thoroughfare plan. 
    Master plan means the comprehensive community plan, including graphic and written proposals indicating the general location for streets, parks, schools, public buildings, and all physical development of the municipality, and includes any unit or part of such plan, and any amendment of such plan or parts thereof. Such plan may or may not be adopted by the planning commission and/or the legislative body. 
    Mezzanine means an intermediate floor in any story occupying not to exceed one-third of the floor area of such story. 
    Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is on a chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical system contained within the structure. The term "mobile home" does not include any recreational type vehicles. Mobile homes for occupancy purposes cannot be less than 12-feet wide and must contain 600 square feet or more. 
    Mobile home park or trailer court means any plot of ground upon which two or more trailer coaches, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located. 
    Motel means a series (three or more) of attached, semidetached or detached rooming units. Units shall provide for overnight transient lodging and shall cater primarily to the public traveling by motor vehicle. 
    Nonconforming building means a building or portion thereof lawfully existing at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to the provisions of the chapter in the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming use means a use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Nuisance factors means an offensive, annoying, unpleasant or obnoxious thing or practice, a cause or source of annoyance, especially a continuing or repeating invasion of any physical characteristics of activity or use across a property line which can be perceived by or affects a human being, or the generation of an excessive or concentrated movement of people or things, such as, but not limited to: 
(1)  Noise; 
(2)  Dust; 
(3)  Smoke; 
(4)  Odor; 
(5)  Glare; 
(6)  Fumes; 
(7)  Flashes; 
(8)  Vibration; 
(9)  Shock waves; 
(10)  Heat; 
(11)  Electronic or atomic radiation; 
(12)  Objectionable effluent; 
(13)  Noise of congregation of people, particularly at night. 
    Nursery, plant materials, means a space, building or structure, or combination thereof, for the storage of live trees, shrubs or plants offered for retail sale on the premises including products used for gardening or landscaping. The term "nursery" within the meaning of this chapter does not include any space, building or structure used for the sale of fruits, vegetables or Christmas trees. 
    Off-street parking lot means a facility providing vehicular parking spaces along with adequate drives and aisles, for maneuvering, so as to provide access for entrance and exit for the parking of more than three vehicles. 
    Open front store means a business establishment so developed that service to the patron may be extended beyond the walls of the structure, not requiring the patron to enter the structure. The term "open front store" shall not include automobile repair stations or automobile service stations. 
    Parking spaces means an area of definite length and width, said areas shall be exclusive of drives, aisles or entrances giving access thereto, and shall be fully accessible for the parking of permitted vehicles. 
    Pet crematorium means a dedicated area within a building approved for animal cremation service or an accessory building of an approved animal cremation service wherein animal remains are cremated in a cremation retort. 
    Principal use means the main use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose for which the premises exist. 
    Privacy screens means an accessory structure surrounding, in whole or part, a rear or side yard deck, patio or porch, with said deck, patio or porch being affixed or adjacent to the dwelling or other principal use. The walls of a privacy screen must either be attached directly to the deck, patio or porch or located within one foot from said deck, patio or porch. For purposes of this Code, the term "privacy screen" shall be considered as attached to the dwelling unit or other principal use. 
    Public utility means a person, firm or corporation, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal, state or municipal regulations to the public: gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication, telegraph, transportation or water. 
    Recreational vehicle means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  Camping trailer or folding tent trailer means a vehicular portable structure mounted on wheels and constructed with collapsible partial side walls of fabric, plastic or other pliable material which fold for towing by another vehicle and unfold at the campsite to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or only travel use. 
(2)  Motor home or motorized home means a vehicular portable structure built on a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis, primarily designed to provide only temporary living quarters for recreation, camping or travel use. 
(3)  Small mobile home means primarily designed and used as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel purposes. 
(4)  Travel, dependent, means a travel trailer which is dependent upon a service building for toilet and lavatory facilities, as well as electrical power. 
(5)  Travel trailer means a vehicular portable structure, mounted on wheels of such size or weight not to require special highway movement permits when drawn by a stock passenger automobile, primarily designed and constructed to provide only temporary living quarters or recreational, camping or travel use. 
(6)  Truck camper means a portable structure, designed to be loaded onto, or affixed to the bed or chassis of a truck, constructed to provide only temporary living quarters for recreation, camping or travel use. 
    Room means, for the purpose of determining lot area requirements and density in a multiple-family district, a living room, dining room or bedroom, equal to at least 80 square feet in area. The term "room" shall not include the area in kitchens, sanitary facilities, utility provisions, corridors, hallways, and storage. Plans presented showing 1-, 2-, or 3-bedroom units and including a den, library or other extra room shall count such extra room as a bedroom for the purposes of computing density. 
    Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms with provisions for sleeping. 
    Roominghouse means any dwelling unit, or part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner to three or more persons not in immediate family. When rooms are let to less than three persons, the dwelling must comply with the requirements of a single-family dwelling unit unless otherwise required in this Code. The term "roominghouse" shall not include a bed and breakfast, hotel, motel or other transient uses less than 30 days. 
    Satellite apartment means a dwelling unit located on the same property as the owner's residence. The term "satellite apartment" is also known as an echo apartment. 
    Setback means the distance required to obtain the minimum front, side or rear yard open space provisions of this chapter. 
    Sidewalk café means a street level portion of a restaurant, of any type, located within the sidewalk area of the public right-of-way, which is normally adjacent to a street and functions as an extension of the principal use of the private property of the restaurant. A sidewalk café is open to the sky, except that it may have table awnings or umbrellas, and shall be used for dining, drinking (including alcoholic beverages in certain circumstances) and circulation therein. A sidewalk café may provide either wait staff service or self-service. 
    Secondly, in the interest of promoting a vibrant and active downtown business district, sidewalk cafés are allowed when the proper annual, revocable permit has been issued by the city manager, or his or her designee, as a principal use in the B-2 central business district as set forth in section 46-395, principal Uses permitted. 
    Sign means the use of any words, numerals, figures, devices, designs, or trademarks by which anything is made known, such as are used to show an individual, firm, profession, or business, and are visible to the general public. 
    Sign, accessory, means a sign which is accessory to the principal use of the premises. 
    Sign, nonaccessory, means a sign which is not accessory to the principal use of the premises. 
    Story means that part of a building, except a mezzanine as defined herein, included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the next floor, or if there is no floor above, then the ceiling next above. A story thus defined shall not be counted as a story when more than 50 percent, by cubic content, is below the height level of the adjoining ground. 

    Story, half, means an uppermost story lying under a sloping roof having an area of at least 200 square feet with a clear height of seven feet six inches. For the purposes of this chapter, the usable floor area is only that area having at least four feet clear height between the floor and the ceiling. 
    Street means a public dedicated right-of-way, other than an alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which required a permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground. Exceptions to the term "structure" as used in this chapter are as follows: 
(1)  Structures not greater than nine inches above the average finished grade, nor more than six feet below grade, such as, but not limited to driveways, patios and decks. 
(2)  Structures with a cross sectional area at grade less than 16 square feet, and with a projected silhouette in any plane less than 50 square feet, such as, but not limited to well house covers, flagpoles, and monuments. 
    Temporary use or building means a use or building permitted by the board of appeals to exist during periods of construction of the main building or use, or for special events for a period of time as specified by the board of appeals. 
    Tourist cabin means a maximum of two detached buildings which are maintained, offered or used as dwellings or sleeping quarters for transients. More than two tourist cabins on the same property will be considered a motel. 
    Tourist home. See Bed and breakfast. 
    Towers means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers or monopole towers. The term "towers" includes radio and television transmission towers, alternative tower structures and the like. The term "towers" includes the structure and any support thereto. This chapter shall not govern any tower or the installation of any antenna that is under 40 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive only antennas. 
    Transient resident means one who temporarily resides for generally less than 30 days or seasonally for less than three months during any 12-month period. 
    Use means the principal purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which land or a building is or may be occupied. 
    Wall. See Fence/wall. 
    Yards means the open spaces on the same lot with a main building unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this chapter and as defined herein: 
(1)  Front yard means an open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth if which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest point of the main building. 
(2)  Rear yard means an open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot and the nearest point of the main building. In the case of a corner lot, the rear yard may be opposite either street frontage. 
(3)  Side yard means an open space between a main building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point on the side lot line to the nearest point of the main building. 

    Zoning exception and zoning variance mean the following: 
(1)  Zoning exception is a use permitted only after review and recommendation of an application by the planning commission and approved by the legislative body. Such review being necessary because the provisions of this chapter covering conditions precedent or subsequent are not precise enough to all applications without interpretation, and such review and exception is provided for by this chapter. 
(2)  Zoning variance is a modification of the literal provisions of the physical development standards of this chapter granted when strict enforcement of the zoning chapter would cause undue hardship owing to circumstances unique to the individual property on which the variance is granted. The crucial points of variance are undue hardships and unique circumstances applying to the property. A variance is not justified unless both elements are present in the case. 
(3)  The land uses considered under the exception provisions of this chapter could not be conveniently allocated to one zone or another, or the effects of such uses could not be definitely foreseen as of a given time. In general, the characteristics of these uses include one or more of the following: 
a.  They are not specified within a given zone district. 
b.  They require large areas. 
c.  They are infrequent. 
d.  They sometimes create an unusual amount of traffic. 
e.  They are sometimes obnoxious or hazardous. 
f.  They are required for public safety and convenience. 
(Prior Code, §§ 5.6-5.12; Ord. No. 80-004, 12-1-1980; Ord. No. 80-006, 12-1-1980; Ord. No. 88-06, 6-6-1988; Ord. No. 89-01, 1-9-1989; Ord. No. 89-20, 11-6-1989; Ord. No. 90-28, 12-3-1990; Ord. No. 95-16, 7-17-1995; Ord. No. 98-01, 3-2-1998; Ord. No. 98-23, 11-16-1998; Ord. No. 2005-13, 8-15-2005; Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1, 3-2-2009; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 1, 12-19-2016; Ord. No. 2017-05, § 1, 4-17-2017; Ord. No. 2018-14, § 1, 12-17-2018) 
Secs. 46-5-46-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-27. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the zoning administrator or his or her designee. 
(Prior Code, § 5.241; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 15, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 46-28. - Duties of zoning administrator. 
(a)  The zoning administrator or his or her designee shall have the power to grant zoning compliance permits, to make inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his or her duties in the enforcement of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for the zoning administrator or his or her designee to approve any plans or issue any permits until he has inspected such plans in detail and found them to conform with this chapter. 
(b)  Under no circumstances is the zoning administrator or his or her designee permitted to make changes to this chapter nor to vary the terms of this chapter in carrying out his or her duties as zoning administrator. 
(c)  The zoning administrator or his or her designee shall not refuse to issue a permit when conditions imposed by this chapter are complied with by the applicant despite violations of contracts, such as covenants or private agreements which may occur upon the granting of said permit. 
(Prior Code, § 5.242; Ord. No. 96-19, 1-20-1997; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 15, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 46-29. - Site plan. 
(a)  The zoning administrator or his or her designee shall require that all applications for zoning compliance permits, and when otherwise required by the provisions of this chapter, shall be accompanied by such surveys, plans, specifications and information as needed to determine the compliance with this chapter, and shall include a site plan showing the following: 
(1)  The names and addresses of the architect, planner, designer, engineer, or person responsible for the preparation of the site plan. 
(2)  The location and right-of-way widths of all abutting and intersecting streets and alleys or other public easements and all existing and proposed drives and parking areas on the subject property. Show existing driveways on abutting properties and properties across the street. 
(3)  The dimensions of all lot and property lines, showing the relationship of the subject property to abutting properties. 
(4)  The shape, size and location shall be shown and properly dimensioned for all buildings or other structures to be erected, altered, or moved and for all buildings or other structures already on the lot. 
(5)  The existing and proposed use of the property and of all such structures upon it. In residential areas, the number of dwelling units a building is intended to accommodate is to be shown. 
(6)  Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed. 
(7)  All site plans shall include a date, north point and a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet if the subject property is less than three acres and one inch equals 100 feet, if three acres or more. 
(8)  Stormwater drainage. 
(9)  Utility locations and sizes. 
(10)  Uses of abutting properties. 
(b)  Before a site plan is approved or any zoning compliance permit issued, the zoning administrator shall determine that the proposed development is in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  In the process of reviewing the site plan, the zoning administrator shall consider: 
(1)  The safety and adequate circulation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic on the site. 
(2)  The safety and unimpeded traffic flow of any street upon which the property abuts. 
(3)  Satisfactory and harmonious relationships between the use or development on the site and the prospective development of contiguous land and adjacent neighborhoods. 
(Prior Code, § 5.243; Ord. No. 96-19, 1-20-1997; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 15, 8-2-2010) 
State Law reference- Submission and approval of site plan, MCL 125.3501. 
Sec. 46-30. - Permits. 
(a)  Not to be issued. No building permit shall be issued for the erection, alteration or use of any building or structure or part thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  For new use of land. No land heretofore vacant shall hereafter be used or and existing use of land be hereafter changed to a use of a different class of type unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained for the new or different use. 
(c)  For new use of buildings. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be changed to or occupied by a use of a different class or type unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained for the new or different use. 
(d)  Required. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be hereafter erected, altered, moved, or repaired unless a building permit shall have been first issued for such work. The terms "altered" and "repaired" shall include any changes in structural parts, stairways, type of construction, type, class or kind of occupancy, light or ventilation, means of egress and ingress, or other changes affecting or regulated by the state construction code, housing law, Public Act No. 167 of 1917 (MCL 125.401 et seq.), or this chapter, except for minor repairs or changes not involving any of the aforesaid features. 
(Prior Code, § 5.244) 
Sec. 46-31. - Certificates. 
(a)  Required for occupancy. No land, building, or part thereof, shall be occupied by or for any use unless and until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such use. 
(b)  Issuance requirements. The following shall apply in the issuance of any certificate: 
(1)  Not to be issued. No certificates of occupancy shall be issued for any building, structure, or part thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Required. No building or structure, or part thereof, which is hereafter erected, or altered, shall be occupied or used or the same caused to be done, unless and until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such building or structure. 
(3)  Including zoning. Certificates of occupancy as required by the city building code for new buildings or structures, or parts thereof, or for alterations to or changes of use of existing buildings or structures, shall also constitute certificates of occupancy as required by this chapter. 
(4)  For existing buildings. Certificates of occupancy shall be issued for existing buildings, structures, or parts thereof, or existing uses of land if, after inspection, it is found that such buildings, structures, or parts thereof, or such use of land, are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  Record kept on file. A record of all certificates issued shall be kept on file in the office of the Wexford County building inspector, and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the property involved. 
(6)  Buildings accessory to principal dwelling. Buildings or structures accessory to dwellings shall not require separate certificates of occupancy but may be included in the certificate of occupancy for the dwelling when shown on the plot plan and when completed at the same time as such dwellings. 
(7)  Application. Application for certificates of occupancy shall be made in writing to the Wexford County building inspector on forms furnished by that department, and such certificates shall be issued within five days after receipt of such application if it is found that the building or structure, or part thereof, or the use of land is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Refusal notification. If such certificate is refused for cause, the applicant therefor shall be notified of such refusal and cause thereof, within the aforesaid five-day period. 
(Prior Code, § 5.245; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 15, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 46-32. - Final inspection. 
    The holder of every building permit for the construction, erection, alteration, repair, or moving of any building, structure or part thereof, shall notify the Wexford County building inspector immediately upon the completion of the work authorized by such permit for final inspection. 
(Prior Code, § 5.246; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 15, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 46-33. - Fees. 
    Fees for inspection and the issuance of permits or certificates or copies thereof required or issued under the provisions of this chapter may be collected by the Wexford County building inspector in advance of issuance. The amount of such fees shall be established by Wexford County and shall cover the cost of inspection and supervision resulting from enforcement of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 5.247; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 15, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 46-34. - Zoning commission. 
    The planning commission is hereby designated as the commissions specified in section 301 of Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3301), and shall perform the zoning duties of said commission as provided in the statute in connection with the amendment of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 5.261) 
Sec. 46-35. - Changes and amendments. 
    The city council may from time to time, on recommendation from the planning commission or on petition, amend, supplement or change the district boundaries or the regulations herein, or subsequently established herein pursuant to the authority and procedure established in Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3101 et seq.). 
(Prior Code, § 5.262) 
Sec. 46-36. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience or general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way to impair or interfere with any existing provision of law or ordinance or with any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to the law relating to the use of buildings or premises; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than is required by existing ordinance or by rules, regulations or permits, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Prior Code, § 5.263) 
Sec. 46-37. - Vested rights. 
    Nothing in this chapter should be interpreted or construed to give rise to any permanent vested rights in the continuation of any particular use, district, zoning classification or any permissible activities therein, and they are hereby declared to be subject to subsequent amendment, change or modification as may be necessary to the preservation or protection of public health, safety and welfare. 
(Prior Code, § 5.264) 
Sec. 46-38. - Fees. 
    Any regular business to come before the planning commission that does not require a public hearing shall be accompanied by a fee. An application for a special land use request shall be accompanied by a fee. An application for a rezoning request shall be accompanied by a fee. Such fees shall be used by the city towards expenses involved in hearing this request, including public hearings before the planning commission and the city council. Such fees shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time. 
(Prior Code, § 5.265; Ord. No. 86-03, 6-2-1986; Ord. No. 95-11, 6-5-1995) 
Secs. 46-39-46-64. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF APPEALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning board of appeals, MCL 125.3601 et seq. 

Sec. 46-65. - Creation and membership. 
(a)  There is hereby established a board of appeals, which shall perform its duties and exercise its powers as provided in article VI of Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3601 et seq.), and in such a way that the objectives of this chapter shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The board shall consist of seven members appointed by the city council. Each member shall be appointed for a period of three years, each term to commence on January 1 of the year of appointment. Any vacancies on the board shall be filled by appointment by the city council for the remainder of the unexpired term. The board of appeals shall annually elect its own chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary. The compensation of the appointed members of the board of appeals may be fixed by the city council. 
(b)  Two alternate members may be appointed to the board of appeals, for terms to run for the same term as regular members. The alternate members may be called, on a rotating basis, to sit as regular members on the board in the absence of a regular member. An alternate member may also be called to serve in the place of a regular member for the purpose of reaching a decision on a case in which the regular member has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest. The alternate member having been appointed shall serve in the case until a final decision has been made. The alternate member shall have the same voting rights as a regular member of the board of appeals. 
(Prior Code, § 5.21; Ord. No. 85-09, 7-8-1985; Ord. No. 88-04, 4-18-1988) 
Sec. 46-66. - Meetings. 
    All meetings of the board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such time as such board may determine. All hearings conducted by the board shall be open to the public. The city clerk, or his representative, shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact; and shall also keep records of its hearings and other official action. Four members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of its business. The board shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses, administer oaths, compel testimony and the production of books, papers, files and other evidence pertinent to the matter before it. 
(Prior Code, § 5.252) 
Sec. 46-67. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-10, § 15, adopted Aug. 2, 2010, repealed § 46-67 which pertained to appeal and derived from § 5.253 of the prior Code. 
Sec. 46-68. - Fees. 
    There will be a fee for any application for appeal to the board of appeals where a public hearing is not required. There will be a fee for an application for a variance to the board of appeals where a public hearing is required. At the time the notice for appeal is filed, said fee shall be paid to the secretary of the board of appeals, which the secretary shall forthwith pay over to the city treasurer to the credit of the general revenue fund of the city. Such fees shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time. 
(Prior Code, § 5.254; Ord. No. 95-11, 6-5-1995) 
Sec. 46-69. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  Restrictions on power. The board of appeals shall not have the power to alter or change the zoning district classification of any property, nor to permit any use of land or premises, excepting temporary uses, nor to make any change in the terms of this chapter, but does have the power to act on those matters where this chapter provides for an administrative review, interpretation, and to authorize a variance as defined in this section and laws of the state. 
(b)  Authority. The board of appeals powers shall include: 
(1)  Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order, requirement, permit, decision or refusal made by the building inspector or any other administrative official in carrying out or enforcing any provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Variance. To authorize, upon an appeal, a variance from the strict application of the provisions of this chapter where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape or area of a specific piece of property at the time of enactment of this chapter or by reason of exceptional conditions of such property, the strict application of the regulations enacted would result in peculiar or exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional undue hardship upon the owner of such property, provided such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter. In granting a variance, the board may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed development as it may deem reasonable in furtherance of the purpose of this chapter. In granting a variance, the board shall state the grounds upon which it justifies the granting of a variance. 
(3)  Interpretation and special approvals. To hear and decide in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, for interpretations of the zoning map, and for decisions on special approval situations on which this chapter specifically authorizes the board to pass. Any special approval shall be subject to such conditions as the board may require to preserve and promote the character of the zone district in question and otherwise promote the purpose of this chapter, including the following: 
a.  Interpret the provisions of this chapter in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the plan as shown upon the zoning map fixing the use districts, accompanying and made part of this chapter, where street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the map aforesaid. 
b.  Permit the modifications of the loading space requirements where, in the particular instance, such modification will not be inconsistent with the purpose and intent of such requirements. 
c.  Permit temporary buildings for periods not to exceed one year in undeveloped sections of the city and for periods not to exceed six months in developed sections. 
d.  Permit, upon proper application, the following character of temporary use, not otherwise permitted in any district, not to exceed 12 months with the granting of 12 month extensions being permissible: uses which do not require the erection of any capital improvement of a structural nature. 
e.  The board of appeals, in granting permits for the above temporary uses, shall do so under the following conditions: 
1.  The granting of the temporary use shall in no way constitute a change in the basic uses permitted in the district nor the property whereon the temporary use is permitted. 
2.  The granting of the temporary use shall be granted in writing, stipulating all conditions as to time, nature of development permitted and arrangements for removing the use and reconditioning of the property at the termination of said temporary permit. 
3.  All setbacks, land coverage, off-street parking, lighting and other requirements to be considered in protecting the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city, shall be made at the discretion of the board of appeals. 
4.  In classifying uses as not requiring capital improvement, the board of appeals shall determine that they are either demountable structures related to the permitted use of the land, recreation developments, such as, but not limited to: golf driving ranges and outdoor archery courts; or structures which do not require foundations, heating systems or sanitary connections; or, improvement to the land which can be easily removed upon termination of said temporary permit. 
5.  The temporary use shall be in harmony with the general character of the district. 
6.  No temporary use permit shall be granted without first giving notice to owners of adjacent property of the time and place of a public hearing to be held as further provided for in this chapter. Further, the board of appeals shall seek the review and recommendation of the planning commission prior to the taking of any action. 
(4)  Considerations for variations. In consideration of all appeals and all proposed variations to this chapter, the board shall, before making any variations from the chapter in a specific case, first determine that the proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or unreasonably increase the congestion in public streets, or decrease the danger of fire or endanger the public safety, or unreasonably diminish or impair established property values within the surrounding area, or in any other respect impair the public health, safety, comfort, morals or welfare of the inhabitants of the city. The concurring vote of four members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirements, decision, or determination of the building inspector, or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is authorized by this chapter to render a decision. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to give or grant to the board the power or authority to alter or change this chapter or the zoning map, such power and authority being reserved to the mayor and the city council, in the manner provided by law. 
(Prior Code, § 5.255) 
Sec. 46-70. - Orders. 
    In exercising the powers enumerated in section 46-69, the board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the orders, requirements, decisions or determinations appealed from and may make such order, requirements, decisions or determinations as ought to be made, and to that shall have all the powers of the building inspector from whom the appeal is taken. 
(Prior Code, § 5.256) 
Sec. 46-71. - Notice. 
    The board shall make no recommendation except in a specific case and after a public hearing conducted by the board. It shall, by general rule or in specific cases, determine the interested parties who, in the opinion of the board, may be affected by any matter brought before it. All notices shall comply with the requirements of MCL 125.3103 and 125.3604. The board may require any party applying to the board for relief to give such notice to other interested party as it shall prescribe. 
(Prior Code, § 5.257) 
Sec. 46-72. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  No order of the board permitting the erection of a building shall be valid for a period longer than six months, unless a building permit for such erection or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. 
(b)  No order of the board permitting a development of a building or premises shall be valid for a period longer than one year unless such development is established within such period; provided, however, that where such use permitted is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a building such order shall continue in force and effect if a building permit for said erection or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. 
(Prior Code, § 5.258) 
Sec. 46-73. - Rehearing. 
    No rehearing of any decision of the board of appeals will be considered unless new evidence is submitted which could not reasonably have been presented at the meeting or unless there has been a material change in the facts of the case. 
(Prior Code, § 5.259; Ord. No. 85-08, 7-8-1988) 
Secs. 46-74-46-104. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES AND REMEDIES 

Sec. 46-105. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 and the costs of prosecution or, in default of the payment thereof, shall be punished by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90 days for each offense, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court, together with the costs of such prosecution. 
(b)  Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor unless specifically set forth in this Code as a municipal civil infraction. 
(Prior Code, § 5.271; Ord. No. 95-21, 8-7-1995) 
Sec. 46-106. - Public nuisance per se. 
    Any building or structure which is erected, altered or converted, or any use of premises or land which is begun or changed subsequent to the time of passage of this chapter and in violation of any of the provisions thereof, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Prior Code, § 5.272) 
Sec. 46-107. - Fines; imprisonment. 
    The owner of any building, structure or premises or part thereof, where any condition in violation of this chapter shall exist or shall be created, and who has assisted knowingly in the commission of such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be liable to the fines and imprisonment herein provided. 
(Prior Code, § 5.273) 
Sec. 46-108. - Each day a separate offense. 
    A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or when a violation occurs or continues. 
(Prior Code, § 5.274) 
Sec. 46-109. - Rights and remedies are cumulative. 
    The rights and remedies provided herein are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
(Prior Code, § 5.275) 
Sec. 46-110. - Severance clause. 
    Sections of this chapter shall be deemed to be severable and should any section, subsection, or provision hereof be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such holdings shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or any part hereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Prior Code, § 5.276) 
Secs. 46-111-46-133. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-134. - Established. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into the following districts: 
(1)  Residential districts. 
a.  R-1 One-family residential district. 
b.  R-2 One-family residential district. 
c.  R-3 One-family residential district. 
d.  R-4 One-family residential district. 
e.  RT Two-family residential district. (See section 46-218, pertaining to two-family uses.) 
f.  RM-1 Multiple-family residential district. 
g.  RM-2 Multiple-family residential district. 
h.  RMH One-family residential mobile home district. 
i.  MH Mobile home park residential district. 
j.  R-PUD Residential planned unit development. 
(2)  Nonresidential districts. 
a.  OS-1 Office service district. 
b.  OS-2 Office service district. 
c.  B-1 Auxiliary business district. 
d.  B-2 Central business district. 
e.  B-3 General business district. 
f.  TS-1 Tourist service district. 
g.  TS-2 Tourist service district. 
h.  I-1 Light industrial district. 
i.  I-2 General industrial district. 
j.  P-1 Vehicular parking district. 
k.  POS Parks and open space district. 
l.  C-PUD Commercial planned unit development. 
(Prior Code, § 5.21; Ord. No. 87-17, 10-9-1987; Ord. No. 90-28, 12-3-1990; Ord. No. 96-19, 1-20-1997) 
Sec. 46-135. - Boundaries-Established. 
    The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the zoning map, city zoning ordinance, which accompanies Ord. No. 752, as amended by the zoning map attached to the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and which map with all notations, references, and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this chapter and Ord. No. 87-17, as if fully described herein. 
(Prior Code, § 5.22; Ord. No. 87-17, 10-9-1987) 
Sec. 46-136. - Same-Interpreted. 
    Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys, shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(2)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
(3)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following city limits. 
(4)  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be the midway between the main tracks. 
(5)  Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to follow such shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore line, shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line; boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(6)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (1) through (5) of this section shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
(7)  Where physical or natural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections (1) through (6) of this section, the board of appeals shall interpret the district boundaries. 
(8)  Insofar as some or all of the various districts may be indicated on the zoning map by patterns which, for the sake of map clarity, do not cover public rights-of-way, it is intended that such district boundaries do extend to the center of any public rights-of-way. 
(Prior Code, § 5.23) 
Sec. 46-137. - Zoning-Annexed areas. 
    Whenever any area is annexed to the city, one of the following conditions will apply: 
(1)  Land that is zoned previous to annexation shall be classified as being in whichever district of this chapter most closely conforms with the zoning that existed prior to annexation, such classification to be recommended by the planning commission to the city council and the city council may approve the same by resolution. 
(2)  Land not zoned prior to annexation shall be automatically classified as an R-1 district until a zoning map for said area has been adopted by the city council. The planning commission shall recommend the appropriate zoning districts for such area within three months after the matter is referred to it by the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 5.24) 
Sec. 46-138. - Same-Vacated areas. 
    Whenever any street, alley or other public way, within the city shall be vacated, such street, alley, or other public way or portion thereof, shall automatically be classified in the same zone district as the property to which it attaches. 
(Prior Code, § 5.25) 
Sec. 46-139. - District requirements. 
    All buildings and uses in any district shall be subject to the provisions of article IV of this chapter, pertaining to supplemental regulations and article V of this chapter, pertaining to general exceptions. 
(Prior Code, § 5.26) 
Secs. 46-140-46-161. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - R-1 THROUGH R-4 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 46-162. - Intent. 
(a)  The R-1 through R-4 one-family residential districts are designed to be the most protective of the residential districts. The intent is to provide for an environment of predominantly low-density, one-family detached dwellings along with other residentially related facilities, which serve the residents in the district. 
(b)  It is also intended that the size, shape and design of structures located within these areas conform with the neighborhood in which they are located so as not to diminish or impair the value of surrounding properties. 
(Prior Code, § 5.31) 
Sec. 46-163. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a one-family residential district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  One-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  State licensed residential facilities as required by MCL 125.3206. 
(3)  Farms on those parcels of land separately owned outside the boundaries of either a proprietary or supervisor's plat, having an area of not less than five acres, all subject to the health and sanitation provisions of the city and provided further that no farms shall be operated as piggeries, or for the disposal of garbage, sewage, rubbish, offal or rendering plants, or for the slaughtering of animals, except such animals as have been raised on the premises or have been maintained on the premises for at least a period of one year immediately prior thereto, and for the use and consumption by persons residing on the premises. 
(4)  Publicly owned and operated libraries, parks, parkways and recreational facilities. 
(5)  Cemeteries which lawfully occupied land at the time of the adoption of this Code. 
(6)  Public, parochial and other private elementary schools offering courses in general education and not operated for profit. 
(7)  Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incident to any of the uses permitted in subsections (1) through (6) of this section. 
(8)  Home occupations in any residential district under the following conditions: 
a.  It is understood that many occupations use their home as a base of operations, and many businesses begin as small home occupations which are expanded in the future. It is the intention of the city to allow such uses as long as the uses do not adversely affect the peace and quiet of the residential neighborhood, and to encourage their relocation into a commercially zoned area if the business expands beyond the residential constraints. 
b.  In general, a home occupation is an accessory use so located and conducted that the average neighbor, under normal circumstances, would not be aware of its existence. 
c.  Instructions in craft, fine art, music, dancing and similar subjects shall be limited to six students at a time. 
d.  Day care facilities shall be limited to not more than six children; provided that all requirements set by the state department of human services are complied with. 
e.  Only residents of the dwelling may be engaged in the home occupation. 
f.  No display of products shall be visible from the street, and there shall be no signs other than those permitted by section 46-664. 
g.  The home occupation shall be clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling and shall not change the essential residential character of the dwelling. No internal or external alterations inconsistent with the residential use of the building shall be permitted. 
h.  Use of the dwelling or accessory building for this purpose shall be limited to an area not greater than ten percent of the occupiable floor space of the principal building. 
i.  Outside storage shall not be used in connection with the home occupation. 
j.  No such home occupation shall be noxious or offensive by reason of emission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, odorous matter, heat, humidity, glare, refuse, interference in radio or television reception, or other objectionable emissions. No unreasonable use of lights shall be permitted. 
k.  Only vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of the home occupation. No traffic shall be generated by a home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood (i.e., no more than one additional vehicle at a time) and any need for parking generated by the conduct of a home occupation shall be met off the street. 
l.  The following uses and similar such uses shall be prohibited as home occupations, because the nature of the investment or operations have a pronounced tendency, once started, to rapidly increase beyond the limits permitted for home occupations and thereby impair the use and value of residentially zoned areas: auto repair or painting, barbershop, beauty salon, major carpentry work, patient clinic facility of a doctor or dentist, private schools with organized classes with more than six students, appliance repair and upholstering. 
m.  The wholesaling of products shall not be permitted at any home occupation site. 
n.  Garage and yard type sales with a duration not more than three days a month are exempt from this section. 
o.  The city council may void any home occupation for noncompliance with the conditions set forth herein. 
p.  Business uses that are beyond the scope of a customary home occupation/business may be eligible for a special use permit according to article VI of this chapter, pertaining to special land use. 
Examples of accessory home occupations/businesses: artists, authors, clothes makers, home crafts, office facilities of clergy, salesmen, professionals, the boarding of not more than two boarders. 
(Prior Code, § 5.32; Ord. No. 89-20, 11-6-1989) 
Sec. 46-164. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the planning commission: 
(1)  Churches and other facilities normally incidental thereto, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in division 18 of this article, the schedule of regulations, may be allowed provided front, side and rear yards increased above the minimum required yards by two feet for each foot of building height that exceeds the maximum height allowed. 
b.  All access to the site shall be in accordance with section 46-671. 
(2)  Public, parochial and private intermediate and/or secondary schools offering courses in general education, not operated for profit. Access to the site shall be in accordance with section 46-671. 
(3)  Utility and public service buildings and uses, without storage yards, when operating requirements necessitate the locating of said building within the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity. 
(4)  Nursery schools, day nurseries and child care centers, not including dormitories; provided that for each child so cared for, there shall be provided and maintained a minimum of 150 square feet of outdoor play area. Such play space shall have a total minimum area of not less than 5,000 square feet and shall be fenced and screened from any adjoining lot in any residential district. 
(5)  Private noncommercial recreational areas, institutional or community recreation centers, nonprofit swimming pool clubs, all subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The proposed site for any of the uses permitted herein which would attract persons from, or are intended to serve, areas beyond the immediate neighborhood shall have at least one property line abutting a major thoroughfare as designated on the major thoroughfare plan, and the site shall be so planned as to provide all access in accordance with section 46-671. 
b.  Front, side and rear yards shall be at least 80 feet wide, and shall be landscaped in trees, shrubs, and grass. All such landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy condition. There shall be no parking or structures permitted in these yards, except required entrance drives and those walls used to obscure the use from abutting residential districts. 
c.  Off-street parking shall be provided so as to accommodate not less than one-half of the member families and/or individual members. The planning commission may modify the off-street parking requirements in those instances wherein it is specifically determined that the users will originate from the immediately adjacent areas, and will therefor be pedestrian. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or zoning compliance permit, bylaws of the organization shall be provided in order to establish the membership involved for computing the off-street parking requirements. In those cases wherein the proposed use or organization does not have bylaws or formal membership, the off-street parking requirement shall be determined by the planning commission on the basis of usage. 
d.  Whenever a swimming pool is constructed under this chapter, said pool area shall be provided with a protective fence, four feet six inches in height, and entry shall be provided by means of a controlled gate. 
(6)  Golf courses, which may or may not be operated for profit, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The site shall be so planned as to provide all access in accordance with section 46-671. 
b.  The site plan shall be laid out to achieve a relationship between the major thoroughfare and any proposed service roads, entrances, driveways, and parking areas which will encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety. 
c.  Development features including the principal and accessory buildings and structures shall be so located and related as to minimize the possibilities of any adverse effects upon adjacent property. This shall mean that all principal or accessory buildings shall not be less than 200 feet from any property line abutting residentially zoned lands; provided that, where topographic conditions are such that buildings would be screened from view, the planning commission may modify this requirement. 
d.  Whenever a swimming pool is to be provided, said pool shall be provided with a protective fence six feet in height, and entry shall be by means of a controlled gate. 
(7)  Colleges, universities and other such institutions of higher learning, public and private, offering courses in general, technical, or religious education and not operated for profit, all subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Any use permitted herein shall be developed only on sites of at least 40 acres in area, and shall not be permitted on any portion of a recorded subdivision plat. 
b.  All access to said site shall be in accordance with section 46-671. 
c.  No building shall be closer than 80 feet to any property line. 
(8)  Private swimming pools shall be permitted as an accessory use within the rear yard only, provided they meet the following requirements: 
a.  There shall be a minimum distance of not less than ten feet, between the adjoining property line, or alley right-of-way and the outside of the pool wall. Side yard setbacks shall apply to side yards if greater than ten feet. 
b.  There shall be a distance of not less than four feet between the outside pool wall and any building located on the same lot. 
c.  No swimming pool shall be located less than 35 feet from any front lot line. 
d.  No swimming pool shall be located in an easement. 
e.  For the protection of the general public, all yards containing swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence not less than four feet in height. The gates shall be of a self-closing latching-type, with the latch on the inside of the gate not readily available for children to open. Gates shall be capable of being securely locked when the pool is not in use for extended periods; provided, however, that if the entire premises of the residence is enclosed, then this provision may be waived by the Wexford County building inspector. 
(9)  Roominghouses and boardinghouses. 
(10)  Family shelter, subject to the requirements of article VI-Special Land Uses. 
(11)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 
(Prior Code, § 5.33; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 16, 8-2-2010; Ord. No. 2017-05, § 2, 4-17-2017) 
Sec. 46-165. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See division 18 of this article, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of a lot permitted by land use, the maximum density permitted, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(Prior Code, § 5.34) 
Secs. 46-166-46-183. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RM-1 MULTIPLE-FAMILY DISTRICTS 

Sec. 46-184. - Intent. 
    The RM-1 multiple-family residential district is designed to afford a transition of use in existing housing areas by permitting new construction or conversion of existing structures between adjacent residential and commercial, office, thoroughfares or other uses which would affect residential character. This district also recognizes the existence of older residential areas of the city where larger houses have been or can be converted from single-family to two-family or multiple-family residences in order to extend the economic life of these structures and allow the owners to justify the expenditures for repairs and modernization. 
(Prior Code, § 5.41; Ord. No. 96-19, 1-20-1997) 
Sec. 46-185. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an RM-1 multiple family residential district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  All uses permitted and as regulated in one-family residential districts. The standards of the schedule of regulations applicable to the R-3 one-family residential district, shall apply as minimum standards when one-family detached dwellings are erected. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Multiple-family dwellings. (See section 46-215, pertaining to site plans and conditions for approval.) 
(4)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the uses permitted in subsections (1) through (3) of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 5.42; Ord. No. 96-19, 1-20-1997) 
Sec. 46-186. - Special land uses permitted. 
    The following uses of land and structures will be allowed as stipulated in article VI of this chapter, special land uses: 
(1)  Recreational activities. 
(2)  Offices and/or business in an existing building. 
(3)  Office and/or business in a dwelling (mixed use). 
(4)  Family shelter. 
(5)  Group shelter. 
(6)  Combination group/family shelter. 
(Prior Code, § 5.43; Ord. No. 96-19, 1-20-1997; Ord. No. 2017-05, § 3, 4-17-2017; Ord. No. 2018-14, § 2, 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 46-187. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See division 18 of this article, schedule of regulations limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of a lot permitted by land use, the maximum density permitted, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(Prior Code, § 5.44; Ord. No. 96-19, 1-20-1997) 
Secs. 46-188-46-212. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RM-2 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 46-213. - Intent. 
    The RM-2 multiple family residential districts are designed to provide sites for multiple-family dwelling structures, and related uses, which will generally serve as zones of transition between the nonresidential districts and lower density single-family districts. The multiple-family district is further provided to serve the limited needs for the apartment type of unit in an otherwise medium density, single-family community. 
(Prior Code, § 5.51; Ord. No. 96-19, 1-20-1997) 
Sec. 46-214. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a multiple-family residential district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  All residential uses permitted and as regulated in the one-family residential districts. The standards of the schedule of regulations applicable to the R-1 one-family residential district, shall apply as minimum standards when one-family detached dwellings are erected. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. The standards of the schedule of regulations applicable to the R-3 one-family residential district shall apply as minimum standards for the setbacks, lot coverage and building heights of the duplexes constructed in the Twin Haven plat approved by the planning commission on January 22, 1996. 
(3)  Multiple-family dwellings. 
(4)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the permitted uses in subsections (1) through (3) of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 5.52; Ord. No. 96-19, 1-20-1997) 
Sec. 46-215. - Site plans required; conditions for approval. 
(a)  In the case of multiple-dwelling developments, all site plans (see section 46-29) shall be submitted to the planning commission for its review and approval prior to issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  Approval shall be contingent upon a finding that: 
(1)  The site plan shows that a proper relationship exists between local streets and any proposed service roads, driveways, and parking areas to encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety; and 
(2)  All the development features including the principal building or buildings and any accessory buildings, or uses, open spaces, and any service roads, driveways and parking areas are so located and related to minimize the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent property, such as, but not limited to: channeling excessive traffic onto local residential streets, lack of adequate screening or buffering of parking or service areas, or building groupings and circulation routes located as to interfere with police or fire equipment access. 
(Prior Code, § 5.53) 
Sec. 46-216. - Special land uses permitted. 
    The following uses of land and structures will be allowed, as stipulated in article VI of this chapter, special land uses: 
(1)  Recreational facilities. 
(2)  Mobile home parks. 
(3)  Office and/or business in an existing building. 
(4)  Office and/or business in a dwelling (mixed use). 
(5)  Family shelter. 
(6)  Group shelter. 
(7)  Combination group/family shelter. 
(8)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the special land uses in subsections (1) through (7) of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 5.54; Ord. No. 96-19, 1-20-1997; Ord. No. 2017-05, § 4, 4-17-2017; Ord. No. 2018-14, § 3, 12-17-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-14, § 3, adopted December 17, 2018, amended § 46-216 and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions" to "Special land uses permitted," as set out herein. 
Sec. 46-217. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See division 18 of this article, schedule of regulations limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, maximum density permitted and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(Prior Code, § 5.55; Ord. No. 96-19, 1-20-1997) 
Sec. 46-218. - Two-family uses (formerly RT district). 
    The RT two-family residential district requirements have been incorporated into the RM-1 and RM-2 multiple-family district requirements. For those RT districts currently shown on the zoning map, the standards of the schedule of regulations (section 46-629) applicable to the R-3 one-family residential district shall apply as minimum standards for the setbacks of newly constructed duplexes, otherwise, all other standards of the schedule of regulations applicable to RM-2 multiple-family residential district shall apply as minimum standards. 
(Prior Code, § 5.56; Ord. No. 96-19, 1-20-1997) 
Secs. 46-219-46-244. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RMH ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL MOBILE HOME DISTRICTS 

Sec. 46-245. - Intent. 
    The RMH one-family residential mobile home districts are designed to accommodate the housing of families on individual lots located outside the confines of a mobile home park. These districts recognize the existence of land divisions which are not in general keeping with modern practices of land subdivision and homebuilding. 
(Prior Code, § 5.81) 
Sec. 46-246. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a one-family residential mobile home district, no building or land shall be used and no structure shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  All uses permitted and as regulated in the one-family residential districts. The standards of the schedule of regulations applicable to the R-3 one-family residential district shall apply as minimum standards when one-family detached dwellings are erected. 
(2)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the permitted uses in subsection (1) of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 5.82) 
Sec. 46-247. - Required conditions for approval of plot plan. 
    In the case of mobile home development, the approval of plot plans submitted to the building inspector for review shall be contingent upon a finding that: 
(1)  All development features, including the location of the principal building, any accessory buildings, or uses, open spaces, driveways, parking areas, etc., are so located and related to minimize the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent property. 
(2)  A concrete pad shall be provided which is at least as large as the mobile home in total width and length, and shall have sufficient tiedowns as specified by the building inspector. 
(3)  All water and sewer connections shall be suitably protected from freezing. 
(4)  All fuel oil and gasoline tanks located on the lot shall be screened from view. All tanks shall be equipped with vent pipes and fused valves. 
(5)  There shall be no storage of any kind under mobile homes. 
(6)  All mobile homes shall be properly skirted. 
(7)  There shall not be less than 600 square feet of floor space within each mobile home for the first two occupants, and an additional 50 square feet of floor space for each occupant over two. Mobile homes less than 12 feet wide are not permitted within the city. These provisions shall not apply to any mobile home lawfully located in a mobile home park on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(Prior Code, § 5.83) 
Sec. 46-248. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See division 18 of this article, schedule of regulations limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of a lot permitted by land use, the maximum density permitted, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(Prior Code, § 5.84) 
Secs. 46-249-46-274. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - MH MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Mobile home commission act, MCL 125.2301 et seq. 

Sec. 46-275. - Intent. 
    The MH mobile home park districts are designed to provide for mobile home parks and their accessory uses. Mobile home parks possess site characteristics most similar to multiple-family residential development and would provide for transition between nonresidential development and residential districts where such use would not be detrimental to the future expansion of residential development in the area. Because mobile home parks possess unique characteristics which may be detrimental to the development of new residential areas, the maintenance of a high degree of control over their location is essential and each location requires review of all site features and relationships between abutting land uses before approval. 
(Prior Code, § 5.61) 
Sec. 46-276. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In mobile home parks, principal uses shall be permitted after review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission and subject further to the following conditions: 
(1)  The mobile home park shall have access to two existing streets, one of which shall be paved. 
(2)  A mobile home park shall be permitted only on a lot or parcel which has a width of at least 400 feet on an existing street. 
(3)  Prior to the public hearing on the proposed mobile home park, notification shall be given by mail of the proposal for said mobile home park and the date, time and place of public hearing to all property owners within 1,000 feet of the proposed mobile home park. 
(4)  The mobile home park site shall be enclosed by a 15-foot wide greenbelt adjacent to all abutting properties and public rights-of-way. The greenbelt shall be located within the mobile home park site and shall provide a continuous yearround obscuring screen. 
(5)  An open area shall be provided on each mobile home lot to insure adequate natural light and ventilation to each trailer and to provide sufficient area for outdoor uses essential to the occupants of the mobile home. Mobile home lots shall average not less than 4,000 square feet in area exclusive of drives, open space in the mobile home park or other open areas not specifically for mobile home occupancy. The minimum width for mobile home lots shall be not less than: 
a.  Forty feet for singlewide mobile homes. 
b.  Forty-five feet for expandable mobile homes. 
c.  Fifty-five feet for doublewide mobile homes. 
(6)  Each mobile home site shall have the minimum yard requirements in MAC R 125.1941. 
(7)  Parking spaces shall be as required by MAC R 125.1925 and R 125.1926. 
(8)  Mobile home sites shall be provided with a concrete apron of suitable width and length to park and support a mobile home, and shall have tie downs as specified by the building inspector. 
(Prior Code, § 5.62) 
Sec. 46-277. - Service drives and sidewalks. 
    Service drives and sidewalks shall be as required by MAC R 125.1920 and 125.1928. 
(Prior Code, § 5.63) 
Sec. 46-278. - Underground wiring. 
(a)  Arrangements shall be made for all local distribution lines for telephone, television or electric services, exclusive of main supply and perimeter feed lines when located on section or quarter section lines, to be placed entirely underground throughout the trailer court area; provided, however, that when a mobile home park overlaps a section or quarter section line, main supply and perimeter feed lines located on such section or quarter section line shall be placed underground. The planning commission may waive or modify this requirement where, in its judgment and upon the advice of the city engineer, circumstances exist which render compliance impractical. 
(b)  Conduits or cables should be placed within private easements provided to the service companies by the proprietor and/or developer or within public ways. Those telephone, television and electrical facilities placed in dedicated public ways shall be planned so as not to conflict with other underground utilities. All telephone and electrical facilities shall be constructed in accordance with standards of construction approved by the state public service commission. 
(Prior Code, § 5.64) 
Sec. 46-279. - Additional requirements. 
(a)  There shall not be less than 400 square feet of floor space within each mobile home for the first one occupant, and an additional 100 square feet of floor space for each occupant over one. This provision shall not apply to any mobile home located in a mobile home park on the effective date of Ord. No. 752. 
(b)  There shall be provided for each mobile home park a recreation area equal in size to at least 200 square feet per mobile home park site. Said recreation area shall be no longer than 11/2 times its width. Such area shall be graded, developed, equipped, sodded and maintained by the management, so as to provide recreation for the residents of the mobile home park. 
(c)  The front yard, and any side yard adjacent to a street shall be landscaped within one year after the issuance of a building permit and in any case prior to the certificate of occupancy and the entire mobile home park shall be maintained in a good, clean, presentable condition at all times. 
(d)  No business of any kind shall be conducted in any mobile home park except for separate, permanent structures which contain facilities such as the management's office, laundry and dry cleaning facilities or similar uses which are designed to serve only the residents of the mobile home park and provided that no signs or advertising devices shall be visible from adjacent public streets. 
(e)  All fuel oil and gas tanks located on each mobile home site shall be placed in a uniform manner and screened from view. All tanks shall be equipped with vent pipes and fused valves. 
(f)  There shall be no storage of any kind under mobile homes, and all mobile homes shall be properly skirted. 
(g)  All fences, other than the greenbelt surrounding the court, shall be uniform in height, and shall not exceed 30 inches in height, and shall be constructed in such a manner as to provide firemen access to all sides of each mobile home. 
(Prior Code, § 5.65) 
Sec. 46-280. - Compliance with state law. 
    All mobile home park development shall further comply with Public Act No. 96 of 1987 (MCL 125.2301 et seq.). 
(Prior Code, § 5.66) 
Sec. 46-281. - Additional permitted uses. 
    All uses permitted and as regulated in the one-family residential district are permitted in the MH mobile home park districts. The standards of the schedule of regulations applicable to the R-3 one-family residential district shall apply as minimum standards when one-family detached dwellings are affected. 
(Prior Code, § 5.67) 
Sec. 46-282. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See division 18 of this article, schedule of regulations limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of a lot permitted by land use, the maximum density permitted, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(Prior Code, § 5.68) 
Secs. 46-283-46-312. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (R-PUD) 

Sec. 46-313. - Requirements. 
(a)  Special exception within districts. A R-PUD planned unit development shall be recognized as a special exception use within zoning districts. The requirements listed in this section shall apply in addition to all other applicable requirements of this chapter for the districts in which such uses are located. Control of such R-PUD developments shall be the responsibility of the city planning commission. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to permit greater flexibility in the development of zoning districts than is generally possible under conventional zoning regulations. It is further intended to promote more efficient use of the land while permitting a harmonious variety of development choices, the integration of necessary services and community facilities and the preservation of open space for park and recreational use. A permit may be issued for construction and occupancy of a R-PUD subject to compliance with the requirements, standards and procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(c)  General requirements for residential planned unit developments. 
(1)  Minimum area. The minimum area for a R-PUD special exception permit shall not be less than five contiguous acres of land. However, an area bounded on all sides by a public street, railroad, or other external barriers of a similar defining nature shall be considered for a R-PUD, regardless of minimum acreage. 
(2)  Ownership. The tract of land for a project must be either in one ownership or the subject of an application filed jointly by the owners of all property involved. 
(3)  Location. Residential planned unit developments shall be allowed in any zoning district. 
(4)  Utilities. Public water, sanitary sewer and storm drainage facilities shall be provided as part of the site development. All public utility transmission lines shall be placed underground. 
(5)  Streets. All streets shall be approved by the city engineer. All sewer and water installations and use shall be approved by the city utilities director. 
(d)  Approval. Approval by the city planning commission of a sketch plan and detailed site plan for all planned use development is required. 
(Prior Code, § 5.35; Ord. No. 95-17, 7-17-1995) 
Sec. 46-314. - Permitted uses. 
    No structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered, or used, and no land shall be used except for one or more of the following: 
(1)  Residential uses permitted : 
a.  Single-family detached dwellings; 
b.  Two-family dwellings; 
c.  Townhouses; 
d.  Apartment buildings; 
e.  Condominiums; 
f.  State licensed residential facilities; 
g.  Any combination of the permitted uses in this subsection. 
h.  Family shelter, subject to the requirements of article VI-Special Land Uses. 
(2)  Nonresidential uses permitted. Nonresidential uses of a religious, educational, commercial, or recreational character to the extent that they are designed and intended for use by the residents of the R-PUD. The burden shall be on the applicant to show that nonresidential uses are intended to serve principally the residents of the R-PUD. Nonresidential permitted uses shall be allowed only to the extent that the planning commission finds them to be designed to serve primarily the residents of the R-PUD, and compatibly and harmoniously incorporated into the unitary design of the R-PUD. Buildings designed and intended to be used, in part or wholly, for nonresidential uses shall be constructed according to the following: 
a.  If the R-PUD contains from one to 50 dwelling units, 75 percent of said dwelling units must be physically constructed prior to any nonresidential use construction. 
b.  If the R-PUD contains 50 or more dwelling units, 50 percent of said dwelling units shall be physically constructed prior to any nonresidential use construction. In no case shall the number of physically constructed dwelling units under this standard be less than 38 prior to the nonresidential use construction. 
c.  The only nonresidential uses permitted within a R-PUD are: 
1.  Commissary for the retail sale of books, stationary, foodstuffs typically consumed on a daily basis, nonprescription pharmacy products, and related sundry goods; 
2.  Barbershops and beauty shops; 
3.  Laundromats; 
4.  Schools, public or private; 
5.  Churches; 
6.  Public parks, forest preserves, and noncommercial recreational areas; 
7.  Golf courses; 
8.  Real estate office only in conjunction with a new R-PUD, limited to selling or renting units in such development; and 
9.  Temporary buildings associated with on-site construction activities for a period not to extend beyond the completion date of such construction. Placement of a temporary building shall only be made after issuance of necessary building permits for the associated construction activity. 
(3)  Nonresidential uses review and placement standards. A special use provision to permit nonresidential uses within this district may be granted by the planning commission only after application has been made and reviewed in accordance with procedures established by this chapter. Approval of nonresidential uses shall require demonstration of compliance with the following standards: 
a.  The R-PUD is of a scale to reasonably support the proposed nonresidential use. 
b.  The need for the use has been adequately demonstrated through applicable marketing studies or other appropriate research. 
c.  Nonresidential uses convenient for the users of the R-PUD or the immediate neighborhood and provided that such uses are planned so as to ensure that they shall not materially alter or negatively impact the existing character of adjacent residential neighborhoods, and shall be integrated by design as an accessory element of the R-PUD. 
d.  Except as provided in this subsection, all nonresidential uses allowed in the R-PUD, inclusive of those uses stated in subsection (2)c of this section, shall occupy no more than ten percent of the R-PUD net project area, nor shall nonresidential buildings occupy more than ten percent of the total ground floor area of all residential buildings in the project. The exceptions to the restriction stated in this subsection are recreational uses of primarily open space character, such as forest preserves and golf courses, which may occupy a net project area greater than ten percent. 
e.  Adequate provision has been made to accommodate the systems and facilities and services identified under section 46-316(e). 
f.  Compliance with other applicable requirements of this chapter. 
g.  Accessory uses. Uses which are customarily accessory and incidental to permitted principal uses. 
(Prior Code, § 5.36; Ord. No. 941, 6-16-1980; Ord. No. 95-17, 7-17-1995; Ord. No. 2017-05, § 5, 4-17-2017) 
Sec. 46-315. - Design requirements. 
    Within the R-PUD, the requirements hereinafter set forth shall apply in lieu of any conflicting regulations set forth in the district in which the development is located: 
(1)  Number of units permitted. The maximum number of units permitted within the project shall be determined by dividing the net planned unit development area, as defined in this subsection, by the minimum zoning lot area per unit required by the underlying district in which the project is located. In the event the project lies in more than one zoning district, the number of units shall be computed for each district separately. Net planned unit development area shall be defined as the gross area of the R-PUD site minus the sum of those areas occupied by the structures, uses, wetlands and water bodies stated in this subsection (1): 
a.  All areas planned for the placement of nonresidential buildings and associated nonresidential buildings and structures, including parking areas, loading and unloading areas, accessory buildings, dumpster pads, and road and driveway rights-of-way whose only function is to serve traffic movements associated with nonresidential uses. Determination of the extent of these areas shall be based on the footprint of each nonresidential building, structure and use which shall be detailed on the R-PUD sketch site plan; 
b.  Seventy-five percent of all areas classified as a regulated wetland under the provisions of part 303 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.3031 et seq.), and 75 percent of all area classified as a regulated inland lake or stream under the provisions of part 301 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.30101 et seq.). The location and size of these areas shall be indicated on the R-PUD sketch site plan. 
(2)  Reduction of lot area requirements. The minimum lot area may be reduced for any permitted use provided; however, said reduction shall not be greater than 33 percent below that required in the district in which the project is located. 
(3)  Setbacks, yards and open spaces. The minimum setbacks, yards and open space requirements for buildings and structures may be reduced or increased in the discretion of the planning commission to avoid unnecessary disruption of the environment where reasonably equivalent open space is provided elsewhere upon the site. 
(4)  Reduction of minimum lot frontage and width. The minimum lot frontage and width for any lot designated for single-family dwellings may be reduced up to 33 percent below the requirements of the district in which the R-PUD is located. 
(5)  Screening. A screening area comprised of landscaping, fencing, increased building setback, or any combination of the same, may be required by the planning commission along the perimeter of the R-PUD or any portion thereof, if deemed necessary to ensure a more compatible relationship between the R-PUD and adjoining property. 
(6)  Open space required. Within every R-PUD there shall be planned and set aside permanently as part of the total development an amount of common open space equal to not less than the aggregate accumulation of lot size reduction below the minimum lot area for the development as a whole. 
a.  Before accepting the open space as meeting the requirements of this provision, the planning commission must find the land thus designated: 
1.  To be sufficient in size, suitably located, with adequate access; and 
2.  With evidence given that satisfactory arrangements will be made for the maintenance of such designated land to relieve the municipality of future maintenance thereof. 
b.  For the purposes of meeting the open space requirement in this subsection, the planning commission may consider regulated wetlands and regulated water bodies, as defined under subsection (1)b of this section, provided said wetlands and water bodies are integrated into the R-PUD in such a way that R-PUD residents are afforded the opportunity to access and use these natural features for recreational purposes. 
(7)  Arrangement of open space. All required open space within the R-PUD shall be arranged so as to provide benefit to the maximum number of dwelling units. Separate tracts of open space shall have adequate pedestrian access from at least one point along a public street or from a right-of-way in common ownership to all R-PUD residents and easily accessible by the same. 
(8)  Sign standards. All signs located in the R-PUD shall be subject to the requirements of section 46-664. The underlying zoning district shall be used as a guide. 
(9)  Variations. With the exception of increases in permitted housing density, the planning commission may authorize variations from the design provisions of this section, which will not be incompatible with the purposes of the R-PUD or the criteria required in this section, and will not be obstructive of view, light or air, or hazardous or otherwise a nuisance or annoyance to adjacent developments, highway motorists or the general public. 
a.  The purpose of these variations is to provide for reasonable flexibility in the regulations as a means of: 
1.  Permitting the development of a site upon which buildable areas exist, but upon which the majority of the site area is encompassed by regulated wetlands, regulated water bodies, other unique natural features, or combinations of each; or 
2.  Providing opportunity for the development of innovative design concepts which will be of public benefit. 
b.  In consideration of a variation, the applicant shall demonstrate: 
1.  The property values of parcels contiguous to the R-PUD will not depreciate as a result of the variation; 
2.  The existing public infrastructure, or infrastructure proposed for construction as a component of the R-PUD, is capable of supporting the variation; and 
3.  The R-PUD could not reasonably be developed without a variation due to practicable difficulties associated with the physical characteristics of the site; or a variation offers an appropriate alternative to compliance with the design requirements of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 5.37; Ord. No. 941, 6-16-1980; Ord. No. 95-17, 7-17-1995) 
Sec. 46-316. - Application procedure and approval process. 
(a)  General. Whenever any R-PUD is proposed, before any building permit is granted, the developer shall apply for and secure approval of a special exception use in accordance with the procedures of this section and obtain approval of a final site plan from the planning commission. 
(b)  Application for sketch plan approval. So that the planning commission and the developer can reach an understanding of what is being proposed, and what is required, the developer shall submit a R-PUD application and sketch site plan and related project information to the planning commission. The sketch site plan shall be drawn to scale, fully dimensioned, and shall clearly show the following information: 
(1)  Boundaries and size of property; 
(2)  Location, size and height of all buildings and building facades; 
(3)  Interior roadway system including parking facilities, proposed and existing rights-of-way, loading and unloading areas, curb cuts to public roads, and adjacent streets; 
(4)  The interior open space system with details on the size and use of the space, ownership status at R-PUD completion, and method of maintaining same; 
(5)  The overall stormwater drainage system; 
(6)  Principal ties to the neighborhood and community with respect to transportation, water supply and sewage disposal; 
(7)  Delineation of the various residential and nonresidential areas and uses, including size, location and number of housing units and other buildings; 
(8)  Construction phases and construction schedule; 
(9)  Existing natural features and proposed landscaping; 
(10)  Topography, existing and proposed (contour intervals of no greater than five feet); 
(11)  Location, size and function of proposed signs. 
In addition to the sketch plan, the applicant shall submit copies of other information, which may be required by provisions of the R-PUD regulations. 
(c)  Public hearing. The planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing on any application for a R-PUD in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Following the public hearing. The planning commission shall, within 60 days, approve or disapprove the sketch plan or make modification thereto and so notify the applicant of its decision. 
(e)  Approval of sketch plan. The sketch plan shall not constitute approval of the detailed site plan, but shall be deemed an expression of approval of the layout as a guide to the preparation of the detailed plan. The planning commission shall find that compliance with the following standards has been met before approving any sketch plan: 
(1)  The R-PUD is located in an appropriate underlying zoning district; 
(2)  The R-PUD site and proposed uses shall be served by necessary public infrastructure including roadways and utilities and that said infrastructure is appropriately sized and arranged to accommodate the requirements of the R-PUD while avoiding negative impacts on the infrastructure to which it will connect; 
(3)  The R-PUD site, proposed uses and related development shall comply with all density and other PUD design standards; 
(4)  The R-PUD shall be compatible with the adjacent area; 
(5)  That facilities and uses such as parking, loading and unloading areas, dumpster locations, active play areas and other facilities and uses that may pose compatibility problems with adjacent residential development shall either be located internal to the R-PUD site or appropriately buffered through landscaping and fencing; 
(6)  That proposed parking and vehicular and pedestrian circulation, including points of ingress and egress, are properly sized and located; 
(7)  The R-PUD site features including, but not limited to, walkways, exterior lighting, play areas, common areas, building entry points, garage and storage areas, landscaping and signs have been appropriately designed and arranged to compliment the principle R-PUD buildings and uses; 
(8)  The R-PUD is consistent with the city's long range comprehensive plan. 
Approval of the sketch plan warrants to the applicant certification that the proposed R-PUD is appropriate for the planned location and consistent with basic R-PUD site development and design standards as required for sketch site plan approval. 
(f)  Request for changes in plan. If it becomes apparent that certain elements of the sketch plan, as it has been approved by the planning commission become unfeasible and in need of modification, the applicant shall then resubmit his entire sketch plan, as amended, to the planning commission pursuant to the procedures in this section. 
(g)  Application for detailed site plan approval. After receiving approval of a sketch plan from the planning commission, the applicant shall, within six months, prepare his detailed site plan and submit it to the planning commission. The final site plan shall be considered a construction design document and, in addition to the information provided on the sketch plan, contain sufficient design information to determine compliance with applicable city codes and construction requirements including, but not limited to, the following systems: 
(1)  Roads/streets and site access, including location and geometrics; 
(2)  Public water; 
(3)  Public sewers (sanitary and storm); 
(4)  Surface water drainage and snow storage; 
(5)  Emergency access routes; 
(6)  Fire hydrant locations; 
(7)  Exterior lighting 
(8)  Energy and communication facilities, including type and location; 
(9)  Location and size of public and private easements; 
(10)  Exterior signs, including size and location; 
(11)  Parking, loading and unloading, and vehicular and pedestrian circulation; 
(12)  Detailed landscape plan, including all buffers; 
(13)  Waste disposal; and 
(14)  Other information determined by the planning commission, after consultation with city staff, necessary for determination of compliance with city codes and ordinances. 
Within 60 days of receipt of the information in this subsection, the planning commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the final site plan. 
(h)  In making a determination of approval, the planning commission shall find that: 
(1)  The systems and project elements identified under subsection (e)(5) of this section are properly arranged and adequate to meet the requirements of the R-PUD; 
(2)  The systems and project elements identified under subsection (e)(5) of this section are consistent with the design requirements of the city; and 
(3)  The final site plan complies with all regulations of this chapter. 
(i)  Action on detailed site plan. The planning commission shall render its approval, disapproval, or approval with conditions or modifications and so notify the applicant and the building inspector. 
(j)  Revocation. In any case where construction on the R-PUD has not commenced within one year from the date of final planning commission approval, the special exception use permit shall be null and void. 
(k)  Effect of approval. After a final site plan has been approved and construction of any part thereof commenced, no other type of development will be permitted on the site without further approval thereof by the planning commission after proceedings conducted as in the original application. This limitation shall apply to successive owners. 
(l)  Bond requirement. A performance bond, bank letter of credit or other surety acceptable to the city conditioned upon construction and development in accordance with the approved plans shall be required by the planning commission to be filed with the city treasurer at the time of application of a building permit in such amounts and for such periods as in the discretion of said board appears adequate to ensure compliance with the approved plans. 
(m)  Contract. Prior to the commencement of construction on any project permitted under this chapter, the owner shall enter into a contract with the city, which contract shall provide such safeguards and guarantees as may be required by the city. Said contract shall consist of the approved final site plan, conditions which may have been attached to the R-PUD approval, bond requirements, necessary building and other required permits, and payment of all fees. 
(Prior Code, § 5.38; Ord. No. 95-17, 7-17-1995) 
Secs. 46-317-46-335. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - OS-1 AND OS-2 OFFICE SERVICE DISTRICTS 

Sec. 46-336. - Intent. 
(a)  The OS-1 district is designed to accommodate uses such as offices, hospitals and personal service establishments. 
(b)  The OS-2 district is designed to accommodate the same uses as the OS-1 district but with residential uses either as the principal use or as a mixed-use within the same building. It is intended to serve as transitional area between residential and commercial districts and to provide a transition between major thoroughfares and residential districts. 
(Prior Code, § 5.91; Ord. No. 2002-25, 12-16-2002) 
Sec. 46-337. - Principal uses permitted in the OS-1 office service district. 
    In an OS-1 district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Office buildings for any of the following occupations: executive, administrative and professional, subject to the limitations contained in section 46-340. 
(2)  Medical office, including clinics. 
(3)  Facilities for human care, such as: hospitals, sanitariums, rest and convalescent homes. 
(4)  Personal service establishments such as health salons and massage therapy. 
(5)  Off-street parking lots. 
(6)  Other uses similar to the uses stated in subsections (1) through (5) of this section. 
(7)  Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the permitted uses. 
(Prior Code, § 5.92; Ord. No. 2002-25, 12-16-2002) 
Sec. 46-338. - Principal uses permitted in the OS-2 office service district. 
    In an OS-2 district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  All principal uses permitted in the OS-1 district. 
(2)  Single-family residential in a building existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(3)  Office and/or business and residential mix in one dwelling. 
(4)  Business and professional offices, banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations and similar uses, without drive-in facilities. 
(5)  Personal service establishments including barbershops and beauty shops. 
(6)  U.S. post offices. 
(7)  Day care, nursery schools and similar childcare facilities. 
(8)  Home occupations. 
(Prior Code, § 5.93; Ord. No. 2002-25, 12-16-2002) 
Sec. 46-339. - Special land uses permitted in the OS-1 and OS-2 service. 
    The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the planning commission: 
(1)  An accessory use authorized by this section, such as, but not limited to, a pharmacy or apothecary shop, beauty shops and barbershops where not already a principal use permitted, spas and gyms, stores limited to corrective garments or bandages, or optical service, may be permitted. 
(2)  Mortuary establishments, when adequate assembly area is provided off-street for vehicles to be used in funeral procession; provided further that such assembly areas shall be provided in addition to any required off-street parking area. A caretaker's residence may be provided within the main building of mortuary establishments located in an OS-1 district, whereas it is a principal use permitted in an OS-2 district. 
(3)  Publicly owned buildings, telephone, exchange building and public utility offices, excluding storage yards. 
(4)  Multifamily or two-family residential, either new construction or within an existing building, provided the building is of similar style and construction as buildings on adjacent lots, which lend to the transitional nature of the office service districts and the site meets all other chapter requirements, especially on-site parking. 
(5)  Single-family residential, new construction, provided the building is of similar style and construction as buildings on adjacent lots, which lend to the transitional nature of the office service districts and the site meets all other chapter requirements, especially onsite parking. 
(6)  Cafe or eatery designed to serve the occupants/users of the principal use and nearby establishments, with a maximum occupant load of 25 persons. 
(7)  Office and/or business and residential mix in one dwelling in an OS-1 district. 
(8)  Religious and other similar assembly uses. 
(9)  Convenience stores. 
(10)  Recreational activities. 
(11)  Group shelter, but only in the OS-2 district and subject to the requirements of article VI-Special Land Uses. 
(Prior Code, § 5.94; Ord. No. 2002-25, 12-16-2002; Ord. No. 2017-05, § 6, 4-17-2017) 
Sec. 46-340. - Required conditions. 
(a)  No interior display shall be visible from the exterior of the building. 
(b)  The outdoor storage of goods or materials, whether for sale or not, shall be prohibited. 
(c)  Warehousing or indoor storage of goods or material, beyond that normally incident to the permitted uses in section 46-339, shall be prohibited. 
(Prior Code, § 5.95; Ord. No. 2002-25, 12-16-2002) 
Sec. 46-341. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See division 18 of this article, schedule of regulations limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of a lot by permitted land use and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(Prior Code, § 5.96; Ord. No. 2002-25, 12-16-2002) 
Secs. 46-342-46-370. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - B-1 AUXILIARY BUSINESS DISTRICTS 

Sec. 46-371. - Intent. 
    The B-1 auxiliary business district is designed to provide sites for business, office and residential uses. It is intended to create an area of less intense use than the B-2 central business district, with less density than either the B-2 or OS-1 office service district. It is intended to be transitional in nature between one or more adjacent zones, and be easily accessible to both pedestrian and vehicular traffic. A special emphasis is placed on developing and retaining green areas and enhancing the enjoyment of established parks and recreational areas. 
(Prior Code, § 5.101; Ord. No. 87-17, 10-5-1987) 
Sec. 46-372. - Principal uses permitted. 
    The following principal uses are permitted in the B-1 auxiliary business districts: 
(1)  Offices of a personal service, professional or administrative nature and offices of communication media. 
(2)  Restaurants or other establishments serving food or beverage, except those having the character of a drive-in. 
(3)  Indoor commercial recreation facilities. 
(4)  Establishments providing overnight lodging accommodations. 
(5)  Assembly establishments which provide entertainment or social activities. 
(6)  Public or private educational facilities. 
(7)  Single-family residential, except on the primary floor at grade level. 
(8)  Incidental accessory uses customarily related to the principal use. 
(Prior Code, § 5.102; Ord. No. 87-17, 10-5-1987) 
Sec. 46-373. - Required conditions. 
    The following conditions must be met for permitted uses in the B-1 auxiliary business districts: 
(1)  All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking and loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
(2)  Food service establishments which are walkup or open air in nature shall be exempt from subsection (1) of this section, but must provide a suitable physical and visual delineation between any seating area and parking lots or public rights-of-way, as approved by the zoning administrator. 
(3)  No interior display of goods shall be visible from the exterior of the building. 
(4)  The outdoor storage of goods or materials shall be prohibited. 
(5)  Warehousing or indoor storage of goods or material, beyond that customarily incident to the permitted uses in section 46-372, shall be prohibited. 
(6)  All curb cuts for vehicular access shall be limited to performing the following functions: access to required off-street parking, access to loading or delivery zones. 
(7)  Off-street parking in the required front yard is prohibited. 
(Prior Code, § 5.103; Ord. No. 87-17, 10-5-1987) 
Sec. 46-374. - Special land uses permitted. 
    The following uses of land and structures will be allowed as stipulated in article VI of this chapter, special land use: 
(1)  Marine and boat livery facilities including boat rental sales and service facilities. 
(2)  Off-street parking areas or structures, either public or private, to afford necessary parking for nearby concerns. 
(3)  Multifamily residential. 
(4)  Group shelter. 
(Prior Code, § 5.104; Ord. No. 87-17, 10-5-1987; Ord. No. 2017-05, § 7, 4-17-2017) 
Sec. 46-375. - Schedule of regulations. 
    See division 18 of this article, limiting height, area and density within the district. 
(Prior Code, § 5.105; Ord. No. 87-17, 10-5-1987) 
Secs. 46-376-46-393. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - B-2 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS 

Sec. 46-394. - Intent. 
    The B-2 central business district is designed to service a larger consumer population than the auxiliary business district and is characterized by a high density, integrated cluster of comparison retail establishments and supportive office/service establishments, utilizing common parking areas and generating large volumes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
(Prior Code, § 5.111; Ord. No. 87-17, 10-5-1987) 
Sec. 46-395. - Principal uses permitted. 
    The following principal uses are permitted in the B-2 auxiliary business districts: 
(1)  All principal uses allowed in the B-1, except where further stipulations for said uses are listed in this section. 
(2)  Retail establishments where the principal activity is the sale of merchandise in an enclosed building. 
(3)  Private assembly establishments, which provide entertainment or social activities, however, not to be located on a floor with grade level access. 
(4)  Commercial assembly establishments, which provide entertainment or social activities. 
(5)  Incidental accessory uses customarily related to the principal use. 
(6)  Sidewalk cafés with and without alcohol service are subject to the following regulations: 
a.  Sidewalk cafés shall not unduly obstruct pedestrian movement nor diminish the safety of the general public. Tables, chairs and other facilities shall be compatible with the architectural character of adjacent buildings and shall be located near the building wall. A clear path of not less than 60 inches shall be maintained along the full length of the sidewalk for general pedestrian use. A site plan shall be submitted with a sidewalk café permit application that identifies the proposed location of all sidewalk café furniture and equipment, including any lighting, relative to the public right-of-way. 
b.  The immediate area of the café shall be maintained free of litter and debris. 
c.  Tables, chairs, portable signs and other equipment used in the operation of the café shall be removed daily at the close of business. 
d.  Sidewalk cafés may only be located adjacent to the restaurant or food service business with which they are associated. This requirement may be waived, however, to extend the sidewalk café to an adjacent property if deemed appropriate after city review and agreeable to the adjacent property owner. 
e.  Hours of operation of the sidewalk café shall not be later than 11:00 p.m. 
f.  Days of operation of the sidewalk café shall not occur before April 1 or after November 30. A sidewalk café permit shall expire after 360 days. 
g.  The sidewalk café permit issued in accordance with this article shall be prominently displayed. 
h.  A certificate of general liability insurance that names the city and its officers and agents as additional insureds, and provides for a least 15 days notice of cancellation must be submitted prior to issuance of the permit. The minimum amount of coverage required is $1,000,000.00 per occurrence and $2,000,000.00 in aggregate. 
i.  The city shall have the right to suspend the operation of a sidewalk café because of anticipated or actual problems or conflicts in the use of the public sidewalk. Such problems may arise from, but are not limited to, festivals and similar events, parades, or repairs to the street, sidewalk or utilities within the public right-of-way. To the extent possible, the café owner will be given prior written notice of any time period during which the operation of the sidewalk café may be suspended. 
j.  All permits issued under this section are subject to immediate suspension or revocation by the city manager or his or her designee for failure to comply with any or all provisions of this section. Revocation shall be reserved for third offense repeat violations and violations that present an egregious safety risk to the public. 
k.  Persons who have had their permit revoked may request in writing a hearing on that revocation before the city council. Requests for a hearing or an appeal must be made within five business days of the revocation. 
(7)  Sidewalk cafés with alcohol are subject to the following additional regulations: 
a.  The operator of the sidewalk café shall take whatever steps are necessary to procure the appropriate license from the Michigan Liquor Control Commission if he or she intends to serve alcoholic beverages in the sidewalk café area and shall comply with all other laws and regulations concerning the serving of alcoholic beverages in the State of Michigan. 
b.  The sidewalk café area shall be separated from pedestrian traffic by an approved barrier, which can consist of planters, railings and other similar materials. The barrier shall be removed daily at the close of business. All barriers used for sidewalk cafés serving alcoholic beverages shall also conform to Michigan Liquor Control Commission Regulations. 
c.  A sign reading "No Food or Beverage Allowed Beyond Railing" shall be posted at a conspicuous location within the sidewalk café. 
d.  All alcoholic beverages to be served at sidewalk cafés shall be prepared within the adjacent indoor restaurant or food service business, and alcoholic beverages shall only be served to patrons seated at tables. The drinking of alcoholic beverages by a member of the public while a patron at a sidewalk café within the confines of the sidewalk café area shall not be construed as a violation of any ordinance controlling open containers in a public area. 
e.  Notice to the adjacent property owners or occupants on both sides of the applicant's property shall be required before issuing a permit. Proof of this notice shall be provided to the city by the applicant seven days prior to the issuance of a permit. 
f.  Sidewalk cafés serving alcohol shall be continuously supervised by employees of the establishment. 
g.  To be eligible to apply for a sidewalk café, the adjoining restaurant or food service business from which the sidewalk café extends must provide a full-service menu for the on-site consumption of food. 
(Prior Code, § 5.112; Ord. No. 87-17, 10-5-1987; Ord. No. 2005-13, 8-15-2005; Ord. No. 2009-01, 3-2-2009) 
Sec. 46-396. - Required conditions. 
    The following conditions must be met for permitted uses in the B-2 auxiliary business districts: 
(1)  All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments. All goods provided on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises. 
(2)  All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking, loading and delivery shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. Exceptions of a temporary nature may be authorized by the city council (sidewalk sale days, etc.). 
(3)  Businesses of a drive-up, drive-through or drive-in character are prohibited and curb cuts shall not be constructed for this purpose or for access to delivery or loading zones. 
(Prior Code, § 5.113; Ord. No. 87-17, 10-5-1987) 
Sec. 46-397. - Special land uses permitted. 
    The following uses of land and structure will be permitted as stipulated in article VI of this chapter, special land use: 
(1)  Open air businesses such as outdoor vendors. Open air markets, outdoor cafes, outdoor accommodations for patron use, but not including sidewalk cafes as defined by this chapter. 
(2)  Off-street parking areas or structures, either public or private, to afford necessary parking for nearby concerns. 
(3)  Establishments providing overnight lodging accommodations. 
(4)  Drive-through financial institutions or drive-through components of financial institutions. 
(5)  Dwelling units above or below the primary floor at street address grade level. 
(6)  Group shelter. 
(Prior Code, § 5.114; Ord. No. 87-17, 10-5-1987; Ord. No. 95-26, 10-16-1995; Ord. No. 2005-13, 8-15-2005; Ord. No. 2017-05, § 8, 4-17-2017) 
Sec. 46-398. - Schedule of regulations. 
    See division 18 of this article limiting height, area and density within the district. 
(Prior Code, § 5.115; Ord. No. 87-17, 10-5-1987) 
Secs. 46-399-46-424. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - B-3 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS 

Sec. 46-425. - Intent. 
    The B-3 general business districts are designed to provide sites for more diversified business types which would often be incompatible with the pedestrian movement in the local business district or the community business district. 
(Prior Code, § 5.121; Ord. No. 96-11, 8-5-1996) 
Sec. 46-426. - Uses permitted. 
    In a general business district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Any retail business or service establishment permitted in OS-1, OS-2, TS, B-1 and B-2 districts as principal uses permitted and uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
(2)  Auto washes when completely enclosed in a building. 
(3)  Bus passenger stations. 
(4)  New and used car salesroom, showroom or office. 
(5)  Other uses similar to the uses in this section. 
(6)  Other structures and uses customarily incidental to the permitted uses in this section. 
(Prior Code, § 5.122; Ord. No. 96-11, 8-5-1996) 
Sec. 46-427. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the planning commission: 
(1)  Outdoor sales space for exclusive sales of new or secondhand automobiles, house trailers, or rental of trailers and/or automobiles, all subject to the following: 
a.  The lot or area shall be provided with a permanent, durable, and dustless surface, and shall be graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulated within the area. 
b.  Access to the outdoor sales area shall be at least 60 feet from the intersection of any two streets. 
c.  No major repair or major refinishing shall be done on the lot. 
d.  All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts. 
(2)  Motels, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Access shall be provided so as not to conflict with the adjacent business uses or adversely affect traffic flow on a major thoroughfare. 
b.  Each unit shall contain not less than 250 square feet of floor area. 
(3)  Business in the character of a drive-in or open front store, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  A setback of at least 60 feet from the right-of-way line of any existing or proposed street must be maintained. 
b.  Access points shall be located at least 60 feet from the intersection of any two streets. 
c.  All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts. 
d.  A five-foot high completely obscuring wall shall be provided when abutting or adjacent districts are zoned R, OS-1, OS-2, B-1, B-2, B-3 or TS districts. The height of the wall shall be measured from the surface of the ground. Said wall shall further meet the requirements of article IV of this chapter, supplemental regulations. 
(4)  Veterinary hospitals or clinics, provided all activities are conducted within a totally enclosed main building; and, provided further, that all buildings are set back at least 200 feet from abutting residential districts on the same side of the street. 
(5)  Plant materials nursery for the retail sale of plant materials not grown on the site, and sales of lawn furniture, playground equipment and garden supplies subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The storage and/or display of any materials and/or products shall meet all setback requirements of a structure. 
b.  All loading and parking shall be provided off-street. 
c.  The storage of any soil, fertilizer, or other loose, unpackaged materials shall be contained so as to prevent adverse effects on adjacent uses. 
(6)  Warehousing and wholesale establishments, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Access shall be provided so as not to conflict with the adjacent business uses or adversely affect traffic flow on a major thoroughfare. 
b.  All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts. 
c.  The storage and/or display of any materials and/or products shall meet all setback requirements of a structure. 
d.  All loading and parking shall be provided off-street. 
(7)  Automobile service stations for the retail sale of gasoline, oil, groceries or minor accessories, including the minor repair and maintenance and such other activities whose external effects would not adversely extend beyond the property line, not including vehicle body repair, painting, steam cleaning, undercoating or engine rebuilding. 
a.  The curb cuts to a service station shall not be permitted at such locations that will tend to create traffic hazards, shall be located a minimum of 25 feet to a street intersection (measured from curbline), or to a residential district. 
b.  Gas pumps and maneuvering lanes shall be located to allow a minimum vehicular stacking of three vehicles (20 feet times three equals 60 feet overall) for each pump location. 
c.  The minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet, except stations having no facilities for repair or servicing may be permitted on lots a minimum of 10,000 square feet in area. 
d.  Off-street parking, in addition to those requirements for gas pumps in subsection (7)b of this section, must be provided at a rate of two for each service stall, one for each employee, and one for each 150 square feet of retail area. 
e.  Signage must comply with section 46-664. 
f.  There shall be provided, on those sides abutting or adjacent to a residential district, a six-foot obscuring wall or fence, measured from the average surface grade of the abutting properties. 
g.  All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts. 
h.  Engine and body repair when conducted on the site shall be within a completely enclosed building. The storage of automobiles on the site shall be completely obscured from public view. 
i.  Sufficient space shall be provided on site for the maneuvering and parking of delivery vehicles associated with the delivery of fuel and other products. 
j.  Canopies are allowed over the fueling stations subject to the conditions in this subsection. The term "canopy" means structures without walls consisting of a roof supported by a minimum number of columns and/or cantilevered from the main building. 
1.  Height restrictions: 
(i)  The maximum height of canopies is two-thirds of the maximum height allowed in the district. 
(ii)  The minimum height is seven feet, as measured from the ground to the lowest projection of the canopy roof. 
2.  Since canopies do not obstruct the visual streetscape as do walled structures, they will be allowed to project into the required yard not to exceed four-fifths of the required minimum setback; provided, however, said projection shall maintain a minimum setback of at least five feet. 
3.  The maximum depth or thickness of the roof shall not exceed three feet and shall be horizontal and parallel to the ground surface. 
4.  The size/width of the columns shall not exceed that necessary for structural requirements. 
5.  Advertising on the canopy or columns shall not project beyond the canopy or columns in any direction and the total sign area shall not exceed 15 percent of the surface on which installed. 
6.  Canopy lighting shall be internal or placed on the underside such that said lighting is directed in a downward fashion towards the fueling stations. 
7.  Canopy material shall be of rigid construction. Vinyl or cloth fabric shall not be permitted. 
8.  Canopies shall be maintained in good repair. 
(8)  Group shelter, subject to the requirements of Article VI-Special Land Uses. 
(Prior Code, § 5.123; Ord. No. 87-17, 10-2-1987; Ord. No. 92-22, 12-7-1992; Ord. No. 96-11, 8-5-1996; Ord. No. 2017-05, § 9, 4-17-2017) 
Sec. 46-428. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See division 18 of this article, schedule of regulations limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of a lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(Prior Code, § 5.124; Ord. No. 96-11, 8-5-1996) 
Secs. 46-429-46-454. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - TS-1 AND TS-2 TOURIST SERVICE DISTRICTS 

Sec. 46-455. - Intent. 
    The TS-1 and TS-2 tourist service districts are designed to accommodate those activities necessary to service tourist needs including retail activities, tourist accommodations, parks, recreation and public uses of general interest to the tourist. 
(Prior Code, § 5.131; Ord. No. 96-11, 8-5-1996) 
Sec. 46-456. - Principal uses permitted in TS-1 tourist service district. 
    The following principal uses are permitted in the TS-1 tourist service districts: 
(1)  Motels and hotels for temporary lodging only. 
(2)  Tourist-related offices. 
(3)  Public buildings. 
(4)  Religious institutions. 
(5)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the permitted uses in this section. 
(Prior Code, § 5.132; Ord. No. 96-11, 8-5-1996) 
Sec. 46-457. - Special land uses permitted. 
    The following uses of land and/or structures will be permitted as stipulated in article VI of this chapter, special land uses: 
(1)  Private clubs and lodge halls. 
(2)  Assembly halls, concert halls or similar places of assembly when conducted completely within enclosed buildings. 
(3)  Sitdown restaurants that do not have drive-in, drive-up or drive-through facilities. 
(4)  Condominiums subject to parking requirements as set forth in section 46-659, pertaining to residential, multiple-family. 
(5)  Other uses similar to the uses in this section, subject to approval by the planning commission. 
(Prior Code, § 5.133; Ord. No. 96-11, 8-5-1996; Ord. No. 2001-08, 7-2-2001) 
Sec. 46-458. - Principal uses permitted in TS-2 tourist service district. 
    The following principal uses are permitted in the TS-2 tourist service districts: 
(1)  Motels, hotels, tourist cabins and tourist homes for temporary lodging only. 
(2)  Gift and souvenir shops. 
(3)  Restaurants, taverns and bars. 
(4)  Bowling alleys and pool or billiard parlors. 
(5)  Marine and boat livery facilities, including boat rental, sales and service facilities. 
(6)  Recreation and sporting goods shops. 
(7)  Private clubs or lodge halls. 
(8)  Theaters, assembly halls, concert halls or similar places of assembly when conducted completely within enclosed buildings. 
(9)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the permitted uses in this section. 
(10)  Condominiums, subject to parking requirements set forth in section 46-459, pertaining to residential, multiple-family. 
(11)  Laundromats and dry cleaning establishments, subject to parking requirements set forth in section 46-459, pertaining to laundromats, coin-operated and dry cleaners. 
(12)  Generally recognized retail businesses which supply commodities on the premises, such as, but not limited to: groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods or other foods, drugs, dry goods, clothing and notions or hardware. 
(13)  Business establishments which perform services on the premises, such as, but not limited to: banks, loan companies, insurance offices and real estate offices. 
(14)  Personal service establishments including barbershops, beauty shops and health salons. 
(15)  Other uses similar to the principal uses permitted in this section. 
(Prior Code, § 5.134; Ord. No. 92-22, 12-7-1992; Ord. No. 96-11, 8-5-1996) 
Sec. 46-459. - Special land uses permitted. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in TS-2 tourist service districts, subject to the conditions herein, and as stipulated in article VI of this chapter, special land uses: 
(1)  Businesses which have the character of a drive-in, walkup or takeout restaurant subject to the following: 
a.  A building setback of at least 60 feet from the right-of-way line of any existing street must be maintained. 
b.  Ingress and egress points shall be located at least 60 feet from the intersection of any two streets. 
c.  All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts. 
d.  A four-foot six-inch wall or obscuring fence shall be provided where abutting or adjacent to a residential use or district. The height of the wall shall be measured from the surface of the ground of the abutting residential district or use. 
(2)  Commercially used outdoor recreation space for children's amusement parks, carnivals, miniature golf courses, subject to the following: 
a.  Children's amusement park must be fenced on all sides with a four-foot six-inch wall or fence. 
b.  Adequate parking shall be provided off the road right-of-way and shall be fenced with a four-foot six-inch wall or obscuring fence where adjacent to the recreation facility. 
(3)  Automobile service stations for the retail sale of gasoline, oil, groceries or minor accessories, including the minor repair and maintenance and such other activities whose external effects would not adversely extend beyond the property line, not including vehicle body repair, painting, steam cleaning, undercoating or engine rebuilding. See section 46-427(7). 
(Prior Code, § 5.135; Ord. No. 96-11, 8-5-1996) 
Sec. 46-460. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See division 18 of this article, schedule of regulations limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of a lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(Prior Code, § 5.136; Ord. No. 96-11, 8-5-1996) 
Secs. 46-461-46-488. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 46-489. - Intent. 
(a)  The light industrial districts are designed so as to primarily accommodate wholesale activities, warehouses, and industrial operations whose external, physical effects are restricted to the area of the district and in no manner affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding districts. The I-1 district is so structured as to permit, along with any specified uses, the manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, assembly, and/or treatment of finished or semi-finished products from previously prepared material. It is further intended that the processing of raw material for shipment in bulk form, to be used in an industrial operation at another location, not be permitted. 
(b)  The general goals of this use district include, among others, the following specific purposes: 
(1)  To provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations, to meet the needs of the city's expected future economy for all types of manufacturing and related uses. 
(2)  To protect abutting residential districts by separating them from manufacturing activities, and by prohibiting the use of such industrial areas for new residential development. 
(3)  To promote manufacturing development which is free from danger of fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation, and other hazards, and from offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odor and other objectionable influences. 
(4)  To promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with a well considered plan. To protect the character and established pattern of adjacent development, and in each area to conserve the value of land and buildings and other structures, and to protect the city's tax revenue. 
(Prior Code, § 5.141) 
Sec. 46-490. - Principal uses permitted. 
(a)  In a light industrial district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Any use charged with the principal function of basic research, design, and pilot or experimental product development when conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
(2)  Any of the uses stated in this subsection (a)(2), when the manufacturing, compounding, or processing is conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building. That portion of the land used for open storage facilities for materials or equipment used in the manufacturing, compounding, or processing shall be totally obscured by a wall on those sides abutting R-1 through R-3, R-T, RM, RM-1, RM-2, MH, RMH, OS-1, OS-2, B-1, B-2, and B-3 districts, and on any front yard abutting a public thoroughfare except as otherwise provided in section 46-668, pertaining to obscuring walls. 
(b)  In I-1 districts, the extent of such a wall may be determined by the planning commission on the basis of usage. Such a wall shall not be less than four feet and six-inches in height and may, depending upon land usage, be required to be eight feet in height, and shall be subject further to the requirements of article IV of this chapter, pertaining to supplemental regulations. A chainlink fence, with intense evergreen shrub plantings, shall be considered an obscuring wall. The height shall be determined in the same manner as the wall height set forth in this subsection. 
(1)  Warehousing and wholesale establishments, and trucking facilities. 
(2)  The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, or treatment of such products as, but not limited to: bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, toiletries, food products, hardware and cutlery, tool, die, gauge and machine shops. 
(3)  The manufacture, compounding, assembling, or treatment of articles or merchandise from previously prepared materials: bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, elastomers, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, rubber, precious or semiprecious metals or stones, sheet metal, shell textiles, tobacco, wax, wire, wood and yarns. 
(4)  The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by electricity or gas. 
(5)  Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, and metal or rubber stamps, or other molded rubber products. 
(6)  Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devises, radios and phonographs. 
(7)  Laboratories: experimental, film or testing. 
(8)  Manufacturing and repair of electric or neon signs, light sheetmetal products, including heating and ventilating equipment, cornices, eaves and the like. 
(9)  Central dry cleaning plants or laundries; provided that such plants shall not deal directly with a consumer, at retail. 
(10)  All public utilities, including, buildings, necessary structures, storage yards and other related uses. 
(c)  Warehouse, storage and transfer and electric and gas service buildings and yards. Public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electrical transformer stations and substations, and gas regulator stations; water supply and sewage disposal plants; water and gas tank holders; railroad transfer and storage tracks; railroad rights-of-way and freight terminals. 
(d)  Storage facilities for building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber, storage of contractor's equipment and supplies, provided such is enclosed within a building or within an obscuring wall or fence on those sides abutting all residential or business districts, and on any yard abutting a public thoroughfare. In any I-1 district, the extent of such fence or wall may be determined by the planning commission on the basis of usage. Such fence or wall shall not be less than five feet in height, and may, depending on land usage, be required to be eight feet in height. A chainlink type fence, with heavy evergreen shrubbery inside of said fence, shall be considered to be an obscuring fence. 
(e)  Municipal uses such as water treatment plants, and reservoirs, sewage treatment plants, and all other municipal buildings and uses, including outdoor storage. 
(f)  Greenhouses. 
(g)  Trade or industrial schools. 
(h)  Freestanding nonaccessory signs. 
(i)  Other uses of a similar and no more objectionable character to the uses permitted in this section. 
(j)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the permitted uses in this section. 
(Prior Code, § 5.142) 
Sec. 46-491. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the planning commission: 
(1)  Auto engine and body repair, and undercoating shops when completely enclosed. 
(2)  Lumber and planing mills when completely enclosed and when located in the interior of the district so that no property line shall form the exterior boundary of the I-1 district. 
(3)  Metal plating, buffing and polishing, subject to appropriate measures to control the type of process to prevent noxious results and/or nuisances. 
(4)  Retail uses which have an industrial character in terms of either their outdoor storage requirements or activities, such as, but not limited to: lumberyard, building materials outlet, upholsterer, cabinet maker, outdoor boat, house trailer, automobile garage or agricultural implement sales; or serve convenience needs of the industrial district, such as, but not limited to: eating and drinking establishment, bank, savings and loan association, credit union, automobile service station, motel or bowling alley, trade or industrial school or industrial clinic. 
(5)  Storage of flammable liquids. 
(6)  Other uses of a similar character to the uses in this section. 
(7)  Crematoriums and pet crematoriums subject to the conditions set forth in section 46-747(6) of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 5.143; Ord. No. 90-19, 10-1-1990; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 2, 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 46-492. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See division 18 of this article, schedule of regulations limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of a lot by permitted land use and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(Prior Code, § 5.144) 
Secs. 46-493-46-522. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 46-523. - Intent. 
    General industrial districts are designed primarily for manufacturing, assembling, and fabrication activities including large scale or specialized industrial operations, whose external physical effects will be felt to some degree by surrounding districts. The I-2 district is so structured as to permit the manufacturing, processing, and compounding of semifinished or finished products from raw materials as well as from previously prepared material. 
(Prior Code, § 5.151) 
Sec. 46-524. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a general industrial district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Any principal uses first permitted in an I-1 district. 
(2)  Heating and electric power generating plants, and all necessary uses. 
(3)  Any of the following; provided that they are located not less than 800 feet distant from any residential district and not less than 300 feet distant from any other district: 
a.  Junkyards; provided such are entirely enclosed within a building or within an eight-foot obscuring wall and; provided, further that, one property line abuts a railroad right-of-way. 
b.  Incineration of garbage or refuse when conducted within an approved and enclosed incinerator plant. 
c.  Blast furnace, steel furnace, blooming or rolling mill. 
d.  Manufacture of corrosive acid or alkali, cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris. 
e.  Petroleum or other inflammable liquids, production, refining or storage. 
f.  Smelting of copper, iron or zinc ore. 
(4)  Any other use which shall be determined by the board of appeals, after recommendation from the planning commission, to be of the same general character as the permitted uses in this section. The board of appeals may impose any required setback and/or performance standards so as to insure public health, safety and general welfare. 
(5)  Accessory buildings, buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 
(Prior Code, § 5.152) 
Sec. 46-525. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See division 18 of this article, schedule of regulations limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of a lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(Prior Code, § 5.153) 
Sec. 46-526. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the planning commission: 
(1)  Crematoriums and pet crematoriums subject to the conditions set forth in section 46-747(6) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-13, § 3, 12-19-2016) 
Secs. 46-527-46-543. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 15. - P-1 VEHICULAR PARKING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 46-544. - Intent. 
    The P-1 vehicular parking districts are intended to permit the establishment of areas to be used solely for the off-street parking of private passenger vehicles as a use incidental to a principal use. This district will generally be provided by petition or request to serve a use district which has developed without adequate off-street parking facilities. 
(Prior Code, § 5.161) 
Sec. 46-545. - Principal uses permitted. 
    Premises in such districts shall be used only for an off-street vehicular parking area and shall be developed and maintained subject to such regulations as are hereinafter provided. 
(Prior Code, § 5.162) 
Sec. 46-546. - Required conditions. 
(a)  The parking area shall be accessory to, and for use in connection with one or more businesses, or industrial establishments, located in adjoining business or industrial districts, or in connection with one or more existing professional or institutional office buildings or institutions. 
(b)  Such parking lots shall be contiguous to any RM-1 or nonresidential district. Parking areas may be approved when adjacent to said district, or on the end of a block where such areas front on a street, which is perpendicular to that street servicing the district. There may be a private driveway or public street or public alley between such P-1 district and the above listed districts. 
(c)  Parking area shall be used solely for parking of private passenger vehicles, for periods of less than one day, or, 24-hour parking of private commercial and private passenger vehicles when separated by a suitable visual barrier from abutting pedestrian and vehicular throughfares. Parking areas shall not be used as an off-street loading area. A suitable visual barrier shall be determined by the building inspector. 
(d)  No commercial repair work or service of any kind, or sale or display thereof, shall be conducted in such parking area. 
(e)  No signs of any kind, other than signs designating entrances, exits and conditions of use, shall be maintained on such parking area. 
(f)  No building other than those for shelter or attendants shall be erected upon the premises and they shall not exceed 15 feet in height. 
(g)  Applications for P-1 district rezoning shall be made by submitting a dimensional layout of the area requested, showing the intended parking plans in accordance with section 46-660. 
(Prior Code, § 5.163; Ord. No. 85-17, 12-2-1985) 
Sec. 46-547. - Minimum distances and setbacks. 
(a)  Side and rear yards. Where the P-1 district is contiguous to the side and/or rear lot lines of premises within a residentially zoned district, the required wall shall be located along said lot line. 
(b)  Front yards. Where the P-1 district is contiguous to a residentially zoned district which has a common frontage on the same block with residential structures, or wherein no residential structures have been yet erected, there shall be a setback equal to the required residential setback for said residential district, or a minimum of 25 feet, or whichever is the greater. The required wall shall be located on this minimum setback line unless, under unusual circumstances, the planning commission finds that no good purpose would be served. The land between said setback and street right-of-way line shall be kept free from refuse and debris and shall be planted with shrubs, trees, or lawn and shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance. 
(Prior Code, § 5.164) 
Sec. 46-548. - Layout and standards. 
    P-1 vehicular parking districts shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of division 18 of this article, general provisions. 
(Prior Code, § 5.165) 
Secs. 46-549-46-574. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 16. - POS PARKS AND OPEN SPACES DISTRICTS 

Sec. 46-575. - Intent. 
    Parks and open space districts are designed to provide the community with developed and undeveloped lands for recreational uses, to provide for and to protect open spaces, and to maintain a desirable environment for the general health, welfare, and enjoyment of the community. These areas are unique in their function and purpose, and the character of individual areas will be determined by the nature of the activities provided on the site. They are furthermore, intended to be widely distributed throughout the community so as to be easily accessible. 
(Prior Code, § 5.166; Ord. No. 87-21, 10-19-1987) 
Sec. 46-576. - Principal uses subject to planning commission approval. 
    In a park and open space district, no structure or land shall be used and no structure shall be erected, altered, or in any way operated except for one or more of the following uses: 
(1)  Recreational uses which includes, but not limited to, the following: playgrounds, fishing sites, boating facilities, ball fields, parks, parkways, bike trails, docks and piers. 
(2)  Wetlands, which provide refuge for and/or preserve wildlife. 
(3)  Cemeteries. 
(4)  Uses similar or accessory to the principal uses permitted in this section. 
(5)  Temporary uses subject to the approval of the planning commission after finding that the proposed temporary uses would be related or connected with the uses permitted in this section. 
(Prior Code, § 5.167) 
Sec. 46-577. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See division 18 of this article, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of a lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(Prior Code, § 5.168) 
Secs. 46-578-46-602. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 17. - COMMERCIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (C-PUD) 

Sec. 46-603. - General requirements. 
(a)  Special exception use in district. The commercial planned unit development shall be recognized as a special exception use in the commercial zoning districts (OS-1, OS-2, B-1, B-2, B-3, TS-1 and TS-2). The following requirements shall apply in addition to all other applicable requirements of this chapter for the districts in which such uses are located. In the event of duplication or similarity between the standards in this section and those found elsewhere in this chapter, the most stringent of the various requirements shall control. Review and approval of commercial planned unit developments shall fall under the jurisdiction of the city planning commission. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to permit greater flexibility in the placement and design of commercial facilities in commercial districts than is generally possible under conventional zoning regulations upon demonstration that deviation from said standards is necessary to achieve utilization of a site and/or will be of benefit to the surrounding area and the city as a whole. 
(c)  Requirements. The general requirements for commercial planned unit development are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum area. 
a.  B-2, central business district, the minimum area is two acres. 
b.  Other commercial districts, the minimum area is five acres. 
(2)  Contiguous. All land must be contiguous. 
a.  Land separated by a street right-of-way shall not be considered contiguous; provided however, said street right-of-way shall not mean an alley under public ownership. 
b.  Land separated by a public alley right-of-way shall be considered contiguous. 
(3)  Ownership (filing of application). The application shall be filed by all owners of the parcel under consideration for a C-PUD. 
(4)  Location and permitted uses. C-PUDs shall only be placed in underlying commercial districts. A C-PUD may contain multiple uses and buildings. The range of uses permitted within a C-PUD shall be limited to those of the underlying zone district. 
(5)  Infrastructure. Public water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage facilities, and streets shall be provided as part of the site development. All public utility transmission lines shall be placed underground. All proposed infrastructure, including utility and other easements shall be indicated on the C-PUD site development plan. 
a.  Subject to city approval. All utilities and streets, including design and construction, shall be subject to approval by the city departments having regulatory control over said systems. 
b.  Costs borne by applicant. Off-site public infrastructure improvements necessary to serve the C-PUD shall either be in place or shall be constructed with costs borne by the applicant or by agreement acceptable to the city council. 
(6)  Approval. Approval by the city planning commission is required for a C-PUD. 
(7)  Rezoning and C-PUD. An application for a C-PUD shall not be accepted by the city unless the underlying zone district has a commercial classification and provides for the range of uses proposed for the C-PUD. A C-PUD shall not be submitted concurrent with a request for rezoning. 
(8)  Basis for reasonable conditions. The nature of the C-PUD is such that reasonable conditions may be required pursuant to plan approval. Reasonable conditions may be required in order to: 
a.  Ensure that public services and facilities affected by the C-PUD will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads; 
b.  Protect the natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy; 
c.  Ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses; 
d.  Promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner; 
e.  Ensure compliance with the standards of this chapter; and 
f.  Promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Prior Code, § 5.40; Ord. No. 96-18, 1-6-1997) 
Sec. 46-604. - Design requirements. 
(a)  Setbacks and yards. Subject to the following standards, the minimum setback, yard, and open space requirements may be reduced or increased at the discretion of the planning commission to avoid unnecessary disruption of adjacent land uses or environmental features and to ensure a high degree of compatibility between the C-PUD and adjacent development: 
(1)  A setback reduction not to exceed 25 percent of the underlying zone district requirement may be permitted along a C-PUD lot line, which abuts a commercial district, provided pedestrian linkages are provided. 
(2)  A setback increase of no less than two times the required underlying zone district standard shall be required along a C-PUD lot line, which abuts a residential district. 
The planning commission may require a greater setback or additional buffering such as landscaping, fencing, or walls if determined necessary to protect the integrity of the adjacent residential district. 
(b)  Minimum lot width (street frontage). The minimum lot width is 200 feet; provided however, a rear lot having adequate street frontage for purposes of vehicular and pedestrian access, sign placement, and buffering may be considered. 
(c)  Screening. Screening shall be required along any lot line, which abuts a residential district and may be required along other lot lines as determined necessary by the planning commission. Said screening shall be designed and constructed in a manner compatible with adjacent districts. Screening shall consist of decorative fencing, landscape, or combinations of each. See also subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  Fencing. The planning commission may require the erection of an architectural screen or fence between the C-PUD and adjoining property if it is determined a need for such screen or fence is necessary to protect or preserve the value or security of adjoining properties. In the event an architectural screen or fence is required, the applicant shall also incorporate landscape treatment along said screen or fence in order to mitigate the visual impacts of the screen or fence from off-site. Where screening or fencing is required by the planning commission under this section, the standards of this item shall prevail over subsection (c) of this section, screening. 
(e)  Sign standards. The C-PUD shall be regulated by the sign standards of section 46-664. 
(f)  Parking and circulation. The C-PUD shall be regulated by the parking and loading standards of section 46-658; provided however, as part of the site plan, the applicant must show the location and right-of-way dimensions of all public streets and alleys within 300 feet of the proposed project. The plan shall also show the location, width, and use (i.e., one-way, two-way, truck only, etc.) of all adjoining public or private driveways. 
(1)  In the event of multiple C-PUD uses, the parking and circulation plan shall incorporate measures for shared circulation and parking. 
(2)  The planning commission, after recommendation from the city traffic engineer, may require: 
a.  Acceleration or deceleration lanes or other measures deemed necessary for efficient traffic flow and for public safety and welfare; 
b.  The elimination or movement of proposed curb cuts; 
c.  That patron, employee and/or delivery traffic entry points be modified and/or relocated; 
d.  Off-site transportation improvements deemed necessary as a result of the C-PUD; 
e.  The reduction or increase of the number of parking spaces required by section 46-658, as determined necessary to support the range of uses proposed; 
f.  Modifications in the location and/or arrangement of loading areas; 
g.  A traffic and circulation study to be performed by a qualified traffic engineer; and 
h.  Other traffic and circulation improvements necessary to secure the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(g)  Pedestrian circulation. The C-PUD shall incorporate a pedestrian circulation system affording the public a safe means of movement throughout the site. A C-PUD located adjacent to other commercial uses or developments shall incorporate a pedestrian circulation system which coordinates the safe flow of pedestrian movement to and from those uses and developments. 
(h)  Snow storage. The site shall include provision for the placement of snow which must be stockpiled during winter months. Such placement shall not impact the efficient and safe movement of pedestrian and vehicular circulation. A minimum area equal in size to ten percent of the required parking lot area, including access lanes, must be provided for stockpiling of snow. 
(i)  Landscape plan. The applicant shall submit a detailed landscape plan. The plan shall include the type, size, and location of all yard areas and vegetation, areas to be irrigated by underground sprinkling, sidewalks, patio and pedestrian seating areas, and other such features. 
(j)  Maintenance of views. Buildings shall be designed and located in a manner which from off-site, at pedestrian level, limits the horizontal blockage of views through the site. Of particular importance is the maintenance of views to Lake Cadillac from downtown commercial sectors. 
(k)  Modification to design standards. The planning commission may authorize variations from the design requirements of this section which will not be incompatible with the purposes of the C-PUD and will not be obstructive of view, light, air, or a hazard or nuisance or annoyance to adjacent developments, motorists, or the general public. In making such authorization, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the planning commission that modification of a design standard is necessary for development of the C-PUD, is consistent with the purposes of the C-PUD, and will not be obstructive or a hazard or a nuisance as detailed in this section. 
(Prior Code, § 5.40.1; Ord. No. 96-18, 1-6-1997) 
Sec. 46-605. - Application procedure and approval process. 
    The application and approval process for a commercial planned unit development shall follow the application procedure and approval process for residential planned unit developments as provided for under section 46-316. In addition to section 46-316, as a condition of approval, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the planning commission: 
(1)  The property uses and infrastructure included in the proposed C-PUD are consistent with the city master plan. 
(2)  Property values of parcels contiguous to the C-PUD will not be negatively impacted as a result of the C-PUD. 
(3)  That existing public infrastructure is adequate to support the proposed development, or that the applicant will provide the infrastructure improvements necessary to ensure adequacy. 
(4)  If requested by the planning commission, the need for the uses proposed by the C-PUD must be demonstrated. 
(Prior Code, § 5.40.2; Ord. No. 96-18, 1-6-1997) 
Secs. 46-606-46-628. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 18. - SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS 

Sec. 46-629. - Height, bulk, density and area limitations by zoning district. 
Zoning 
District Minimum Zoning Lot Size* Maximum Height of Structures 
(in feet) Minimum Yard Setback** 
(in feet) Maximum Percent of Lot Area 
Covered 
(By All 
Bldgs.) Applicable Footnotes (set in section 46-630) Area square feet per unit Width 
(in feet) Front Side Rear R-1 
One-family 
residential 12,500 100 40 35 least yard 10; total of both, 25 35 30 a, b, h R-2 
One-family 
residential 9,000 75 40 25 least yard 8; total of both, 18 30 35 a, b, h R-3 
One-family 
residential 6,000 50 40 18 least yard 7; total of both, 15 20 40 a, b, h R-4 
One-family 
residential 6,000 50 40 15 least yard 6; total of both, 13 20 40 a, b, h RM-1 
Multiple-family 
residential 3,600 50 40 15 8 30 40 c, h RM-2 
Multiple-family 
residential 3,000 200 40 35 25 30 35 c, h MH-Mobile 
home park 
residential -- -- 25 50 12 25 30 RMH- 
One-family 
residential 
mobile home 6,000 60 15 20 8 20 40 b, h OS-1 
Office 
service 5,000 50 40 30 15 25 25 d OS-2 
Office 
service 5,000 50 40 30 15 25 25 d B-1 
Local 
business 10,000 100 40 10 15 25 25 d, i B-2 
Central 
business -- -- 90 0 0 0 -- j, k, l B-3 
General 
business 10,000 100 40 20 10 0 25 d, i TS-Tourist 
service 10,000 100 40 50 10 45 25 d I-1 
Light 
industrial 60,000 200 See airport overlay 5 25 25 -- d, e, f, g, n I-2 
Heavy 
industrial 120,000 400 See airport overlay 100 50 75 -- d, e, f, g P-1 
Vehicular 
parking 5,000 45 15 25 -- -- 5 POS Park, 
open spaces -- -- -- -- -- -- -- m  
*Not applicable if lot of record prior to September 24, 1971. See section 46-710. 
**For lots having water frontage, see section 46-715. 
(Prior Code, § 5.170; Ord. No. 95-04, 3-6-1995; Ord. No. 96-19, 1-20-1997; Ord. No. 99-02, 4-5-1999; Ord. No. 2001-13, 11-5-2001) 
Sec. 46-630. - Notes to schedule of regulations. 
(a)  See section 46-631, averaged lot size and section 46-632, subdivision open space plan, regarding flexibility allowances. 
(b)  For all uses permitted other than single-family residential, the setback shall equal the height of the main building or the setback required in section 46-164 or 46-629, whichever is greater. 
(c)  In all RM-1 and RM-2 multiple-family residential districts, the minimum distance between any two buildings shall be regulated according to the length and height of such buildings, and in no instance shall this distance be less than 30 feet. Parking may be permitted within a required side or rear yard but shall not cover more than 30 percent of the area of any required yard, or any minimum distance between buildings. The formula regulating the required minimum distance between two buildings in all RM-1 districts is as follows: 
S = L A + L B + 2(H A + H B ) / over 6, where (See illustration after this subsection.) S = Required minimum horizontal distance between any wall of building B or the vertical prolongation of either. L A = Total length of building A. The total length of building A is the length of that portion or portions of a wall or walls of building A from which, when viewed directly from above, lines drawn perpendicular to building A will intersect any wall of building B. L B = Total length of building B. The total length of building B is the length of that portion or portions of a wall or walls of building B from which, when viewed directly from above will intersect any wall of building A. H A = Height of building A. The height of building A at any given level is the height above the natural grade level of any portion or portions of a wall or walls along the length of building A. H B = Height of building B. The height of building B at any given level is the height above the natural grade level of any portion or portions of a wall or walls along the length of building B. "Natural grade level" shall be the mean level of the ground immediately adjoining the portion or portions of the wall or walls along the total length of the building.  

(d)  Off-street parking shall be permitted in a required side yard setback, provided it is screened from any abutting street by a visual barrier as approved by the zoning administrator. 
(e)  Off-street parking for visitors, over and above the number of spaces required under section 46-659, may be permitted within the required front yard setback. 
(f)  No building shall be located closer than 50 feet to the outer perimeter (property line) of such district when said property line abuts any residential district. 
(g)  All outside storage shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from a public street or shall be completely screened with an obscuring wall or fence, not less than four-feet six-inches high, or with a chainlink-type fence and a greenbelt planting so as to obscure all view from any adjacent residential, office or business district or from a public street. 
(h)  On corner lots, there shall be provided a setback of not less than 20 feet from the side street lot line. 
(i)  Buildings may be situated on a lot so as to abut an adjoining building at the side and/or rear lot line for the purpose of conforming with front yard setbacks and/or providing additional parking in the side yard, subject to all other provisions herein required. 
(j)  Minimum facade height of new construction fronting on Mitchell, Harris or Cass Street shall be 20 feet. 
(k)  Maximum front and side yard setbacks shall equal minimum required front and side yard setbacks. 
(l)  Buildings in the area west of Elk Avenue, between Pine and Chapin Streets, shall have a maximum height of 20 feet. 
(m)  The height and bulk, the minimum size of lots by permitted land use and the minimum yard setback regulations shall be to the discretion of the planning commission. Adjacent zoning districts should be used as guidelines. 
(n)  A minimum five feet wide greenbelt planting must be maintained between any street right-of-way and buildings or parking lots. 
(Prior Code, § 5.171; Ord. No. 80-004, 12-1-1980; Ord. No. 87-21, 10-19-1987; Ord. No. 95-04, 3-6-1995) 
Sec. 46-631. - Averaged lot size. 
    The intent of this section is to permit the subdivider or developer to vary his lot sizes and lot widths so as to average the minimum size of lot per unit as required in section 46-629, schedule of regulations for each one-family residential district. If this option is selected, the following conditions shall be met: 
(1)  In meeting the average minimum lot size, the subdivision or site condominium shall be so designed as not to create lots having an area or width greater than ten percent below that area or width required in the schedule of regulations and shall not create an attendant increase in the number of lots. 
(2)  All computations showing lot area and the average resulting through this technique shall be indicated on the print of the preliminary plat. 
(Prior Code, § 5.172; Ord. No. 95-16, 7-17-1995) 
Sec. 46-632. - Subdivision open space plan. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the subdivision and site condominium open space plan is to promote the following objectives: 
(1)  Provide a more desirable living environment by preserving the natural character of open fields, stands of trees, brooks, hills and similar natural assets. 
(2)  Encourage developers to use a more creative approach in the development of residential areas. 
(3)  Encourage a more efficient, aesthetic and desirable use of open area while recognizing a reduction in development costs and by allowing the developer to bypass natural obstacles on the site. 
(4)  Encourage the provision of open space within reasonable distance to all lot development of the subdivision or site condominium and to further encourage the development of recreational facilities. 
(b)  Conditions. Modifications to the standards as outlined in section 46-629, schedule of regulations may be made in the one-family residential districts when the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The lot area in all one-family residential districts, which are served by a public sanitary sewer system, may be reduced up to 20 percent. In the R-1 district, this reduction may be accomplished in part by reducing lot widths up to ten feet. In the R-2, R-3 and R-4 districts, this reduction may be accomplished in part by reducing lot widths up to five feet. These lot area reductions shall be permitted; provided that the dwelling unit density shall be no greater than if the land area to be subdivided or developed as a site condominium were developed in the minimum square foot lot areas as required for each one-family district under section 46-629, schedule of regulations. 
(2)  Under the provisions of subsection (b)(1) of this section, for each square foot of land gained within a residential subdivision or site condominium through the reduction of lot size below the minimum requirements as outlined in the schedule of regulations at least equal amounts of land shall be dedicated to the common use of the lot owners of the subdivision or site condominium in a manner approved by the city. 
(3)  The land area necessary to meet the minimum requirements of this section shall not include bodies of water, swamp or land with excessive grades making it unsuitable for recreation. All land dedicated shall be so graded and developed as to have natural drainage. The entire area may, however, be located in a floodplain. 
(c)  Time limit. The subdivision or site condominium shall be started within 12 months after having received approval, and must be completed in a reasonable time. Failure to start within this period shall void all previous approval. 
(Prior Code, § 5.173; Ord. No. 95-16, 7-17-1995) 
Secs. 46-633-46-640. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 19. - MIXED USE PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (M-PUD)[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-17, § 1, adopted January 4, 2016, set out provisions intended for use as new division 19, §§ 46-653-26-657. In order to avoid duplication of section numbers, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as 46-641-46-645. 

Sec. 46-641. - Intent. 
    The M-PUD District is intended to permit flexibility in the regulation of land development, encourage innovation in land use and variety in design, layout, and type of structures constructed, achieve economy and efficiency in the use of land, natural resources, energy, and the provision of public services and utilities, encourage useful open space, and provide better housing, employment, and shopping opportunities particularly suited to the needs of the residents of the city and the general public. More specifically, this zoning district is intended to provide greater flexibility in the placement and design of commercial, office and residential facilities in a single zoning district than is generally possible under conventional zoning regulations. It is further the intent of these regulations to require a unified, integrated planning and construction project using specialized modern zoning techniques, requirements and review procedures to achieve a cohesive development, promote compatibility and walkability between such uses and promote and encourage innovation in land use planning and design to achieve a higher quality of development than might otherwise be possible. While traditional bulk requirements may be set aside in this District in order to achieve particular design objectives, the city intends that any such district use should share responsibility for maintenance of landscaping, sidewalks, and/or other facilities used or held in common, adhere to all applicable health and building codes and clearly demonstrate a commitment to maintaining a balance between residential and non-residential use, between public open space provided and private land set aside, and in accordance with the ability of the remainder of the city to absorb and effectively deal with the attendant growth. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 1, 1-4-2016) 
Sec. 46-642. - Permissible and prohibited uses in the M-PUD. 
    Subject to review and approval as provided in this division, the range of uses permissible within an M-PUD shall be limited to any residential, office or commercial uses in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, RM-1, RM-2, OS-1, OS-2, B-1, B-2, B-3, TS-1 and TS-2. No other uses shall be permissible in the M-PUD district, including but not limited to adult businesses and any industrial uses otherwise permitted in the I-1 or I-2 zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 1, 1-4-2016) 
Sec. 46-643. - Minimum design requirements. 
(a)  Setbacks and yards. Except as provided in this section, the minimum setback, yard, and open space requirements required shall be as follows: 
(1)  A landscaped buffer of at least 40 feet wide measured from the road right-of-way shall be provided on the subject property adjacent to any state trunk highway or United States highway. 
(2)  A landscaped buffer of at least ten feet wide measured from the road right-of-way shall be provided on the subject property adjacent to any internal public street. 
(3)  A landscaped buffer of at least 50 feet wide shall be provided on the subject property between commercial uses and residential uses located on the subject property and a landscaped buffer of at least 50 feet wide shall be provided between residential uses on the subject property adjacent to any other property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(4)  A landscaped buffer of at least 75 feet shall be provided on the subject property between commercial uses on the subject property adjacent to any other property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(5)  A landscaped buffer of at least 25 feet shall be provided on the subject property between commercial uses on the subject property adjacent to any other property zoned or used for commercial or industrial purposes. 
(6)  No building shall be constructed on the subject property closer than 75 feet from the adjacent state trunk highway right-of-way. 
(7)  No building shall be constructed on the subject property closer than 25 feet from the adjacent internal public street right-of-way. 
(8)  No residential building or development shall be constructed on the subject property closer than 25 feet from any private roadway. 
(9)  No residential building or development shall be constructed on the subject property closer than 25 feet from any parking area. 
(10)  Except for property adjacent to a state trunk highway as provided by subsection (5), above, no building shall be constructed on the subject property closer than 100 feet to any property line of the subject property. 
(11)  No commercial buildings on the subject property shall be located closer than 100 feet from any residential buildings on the subject property. 
(12)  Separation between residential buildings on the subject property shall comply with all provisions of this Code. 
(13)  Separation between commercial buildings on the subject property shall comply with all provisions of this Code. 
(14)  The subject property shall provide for a minimum open space of 35 percent, including the landscaped buffers. 
For purposes of this subsection, a "landscaped buffer" shall mean the area in which either existing vegetation is preserved on the subject property or landscaping or decorative fencing is planned and maintained for screening and as part of the overall landscape plan for the subject property. No parking or pavement is permitted in the landscaped buffer, except for pavement for ingress and egress, sidewalks or other pedestrian walkways. 
(b)  Setback variation. Notwithstanding, the required setbacks, yard, and open space may be reduced or increased at the discretion of the planning commission or city council to avoid unnecessary disruption of adjacent land uses or environmental features and to ensure a high degree of compatibility between the M-PUD and adjacent development: 
(1)  A setback reduction not to exceed 50 percent of the otherwise required distance may be permitted from an M-PUD lot line that abuts a commercial district, provided pedestrian linkages are provided. 
(2)  A setback increase or additional buffering such as landscaping, fencing, or walls may be required along an M-PUD lot line that abuts a residential district if the planning commission or city council determines it is necessary to protect the integrity of the adjacent residential district. In no event shall the setback required be more than two times the distance that would otherwise be required by the zoning district in which the land use is permitted. 
(c)  Screening. Screening shall be required along any lot line that abuts a residential district and may be required along other lot lines as determined necessary by the planning commission or city council. Screening shall be designed and constructed in a manner compatible with adjacent districts and may consist of decorative fencing, landscape, or a combination of each. 
(d)  Fencing. The planning commission or city council may require the erection of an architectural screen or fence between the M-PUD and adjoining property if it is determined a need for such screen or fence is necessary to protect or preserve the value or security of adjoining properties. In the event an architectural screen or fence is required, the applicant shall also incorporate landscape treatment along said screen or fence in order to mitigate the visual impacts of the screen or fence from off-site. 
(e)  Sign standards. The M-PUD shall generally be regulated by the sign standards of section 46-664. Notwithstanding, as part of the review and approval of the site plan, the planning commission and city council may vary any sign standards under section 46-664, including without limitation, the size, location, and number and types of permitted signs. 
(f)  Parking and circulation. The M-PUD shall be regulated by the parking and loading standards of section 46-658; provided, however, as part of the sketch and final site plan, the applicant must show the location and right-of-way dimensions of all public highways, streets and alleys within 300 feet of the proposed project together with the location, width, and use (i.e., one-way, two-way, truck only, etc.) of all adjoining public or private driveways and internal roadways. The parking and circulation plan shall incorporate measures for shared circulation and parking. The planning commission or the city council may also require: 
(1)  Acceleration or deceleration lanes or other measures deemed necessary for efficient traffic flow and for public safety and welfare; 
(2)  The elimination or movement of proposed curb cuts; 
(3)  That patron, resident, employee and/or delivery traffic entry points be modified and/or relocated; 
(4)  Off-site transportation improvements deemed necessary as a result of the M-PUD; 
(5)  The reduction or increase of the number of parking spaces required by section 46-658, as determined necessary to support the range of uses proposed; 
(6)  Modifications in the location and/or arrangement of loading areas; 
(7)  A traffic and circulation study to be performed by a qualified traffic engineer; and 
(8)  Other traffic and circulation improvements necessary to secure the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(g)  Pedestrian circulation. The M-PUD shall incorporate a pedestrian circulation system affording the public a safe means of movement throughout the site. An M-PUD located adjacent to other commercial or residential uses or developments shall incorporate a pedestrian circulation system which coordinates the safe flow of pedestrian movement to and from those uses and developments. 
(h)  Snow storage. The site shall include provision for the placement of snow which must be stockpiled during winter months. Such placement shall not impact the efficient and safe movement of pedestrian and vehicular circulation. A minimum area equal in size to ten percent of the required parking lot area, including access lanes, must be provided for stockpiling of snow. 
(i)  Landscape plan. The applicant shall submit a detailed landscape plan. The plan shall include the type, size, and location of all yard areas and vegetation, areas to be irrigated by underground sprinkling, sidewalks, patio and pedestrian seating areas, and other such features. 
(j)  Maintenance of views. Buildings shall be designed and located in a manner which from off-site, at pedestrian level, limits the horizontal blockage of views through the site. Of particular importance is the maintenance of views to Lake Cadillac from downtown commercial sectors and corridors to and from the city, including adjacent highways and freeways. 
(k)  Modification to design standards. The planning commission or city council may authorize variations from the design requirements of this section that are not incompatible with the purposes of the M-PUD and will not be obstructive of view, light, air, or a hazard or nuisance or annoyance to adjacent developments, motorists, or the general public. In making such request for deviations, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the planning commission or city council that modification of a design standard is necessary for development of the M-PUD, is consistent with the purposes of the M-PUD, and will not have an unreasonable adverse effect on adjacent uses or the public. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 1, 1-4-2016) 
Sec. 46-644. - Requirements. 
(a)  Eligibility. To be eligible for M-PUD zoning approval, the applicant must demonstrate that the following criteria will be met: 
(1)  Recognizable benefits. The planned development must result in a recognizable and substantial benefit to the ultimate users of the project and to the community, and result in a higher quality and diverse development than could be achieved under conventional zoning. 
(2)  Minimum area. Except as provided by this subsection, the minimum area considered for an M-PUD zoning district shall not be less than 20 contiguous acres of land. Land separated by a public street right-of-way shall not be considered contiguous. Land separated by a public alley right-of-way shall be considered contiguous. Notwithstanding the above, the city council, upon the recommendation of the planning commission, may consider a smaller area if the proposed project has unique characteristics or benefits or the subject property has unusual topography, tree stands, wetlands, poor soil conditions, water courses, unusual shape or proportions, utility easements or any other external barrier of a similar defining nature. If the applicant desires an area of less than 20 acres to be considered, the applicant shall submit a request for a pre-application conference to the planning commission. The request shall request a waiver of the minimum area requirements and explain in detail the proposed project and the basis for requesting a waiver from the minimum size. In particular, the applicant must describe the proposed benefits of the project to the community, the unique characteristics of the site or project and any other reasons for waiving the minimum area provision. The planning commission shall review the request and make a recommendation to the city council. The city council shall make the final decision concerning the waiver. 
(b)  Development agreement and ownership. The application shall be filed and jointly signed by all owners of the land proposed for rezoning to an M-PUD. Notwithstanding, the proposed development shall, at the time of approval or execution of the development agreement, be under ownership or control such that all owners of the land proposed for rezoning to an M-PUD shall have responsibility for completing the project, or assuring completion of the project, in conformity with this Code and to ensure a cohesive development. A development agreement, which shall be recorded with the Wexford County Register of Deeds between the city and any owner of land proposed for rezoning, is required by this Code. The development agreement shall include regulations relating to the use of land, including, but not limited to, permitted uses, lot sizes, setbacks, height limits, required facilities, buffers, open space areas, and land use density. The development agreement shall include all conditions of approval of the planned development including, but not limited to, land use restrictions, landscaping and lighting requirements, architectural features and materials, and a requirement that all portions of the development that are not to be maintained or operated at public expense will continue to be operated and maintained by the owner or their successors. The development agreement must bind all successors in title to any commitments made by the initial owner or applicant. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit a transfer of ownership or control, provided that no such transfer shall occur prior to recording the development agreement with the Wexford County Register of Deeds. 
(c)  Utilities and other infrastructure. Public water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage facilities, and streets shall be provided as part of the site development. All public utility transmission lines within the planned development shall be placed underground. All proposed infrastructure, including utility and other easements shall be indicated on the M-PUD sketch plan and final site plan and shall be subject to all of the following: 
(1)  All utilities and streets, including design and construction, shall be subject to approval by the city departments having regulatory control over said systems. 
(2)  All costs for utilities shall be paid by the applicant. Off-site public infrastructure improvements necessary to serve the planned development shall either be in place or shall be constructed at the sole cost and expense of the applicant or by agreement acceptable to the city council. 
(3)  The proposed type and density of use shall not result in an unreasonable increase in the use of public services, facilities and utilities, and shall not place an unreasonable burden upon the subject site, surrounding land, property owners and occupants, or the natural environment. 
(d)  Planning, design, development and building materials. The planning, design, development and building materials of any M-PUD shall incorporate best development practices and shall be designed and operated to: 
(1)  Complement the design principles and standards reflected in the city's master plan and this Code. 
(2)  Maintain a high standard of scenic and visual qualities with due regard to impacts on neighboring properties and motorists, including but not limited to varied roof heights and pitches that add visual interest and obscure roof mounted mechanical equipment. 
(3)  Discourage the establishment of uses deemed more appropriate to the city's core downtown. If the subject property is located outside of the city's downtown development authority boundaries, no more than five percent of the total available commercial space planned for the subject property shall consist of uses occupying less than 2,250 square feet for a single use. This limitation shall not apply to ancillary uses, including but not limited to banks, coffee shops, fast food or food court areas, wholly contained within a larger commercial building. The total available commercial space planned for the subject property shall be indicated on the sketch plan pursuant to section 46-657(b)(2). 
(4)  Encourage the overall design and development of the area in a cohesive and planned manner taking into account access management controls and vehicular circulation, pedestrian and non-vehicular traffic amenities, public spaces, parking, signage, outdoor lighting, landscaping and screening, loading/unloading areas, utilities and public services, energy efficiency, open space conservation; and the like. 
(5)  Ensure that all open areas of any lot not used for parking, driveways or permitted storage be landscaped with an attractive mix of trees, shrubs, berms, flowers, natural mulch, planted ground cover, and other landscaping elements. 
(6)  Function in an environmentally sensitive manner with due regard for the management and protection of surface water and the containment of noise, odor, and light pollution. 
(7)  Improve pedestrian connectivity by providing a circulation system that is conducive to pedestrian and bicycle travel throughout areas designed for residential purposes as well as provisions for convenient and safe non-motorized movement from residential areas to the office and commercial sectors of the planned development. 
(8)  Mitigate views of large off-street parking lots through filtering/screening with appropriate landscaping. 
(9)  Coordinate the design of buildings and their sites to create a cohesively planned and visually attractive development. 
(10)  Encourage the use of architectural design features such as arches, canopies, awnings, covered walkways or porticos, offsets, reveals, recesses, columns, display windows, tile work and molding, and other similar visually appealing features. 
(11)  Incorporate the use of building materials that provide for an aesthetically pleasing and consistent overall development, while recognizing the benefits of diversity. In that regard, the following building materials shall be permitted: 
a.  All exterior walls shall be at least 60 percent masonry. Masonry coverage calculation does not include doors, windows, window box-outs, or bay windows that do not extend to the foundation. Masonry shall be defined as: 
1.  Stone material. Masonry construction using stone material may consist of granite, marble, limestone, slate, river rock, and other hard and durable naturally occurring all weather stone. Cut stone and dimensioned stone techniques are acceptable. 
2.  Brick material. Brick material used for masonry construction shall be hard fired (kiln fired) clay or slate material which meets the latest version of ASTM standard C216, Standard Specification for Facing Brick (Solid Masonry Unit Made of Clay or Shale), and shall be severe weather (SW) grade, and type FBA or FBS or better. 
3.  Concrete masonry units. Concrete masonry units used for masonry construction shall meet the latest version of the following applicable specifications; ASTM C90, Standard Specification for Hollow Load Bearing Concrete Masonry Units; ASTM C145, Standard Specification for Solid Load Bearing Masonry Units; ASTM C129, Standard Specification for Hollow and Solid Non-Load-Bearing Units. Concrete masonry units shall have an indented, hammered, split face or other similar architectural finish as approved by the city. Lightweight concrete block or cinder block construction is not acceptable as an exterior finish. 
4.  Concrete panel construction. Concrete finish or precast panel (tilt wall) construction shall be painted, fluted, or other approved architectural concrete finish. Smooth or untextured concrete finishes are not acceptable. 
5.  Stucco (exterior Portland cement plaster with three coats over metal lath or wire fabric lath). 
6.  Cement fiberboard. 
7.  Architectural glass block (less than 25 percent reflectance). 
(b)  Structures 20,000 square feet or less shall require a minimum of two distinct building materials from the approved masonry list be utilized on all facades to provide architectural detail and interest. 
(c)  Structures over 20,000 square feet shall require a minimum of three distinct building materials from the approved masonry list be utilized on all facades to provide architectural detail and interest. 
(d)  Secondary materials must cover a minimum of ten percent of the building facade on all sides. 
(e)  Architectural accent materials not exceeding 20 percent of the exterior walls, may include metal and wood. Metal accents may include profiled panels, deep-ribbed panels and concealed fastener systems. Exterior finish shall be film laminated or baked on enamel painted to the wall manufacturer's standards. Synthetic stucco, also known as exterior insulation and finish system (EIFS), may be used as architectural accent material when placed more than four feet above grade. 
(f)  Roofing materials. Architectural textured 25-year minimum warranty asphalt or synthetic shingles, standing seam metal, or tile roofs are allowed for sloping roofs. Roof materials for flat roofs shall provide the equivalent level of protection. 
(g)  Prohibited materials. The following materials are prohibited: 
1.  Aluminum siding or cladding. 
2.  Corrugated, metal, plastic, or fiberglass panels. 
3.  Galvanized, aluminum coated, zinc aluminum coated or unpainted exterior metal except as permitted as architectural accent material. 
4.  Wood siding or plastic siding. 
5.  Synthetic stucco, exterior insulation and finish system (EIFS), placed less than four feet above grade. 
6.  Unfinished concrete block. 
7.  Exposed aggregate. 
8.  Wood roof shingles. 
9.  Reflective glass. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 1, 1-4-2016) 
Sec. 46-645. - Application procedure and approval process. 
(a)  General. Whenever any M-PUD is proposed, the application for an M-PUD shall serve as a petition to rezone the subject property to the M-PUD district. The application for an M-PUD shall include a request for sketch site plan approval and shall be filed with the city planning commission. The petition for rezoning and sketch plan approval shall be considered concurrently and the requirements of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, being Public Act 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3101 et seq.) and this Code for amendment of a zoning ordinance shall be followed, except that the hearing and notice required by MCL 125.3503 shall fulfill the public hearing and notice requirements of MCL 125.3306. 
(b)  Application for sketch plan approval. So that the planning commission, city council and the developer may reach an understanding of what is being proposed, and what is required, the developer shall submit a sketch site plan and related project information with an M-PUD application to the planning commission. The sketch site plan shall be drawn to scale, fully dimensioned, and shall clearly show all of the following information: 
(1)  Boundaries and size of property; 
(2)  Location (including setbacks from property lines), size and height of all buildings and building facades; 
(3)  Interior roadway system including parking facilities, proposed and existing rights-of-way, loading and unloading areas, curb cuts to public roads, and adjacent streets; 
(4)  The interior open space system with details on the size and use of the space, proposed ownership of any open space at M-PUD completion, and method of maintaining same; 
(5)  The overall water supply system, waste water system and stormwater drainage system, including any connections to public facilities; 
(6)  Principal ties to the neighborhood and community with respect to transportation, or other public utilities, including gas and electric service; 
(7)  Delineation of the various residential and nonresidential areas and uses, including size, location and number of housing units and other buildings; 
(8)  Construction phases and construction schedule; 
(9)  Existing natural features and proposed landscaping; 
(10)  Topography, existing and proposed (contour intervals of no greater than five feet); 
(11)  Location, size and function of proposed signs; 
(12)  Location, size and function of any on-site lighting, including a photometric plan for the site; and 
(13)  Location of all structures within 300 feet of the property line of the subject property. 
In addition to the sketch plan, the applicant shall submit copies of any other information reasonably requested by the planning commission or city council. 
(c)  Public hearing. The planning commission and city council shall each hold at least one public hearing on any application in accordance with the provisions of this Code and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act. 
(d)  Following the public hearing. The planning commission shall, within a reasonable time of the public hearing, make a recommendation to the city council to deny, approve or approve with conditions the application. The city council shall receive and consider the recommendation of the planning commission and shall deny, approve or approve with conditions the application, including the sketch plan. 
(e)  Basis for conditions. Due to the nature of the M-PUD, additional conditions may be required by the planning commission or the city council. Any conditions imposed by the planning commission or city council must be reasonable and intended to do one or more of the following: 
(1)  Ensure that public services and facilities affected by the M-PUD will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads; 
(2)  Protect the natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy; 
(3)  Ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses; 
(4)  Promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner; 
(5)  Ensure compliance with the standards of this division; or 
(6)  Promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(f)  Approval of sketch plan. If the sketch plan is approved by the city council, such approval shall not constitute approval of the detailed site plan, but shall be deemed an expression of approval of the layout as a guide to the preparation of the detailed plan. The city council shall find that compliance with the following standards have been met before approving any sketch plan: 
(1)  The M-PUD site and proposed uses shall be served by necessary public infrastructure including roadways and utilities and that said infrastructure is appropriately sized and arranged to accommodate the requirements of the M-PUD while avoiding negative impacts on the infrastructure to which it will connect; 
(2)  The M-PUD site, proposed uses and related development shall be consistent with the city's master plan; 
(3)  That facilities and uses such as parking, loading and unloading areas, dumpster locations, active play areas and other facilities and uses that are adjacent to residential development shall either be located internal to the M-PUD site or appropriately buffered through landscaping and other screening techniques; 
(4)  That proposed parking and vehicular and pedestrian circulation, including points of ingress and egress, are properly sized and located; 
(5)  The M-PUD site features including, but not limited to, walkways, exterior lighting, play areas, common areas, building entry points, garage and storage areas, landscaping and signs have been appropriately designed and arranged to compliment the principle M-PUD buildings and uses and avoid adverse impacts on adjacent property or uses; 
(g)  Effect of sketch plan approval. Approval of the sketch plan only warrants to the applicant certification that the proposed M-PUD is appropriate for the planned location and consistent with basic M-PUD site development and design standards as required for sketch site plan approval, subject to any additional terms and conditions of the development agreement approved as part of final site plan approval. 
(h)  Request for changes in plan. If it becomes apparent that certain elements of the sketch plan, as approved by the city council, become unfeasible and in need of substantial modification, the applicant shall then resubmit the entire sketch plan, as amended, to the planning commission, which shall be reviewed by the planning commission and the city council in the same manner as the original sketch plan. Notwithstanding, if a change to the sketch plan is not substantial, the change may be reviewed and approved administratively by the community development director or his or her designee. 
(i)  Application for final site plan approval. After receiving approval of a sketch plan from the city council, the applicant shall, within six months, prepare a final site plan and submit it to the planning commission. The final site plan shall be reviewed by the planning commission in the same manner as the sketch plan, except that no additional public hearings shall be required. Within a reasonable time following submission of a complete final site plan, the planning commission shall make a recommendation on the final site plan to the city council. The final site plan submitted to the planning commission must be a construction design document and, in addition to the information provided on the sketch plan, contain sufficient design information to determine compliance with any applicable city codes and construction requirements including, but not limited to, the following systems: 
(1)  Roads/streets and site access, including location and geometrics; 
(2)  Public water; 
(3)  Public sewers (sanitary and storm); 
(4)  Surface water drainage and snow storage; 
(5)  Emergency access routes; 
(6)  Fire hydrant locations; 
(7)  Exterior lighting; 
(8)  Energy and communication facilities, including type and location; 
(9)  Location and size of public and private easements; 
(10)  Exterior signs, including size and location; 
(11)  Parking, loading and unloading, and vehicular and pedestrian circulation; 
(12)  Detailed landscape plan, including all buffers; 
(13)  Solid waste disposal; and 
(14)  Other information reasonably requested by the planning commission, after consultation with city staff, necessary for determination of compliance with city codes, resolutions, rules and regulations. 
(j)  City council approval of detailed or final site plan. Within a reasonable time following the recommendation from the planning commission, the city council shall review the final site plan and in making a determination of approval, the city council must find that: 
(1)  The systems and project elements are in substantial conformance with the sketch plan and properly arranged and adequate to meet the intended uses within the M-PUD; 
(2)  The systems and project elements are consistent with the design requirements of the city; and 
(3)  The final site plan complies with all regulations of this Code and any other applicable federal, state and local statutes, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations. 
(k)  Action on final site plan. The city council shall deny, approve, or approve the final site plan with conditions or modifications and so notify the applicant and the building inspector. Final approval may be granted on each phase of a multi-phased M-PUD if each phase contains the necessary components to insure protection of natural resources and the health, safety, and welfare of the users of the M-PUD and the residents of the surrounding area. 
(l)  Expiration. In any case where construction on the M-PUD has not commenced within one year from the date of final approval or construction on any phase fails to conform with the approved phasing schedule, final site plan approval shall expire and shall be null and void. Notwithstanding, the community development director or his or her designee may administratively extend the expiration date of the final site plan for a period not to exceed one additional year. 
(m)  Effect of approval. The final site plan, as approved, shall become part of the record of approval, and subsequent actions relating to the activity authorized shall be consistent with the approved site plan. After a final site plan has been approved and construction of any part thereof commenced, no other type of development will be permitted on the site without further approval thereof by the planning commission and city council. 
(n)  Bond requirement. A performance bond, bank letter of credit or other surety acceptable to the city shall be required and be filed with the city treasurer at the time of application of a building permit in such amounts and for such periods adequate to ensure compliance with the approved plans. 
(o)  Development agreement. Prior to final site plan approval and commencement of construction on any project permitted under this division, the owner shall enter into a development agreement with the city, which agreement shall provide such safeguards and guarantees as may be required by the city. Said agreement shall consist of the approved final site plan, conditions which may have been attached to the M-PUD approval, bond requirements, necessary building and other required permits, and payment of all fees. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 1, 1-4-2016) 
Secs. 46-646-46-652. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SUPPLEMENTAL 
Regulations 

Sec. 46-653. - Conflicting regulations. 
    Whenever any provision of this chapter imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other law or ordinance, then the provisions of this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other law or ordinance impose more stringent requirements than are imposed or required by this chapter, then the provisions of such ordinance shall govern. 
(Prior Code, § 5.181) 
Sec. 46-654. - Scope. 
    No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected, constructed or altered and maintained, and no new use or change shall be made or maintained of any building, structure or land, or part thereof, except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 5.182) 
Sec. 46-655. - Nonconforming lots; structures; uses of land; uses of structure. 
(a)  Intent. It is the purpose of this section to permit the continuance of a lawful use of any building or land existing at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, although such use of land or structure may not conform with the provisions of this chapter. It is recognized, however, that those nonconformities which adversely affect orderly development and the value of nearby property are not permitted to continue without restriction. 
(b)  Encourage appropriate groupings. The zoning regulations established by this chapter are designed to guide the future use of land in the city by encouraging appropriate groupings of compatible and related uses and thus to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. The continued existence of nonconformities is frequently inconsistent with the purposes for which such regulations are established, and thus their gradual elimination is generally desirable. The regulations of this section permit such nonconformities to continue without specific limitation of time but are generally intended to restrict further investments which would make them more permanent. 
(c)  Distinction between major nonconforming uses or structures and minor nonconformities. Different regulations are established for each of these categories in this subsection. The degree of restriction over each category is a function of the degree to which that category of nonconformity is a nuisance or incompatible with the purposes and regulations of this chapter. 
(1)  Major nonconforming use or structure. 
a.  A major nonconforming use is any use listed in the table below for the district in which it is listed: 
Zoning District Major 
Nonconforming 
Use Residential Industrial use Commercial use Public lands and open space Industrial use Commercial use Business, office service, tourist service Industrial use Industrial Residential use  
b.  A major nonconforming use or structure shall not be changed to any use other than a use permitted in the zoning district in which it is located. 
c.  Major nonconforming uses or structures shall not be reestablished in their nonconforming condition in any zoning district after damage or destruction, if the estimated expense of reconstruction exceeds 33 percent of the value, determined as the original cost, indexed to present day replacement cost and discounted for physical depreciation and physical obsolescence, as determined by the city assessor. 
d.  If a major nonconforming use ceases for any reason for a period of more than 90 consecutive days, such discontinuance shall be considered conclusive evidence of an intention to abandon the nonconforming use. At the end of this period of abandonment, the nonconforming use shall not be reestablished and any future use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
e.  Major nonconforming uses or structures may not be enlarged, increased, extended, altered, expanded, constructed or reconstructed except in accordance with subsection (h) of this section. 
(2)  Minor nonconforming use or structure. A minor nonconforming use or structure is any nonconforming use or structure which is not a major nonconforming use or structure. 
(d)  Minor nonconforming uses of land or structure. Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, a lawful use of land and/or structure exists that is no longer permissible under the terms of this chapter as enacted or amended, such use may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No such nonconforming use of structure or land shall be enlarged, increased, extended or altered to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. An exception to this restriction can be made where an otherwise lawful structure exists that could not be built under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, the zoning board of appeals may approve the reestablishment, expansion, alteration, or extension upon evidence of demonstrable hardship or practical difficulty resulting from conditions which do not exist generally throughout the zone. 
(2)  No such nonconforming use of structure or land shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(3)  Nonconforming uses shall not be changed to another nonconforming use except after approval of the board of zoning appeals. Before granting such approval, the board shall determine, by making findings in the specific case, that such change in use will have a less detrimental effect on neighboring properties than the existing nonconforming use, and is more or equally appropriate in the zone. In permitting such change, the board of appeals may require appropriate conditions in accordance with the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(4)  If such nonconforming use of land or structure ceases for any reason for a period of more than 90 consecutive days, such discontinuance shall be considered conclusive evidence of an intention to abandon the nonconforming use. The time limit of discontinuance may be extended beyond the 90 days, for a period of time not to exceed one year upon proper application to the board of zoning appeals within the 90-day period and upon presentation of evidence that an unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty would exist should the 90-day limitation be strictly enforced. At the end of this period of abandonment, the nonconforming use of structure or land shall not be reestablished and any future use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  Structural alterations or extensions adding to the bulk of a structure which is nonconforming shall be permitted without prior approval of the board of zoning appeals; provided, that such structure alteration or extension shall not increase the extent of nonconformity and shall satisfy all other site development regulations which are applicable. 
(6)  Structural alterations which do not add to the bulk of structure or increase the intensity of use of the structure shall not require prior approval of the board of zoning appeals. 
(7)  Nonconforming buildings or structures may be structurally altered so as to prolong the life of the building or structure. 
(8)  Nonconforming structures may be reestablished in any zoning district after damage or destruction of the nonconforming structure, if such building or structure is nonconforming due only to its being located on a site having a size, width or both, less than prescribed in the applicable sections of this chapter. 
(9)  Structures which are nonconforming due to their having an insufficient setback may not be reestablished in their nonconforming condition in any zoning district after damage or destruction, if the estimated expense of reconstruction exceed 50 percent of the value, except with approval of the board of zoning appeals. The value is determined in this subsection as the original cost, indexed to present day replacement cost and discounted for physical depreciation and physical obsolescence, as determined by the city assessor. A variance shall be granted by the board only when the strict application of the requirements of this chapter would pose demonstrable hardship or practical difficulty resulting from conditions which do not exist generally throughout the zone. The terms hardship and practical difficulty shall not be deemed financial hardship or mere inconvenience. 
(10)  Any nonconforming use of a structure may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use, and which existed at the time of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(e)  Nonconforming lots. In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot or record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district; provided that yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Yard requirement variances may be obtained through approval of the board of appeals. 
(f)  Repairs and maintenance. Repairs and maintenance may be performed on any building devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use; including ordinary repairs or repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding 50 percent of the assessed value (25 percent of true cash value) of the building during any period of 12 consecutive months. However, the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall not be increased, except as otherwise provided for in this section. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. 
(g)  Prior construction approval. 
(1)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit the completion of construction and use of a nonconforming building for which a building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived; provided that construction is commenced within 90 days after the date of issuance of the permit, that construction is carried on diligently and without interruption for a continuous period in excess of 30 days, and that the entire building shall have been completed according to the plans filed with the permit application within two years after the issuance of the building permit. 
(2)  To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this article shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this article, and upon which actual construction has been diligently carried on. The term "actual construction" is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner; except that where demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction; provided that work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building involved. 
(h)  Uses under exception provisions. Any use which was permitted with a special exception as provided in this chapter, shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall, without further action, be deemed a conforming use. 
(i)  Change of tenancy or ownership. There may be a change of tenancy, ownership or management of any existing nonconforming uses of land, structures, and premises; provided there is no change in the nature or character of such nonconforming uses. 
(j)  Elimination of nonconforming use or structure. The city may acquire by purchase, condemnation or other means, private property or an interest in private property for the removal of any nonconforming use or structure. The cost or expense or a portion thereof may be paid from general funds or assessed to a special district in accordance with applicable statutory provisions. 
(Prior Code, § 5.183; Ord. No. 87-01, 1-12-1987) 
State Law reference- Nonconforming uses or structures, MCL 125.3208. 
Sec. 46-656. - Accessory buildings. 
    Accessory buildings, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Where a building accessory to a residential building is structurally attached to a main building, it shall be subject to, and must conform to, all regulations of this chapter applicable to main building. 
(2)  Buildings accessory to a residential building shall not be erected in any required yard, except a rear yard. 
(3)  Detached buildings accessory to a residential building shall not occupy more than 25 percent of a rear yard; provided that in no instance shall all of the accessory buildings exceed 65 percent of the ground floor area of the main building. 
(4)  No detached building accessory to a residential building shall be located closer than ten feet to any main building nor shall it be located closer than three feet to any side or rear lot line. 
a.  In those instances where the rear lot line is coterminous with an alley right-of-way, the accessory building shall not be closer than three feet to such rear lot line. In no instance shall an accessory building be located within a dedicated easement right-of-way. 
b.  A detached accessory building may be located closer than ten feet to any main building if all walls of the accessory building which face the main building or other permanent structures, are constructed to meet or exceed a one-hour fire rating. 
(5)  No detached accessory building in R-1 through R-4, RT, RM-1, RM-2, MH, RMH, OS-1, OS-2, B-1 and P-1 districts shall exceed one story or 20 feet in height. Accessory buildings in all other districts may be constructed to equal the permitted maximum height of structures in said district. 
(6)  When buildings accessory to a residential building are located on a corner lot, the side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot to its rear, said building shall not project beyond the front yard setback required on the lot in the rear of such corner lot. In no instance shall an accessory building be located nearer than ten feet to a street right-of-way line. 
(7)  Buildings accessory to a nonresidential building must comply with all of the above requirements which apply to residential buildings or apply for and receive a variance from the zoning board of appeals. 
(8)  The parking of a mobile home for periods exceeding 24 hours on lands not approved for mobile home parks shall be expressly prohibited. All mobile homes owned by residents of the city and stored on their individual lots shall be stored only within the confines of the rear yard and shall further respect the requirements of this section applicable to accessory buildings, insofar as distances from principal structures, lot lines, and easements are concerned. All mobile homes parked or stored, shall not be connected to sanitary facilities or public utilities and shall not be occupied. 
(9)  Ground mounted satellite dishes, antennas, towers, privacy screens and similar structures are considered accessory structures when greater than nine inches in height and 50 square feet in projected silhouette, section 46-4, pertaining to the definition of structure, when not attached to a main building and when not the principal use on the property, and must conform to all regulations in this chapter applicable to accessory buildings and structures, including the obtaining of a building permit. Retaining walls must not extend more than nine inches above the highest grade, or they must comply with the city's fence ordinance. See article III of chapter 8, pertaining to fences. Exceptions are as follows: 
a.  Essential services which comply with section 46-707. 
b.  Commercial telecommunication towers and antennas which comply with sections 46-662 and 46-673. 
(Prior Code, § 5.184; Ord. No. 80-004, 12-1-1980; Ord. No. 85-06, 4-1-1985; Ord. No. 90-15, 8-20-1990; Ord. No. 98-01, 3-2-1998; Ord. No. 98-25, 1-4-1999; Ord. No. 2001-13, 11-5-2001) 
Sec. 46-657. - Accessory uses. 
    An accessory use includes, but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  Residential accommodations for up to two servants and/or caretakers. 
(2)  Swimming pools for the use of the occupants of a residence, or their guests. 
(3)  Domestic or agricultural storage in a barn, shed, tool room, or similar accessory building or other structure. 
(4)  A newsstand primarily for the convenience of the occupants of a building, which is located wholly within such building and has no exterior signs or displays. 
(5)  Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock in connection with a business or industrial use, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable district regulations. 
(6)  Storage of goods used in or produced by industrial uses or related activities, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable district regulations. 
(7)  Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, subject to the accessory off-street parking regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located. 
(8)  Uses clearly incidental to a main use such as, but not limited to, offices of an industrial or commercial complex located on the site of the commercial or industrial complex. 
(9)  Accessory off-street loading, subject to the off-street loading regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located. 
(10)  Accessory signs, subject to the sign regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located. 
(Prior Code, § 5.6; Ord. No. 98-01, 3-2-1998; Ord. No. 98-23, 11-16-1998) 
Sec. 46-658. - Requirements. 
    There shall be provided in all zoning districts at the time of erection or enlargement of any main building or structure, automobile off-street parking with adequate access to all spaces. However, this shall not apply to the B-2 zone, or commercial uses in any zone which abut off-street public parking located within the B-2 zone, except subsections (4) and (10) of this section shall remain applicable. The number of off-street parking spaces, in conjunction with all land or building uses, shall be provided prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, as hereinafter prescribed: 
(1)  Off-street parking spaces may be located within any nonrequired yard and within the required rear yard setback unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(2)  Required parking for other than residential use shall be either on the same lot or within 300 feet of the building it is intended to serve, measured from the nearest point of the building to the nearest point of the off-street parking lot. Ownership shall be shown of all lots or parcels intended for use as parking by the applicant. 
(3)  Parking for single-family residential uses shall consist of a parking strip, bay, driveway, garage or combination thereof, and required parking shall be located on the premises to be served, and shall be exempt from other provisions of this section, and section 46-660. 
(4)  Any area once designated as required off-street parking shall not be changed to any other use or to an amount less than the required for a similar new building or use, unless and until equal facilities are provided elsewhere. 
(5)  Two or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required parking, in which case the number of spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the several individual uses computed separately. In the instance of dual function of off-street parking, where operation hours of buildings do not overlap, the board of appeals may grant an exception. 
(6)  Off-street parking areas shall be provided with a suitable, visually aesthetic buffer. This buffer may be the required setback, or may be a continuous, visually obscuring 30-inch high masonry wall that conforms with the city's fence ordinance. Between these extremes, the buffer may consist of berm (section 46-663(4)), landscape foliage, fences, screens, or green areas as approved by the zoning administrator, such that the lesser the distance between the parking area and the property line, the greater the intensity of the buffer. Where a nonresidential parking area is developed adjacent to a residential district, it must be provided with a minimum setback of ten feet or an equivalent buffer as described above. 
(7)  All lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall be so installed as to be confined within and directed onto the parking area only. 
(8)  In all cases where a wall extends to an alley which is a means of access to an off-street parking area, it shall be permissible to end the wall not more than ten feet from such alley line in order to permit a wider means of access to the parking area. 
(9)  Access to off-street parking shall be provided as follows: 
a.  Access to off-street parking areas shall be provided from a collector street only, or by consent of the planning commission, may be provided from streets other than collectors (but with immediate access to a collector) when the board finds a substantial improvement in traffic safety will be achieved by reducing the number of driveways onto a collector street. 
b.  However, at no time shall access proceed through a single-family zone or be provided by way of a noncollector street to a collector street when the noncollector street is abutted by single-family residential zones between the access and the collector site. 
c.  Also, at no time shall a curb cut providing access be nearer than 25 feet from an abutting single-family zone on the same side of the street or directly across the street from a single-family zone. 
(10)  Establishments providing overnight lodging accommodations must provide at least one reserved off-street parking space per bedroom. 
(11)  The outside storage or parking, except for loading and unloading, of commercial vehicles or equipment is prohibited on city streets or in the front yards of residentially zoned property. An exception are commercial vehicles with a length of 21 feet overall, or less, and a height of 11 feet, or less. 
(Prior Code, § 5.185; Ord. No. 87-17, 10-9-1987; Ord. No. 90-14, 8-20-1990; Ord. No. 95-26, 10-16-1995; Ord. No. 98-26, 1-4-1999) 
Sec. 46-659. - Schedule of off-street parking space requirements. 
    The minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be determined in accordance with the schedule in this section. However, uses not specifically mentioned shall be treated as a like use as determined by the planning commission. Whenever the required parking spaces are expressed as a fraction, the requirement shall be rounded to the next whole number. 
Use Number of Minimum Parking Spaces 
Per Unit of Measure Residential Residential, one-family and two-family Two for each dwelling unit. Residential, multiple-family Two for each dwelling unit. Housing for the elderly One for each unit, and one for each employee. Should the units revert to general occupancy, then two per unit shall be provided before the conversion. Mobile homes and mobile home park Two for each mobile home site and one for each employee of the mobile home park. Institutional Churches or temples One for each three seats or six feet of pews in the main unit of worship. Hospitals One for each one bed. Homes for the aged and convalescent homes One for each two beds. Elementary and junior high schools One for each one teacher, employee or administrator, in addition to the requirements of the auditor. Senior high schools One for each one teacher, employee, or administrator and one for each ten students, in addition to the requirements of the auditor. Private clubs or lodge halls One for each two persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county or state fire, building or health codes. Private golf clubs, swimming pool clubs, tennis clubs or other similar uses One for each two member families or individuals plus spaces required for each accessory use, such as a restaurant or bar. Golf courses open to the general public, except miniature or par-three courses Six for each one golf hole and one for each employee, plus spaces required for each accessory use, such as a restaurant or bar. Fraternity or sorority One for each five permitted active members, or one for each two beds whichever is greater. Stadium, sports arena, or similar place of outdoor assembly One for each three seats or six feet of benches. Theaters and auditoriums One for each three seats plus one for each two employees. Business and commercial Planned commercial or shopping center One for each 100 square feet of gross floor area. Auto wash (automatic) One for each employee. In addition, reservoir parking spaces equal in number to five times the maximum capacity of the auto wash. Maximum capacity of the auto wash shall mean the greatest number of automobiles possible undergoing some phase of washing at the same time, which shall be determined by dividing the length in feet of each wash line by 20. Auto wash (self-service or coin operated) Three for each washing stall in addition to the stall itself. Beauty parlor or barbershop Three spaces for each of the first two beauty or barber chairs, and 11/2 for each additional chair. Bowling alleys Five for each one bowling lanes plus accessory uses. Dance halls, pool or billiard parlors, roller or skating rinks, exhibition halls, and assembly halls without fixed seats One for each two persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county, or state fire, building, or health codes. Establishment for sale and consumption on the premises, of beverages, food or refreshments One for each 100 square feet of gross floor space or one for each two persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county, or state fire, building or health codes. Furniture and appliance, household equipment, repair shops, showroom of a plumber, decorator, electrician, or similar trade, shoe repair, and other similar uses One for each 800 square feet of gross floor area. (For that floor area used in processing, one additional shall be provided for each two persons employed therein.) Gasoline service stations Two for each lubrication stall, rack, or pit; and one for each gasoline pump. Laundromats and coin operated dry cleaners One for each two washing and/or dry cleaning machines. Miniature or par-three golf courses Three for each one hole plus one for each one employee. Mortuary establishments One for each 50 square feet of gross floor space. Motel, hotel, or other commercial lodging establishments One for each one occupancy unit plus one for each one employee. Motor vehicle sales and service establishments One for each 200 square feet of gross floor space of sales room and one for each one auto service stall in the service room. Nursery school, day nurseries, or child care centers One for each 350 square feet of gross floor space. Retail stores except as otherwise specified herein One for each 150 square feet of gross floor space. Offices Banks One for each 100 square feet of gross floor space. Business offices or professional offices (except as indicated in the following use) One for each 200 square feet of gross floor space. Professional offices of doctors, dentists or similar professions One for each 50 square feet of gross floor area in waiting rooms, and one for each examining room, dental chair, or similar use area. Industrial Industrial or research establishments, and related accessory offices Five plus one for every 11/2 employees in the largest working shift. Space on site shall also be provided for all construction workers during period of plant construction. Warehouses and wholesale establishments and related accessory offices Five plus one for every one employee in the largest working shift, or one for every 1,700 square feet of gross floor space, whichever is greater.  
(Prior Code, § 5.186; Ord. No. 81-10, 8-31-1981) 
Sec. 46-660. - Off-street parking; layout; construction; maintenance. 
    Whenever the off-street parking requirements in sections 46-658 and 46-659 require an off-street parking area, such areas shall be in accordance with the following: 
(1)  No parking lot shall be constructed unless and until a permit therefor is issued by the zoning administrator. Applications for a permit shall be accompanied with two sets of site plans for the development and construction of the parking area showing that the provisions herein required will be fully complied with. 
(2)  Plans for the layout of off-street parking shall be in accordance with the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Parking space width and length for single spaces. 
Parking Pattern 
(degrees) Maneuvering Lane Width (feet) Parking Space Width (feet) Parking Space Length (feet) 0 12 10 28 30 to 53 12 10 20 54 to 74 15 10 20 75 to 90 20 9 20  
b.  Parking space width with one or two tiers. 
Parking Pattern 
(degrees) Total Width of One Tier of Spaces Plus 
Maneuvering Lane 
(feet) Total Width of Two Tiers 
of Spaces Plus 
Maneuvering Lane 
(feet) 0 20 28 30 to 53 32 52 54 to 74 36.5 58 75 to 90 40 60  
(3)  All spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of clearly limited and defined drives and maneuvering lanes. Backing directly onto a street shall be prohibited. All maneuvering lane widths listed in subsection (2)a and b of this section shall permit one-way traffic movement only, except the 90-degree pattern may permit two-way movement. 
(4)  All off-street parking, including maneuvering lanes and access drives shall be provided with asphalt, concrete or other hard dust-free surfacing as specified by the engineering department. Surfacing shall be completed within six months of the date the occupancy permit is issued. Off-street parking areas shall be drained so as to dispose of all surface water on the parking area in such a way as to preclude drainage of water onto adjacent property or toward buildings. 

(Prior Code, § 5.187; Ord. No. 87-17, 10-9-1987; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 17, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 46-661. - Off-street loading and unloading. 
    On the same premises with every building, structure, or part thereof, involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot, adequate space for standing, loading and unloading in order to avoid undue interference with public uses of dedicated rights-of-way. Such space shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Loading space shall be provided in the rear yard of all uses located in all commercial districts, except B-2 districts, in the ratio of at least 100 square feet per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area and shall be computed separately from the off-street parking requirements, but in no case shall more than 1,500 square feet of loading area be required. 
(2)  In the instance of OS-1 districts, loading space shall be provided in the ratio of 50 percent of the space required for other commercial districts. Where an alley exists at the rear of a building, loading requirements may be computed from the center of said alley. 
(Prior Code, § 5.188; Ord. No. 87-17, 10-9-1987) 
Sec. 46-662. - Uses not otherwise included within specific districts. 
(a)  Because the uses hereinafter referred to possess unique characteristics, making it impractical to include them in a specific use district classification, they may be permitted by the planning commission under the conditions specified. In every case, the uses hereinafter referred to shall be specifically prohibited from any residential districts, unless otherwise specified. 
(b)  These uses require special consideration since they service an area larger than the city and require sizable land areas, creating problems of control with reference to abutting use districts. Reference to those uses falling specifically within the intent of this section is as follows: 
(1)  Shopping malls, amusement parks, stadiums, outdoor recreation and similar uses that require sites greater than five acres and are designed to accommodate occupancies greater than 200 people. 
(2)  Mining, gravel or sand extraction, oil exploration or similar temporary uses. 
(3)  Commercial television, radio, public utility and/or microwave transmitting towers and their attendant facilities. See section 46-673. 
(Prior Code, § 5.189; Ord. No. 98-01, 3-2-1998) 
Sec. 46-663. - Plant materials. 
    Whenever in this chapter a greenbelt or planting is required, it shall be planted within six months from the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy and shall thereafter be reasonably maintained with permanent plant materials to provide a screen to abutting properties. Suitable materials equal in characteristics to the plant materials listed with the spacing as required shall be provided. 
(1)  Plant material spacing. 
a.  Where plant materials are placed in two or more rows, plantings shall be staggered in rows. 
b.  Evergreen trees shall be planted not more than 30 feet on centers, and shall not be less than five feet in height. 
c.  Narrow evergreens shall be planted not more than six feet on centers, and shall not be less than three feet in height. 
d.  Tree-like shrubs shall be planted not more than ten feet on centers, and shall not be less than four feet in height. 
e.  Large deciduous shrubs shall be planted not more than four feet on centers, and shall not be less than six feet in height. 
f.  Large deciduous trees shall be planted not more than 30 feet on centers, and shall not be less than eight feet in height. 
g.  Small shrubs shall be planted not more than four feet on centers, and not less than two feet in height. 
(2)  Trees not permitted. 
a.  Box Elder. 
b.  Elms. 
c.  Poplars. 
d.  Willows. 
e.  Horse Chestnut (nut bearing). 
f.  Tree of Heaven. 
g.  Catalpa. 
h.  Jack Pine. 
i.  Scotch Pine. 
j.  Silver Maple. 
k.  Walnut. 
(3)  Shrubs not permitted. 
a.  Honeysuckle. 
b.  Privet Hedge. 
c.  Lilac (native species). 
(4)  Berms. 
a.  Slopes shall not exceed a ratio of 1:4. 
b.  Landscaped berms greater than one foot in height and less than five feet in width shall be provided with a subsurface watering system. 
c.  Landscaped berms less than eight feet wide shall not exceed two feet in height. 
d.  Landscaped berms greater than eight feet wide shall not exceed three feet in height. 
Suggested 
Plant 
Materials Height 
Minimum 
(in feet) Evergreen trees 3 Douglas Fir* Fir Hemlock Juniper Pine 
(Red or White) Spruce* White Fir* Narrow evergreens 3 Blue Columnar Chinese Juniper Douglas 
Arbor-Vitae Irish Yew Juniper Pyramidal 
Red-Cedar Tree-like shrubs 3 Dogwood Flowering Crab Hawthorn Mountain Ash Redbud Rose of Sharon Large deciduous shrubs 6 Arrow Wood Viburnum* Cotoneaster Euonymus Forsythia French Hybrid 
Lilac* Hazelnut Lilac Mock-Orange Ninebark Viburnum Deciduous trees 8 Beech* Birch Ginkgo Hackberry Honeylocust Horse Chestnut Linden Little Leaf 
Linden* Maple 
(Hard/Sugar)* Modesto Ash* Oak* Red Maple Sweet Gum Sycamore Sycamore 
(London Plane)* Small shrubs 8 Burning Bush Junipers Spirea Yews  
*Recommended for hardiness and maintenance. 
(Prior Code, § 5.190; Ord. No. 98-26, 1-4-1999) 
Sec. 46-664. - Signs. 
(a)  Findings. The city council finds that signs and other visual outdoor advertising are necessary to the commerce, health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city. Further, it finds that failure to regulate their size, location and construction may lead to poor identification of individual businesses, deterioration of the business and residential areas of the city, intensification of the conflicts between different types of land use, reduction in the effectiveness of traffic control devices, and safety hazards to pedestrians and motorists. Further, it finds that the city's economic base is dependent on preserving property values and a healthy business climate. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate signs and outdoor advertising in a manner which will minimize the harmful effects while permitting latitude for creative and effective advertising and identification. To achieve this purpose, this section has the following objectives: 
(1)  To prevent the placement of signs in a manner that will conceal or obscure signs or adjacent businesses. 
(2)  To keep the number of signs and sign messages at the level reasonably necessary to identify a business and its products. 
(3)  To keep signs within a reasonable scale with respect to the buildings to which they relate. 
(4)  To prevent off-premises signs from conflicting with business, residential and public land uses. 
(5)  To keep an area adjacent to streets clear of signs which might obstruct or distract the view of motorists. 
(6)  To reduce the visual and physical obstructions to motorists entering or leaving streets. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Awning sign means any sign when located as an integral part of a canopy or awning. If located on a maximum 12-inch wide valance, the sign shall be considered a marquee sign with no maximum square footage. If located on other than a 12-inch or less valance, the sign shall be considered a wall sign for determining maximum square footage. Approval of awning signs shall be by a staff committee composed of the downtown development director, zoning administrator, and city engineer. In the event two or more designated members of the staff committee are unavailable or have a conflict of interest, approval shall revert to the full planning commission. Determination of approval, whether by the staff committee or planning commission, shall be based on awning sign standards approved by the planning commission. Decisions of the staff committee or planning commission may be appealed to the zoning board of appeals. 
    Billboard. See Off-premises advertising sign. 
    Business sign means any sign erected for the purpose of advertising a business, product or subject related to the premises on which said sign is located. 
    Commercial or professional center sign means any sign which gives directions and/or identification to a group of two or more contiguous stores or business spaces whether or not under single management. 
    Display surface means the entire area within a common geometric figure enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem or any figure of similar character, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed, excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is placed. Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign, except that where two faces are placed back to back and are at no point more than three feet from one another, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area of one face if the two faces are of equal area, or as the area of the larger face if the two faces are of unequal area. 
    Encroaching sign means a sign which projects beyond the private property line into and over public property, or any privately owned sign wholly or partially on public property. 
    Front means and shall be the side of the property facing the thoroughfare that carries the greatest amount of traffic. 
    Hanging sign. See Marquee sign. 
    Home occupation sign means any sign used for the purpose of advertising services in conjunction with a lawful home occupation. 
    Identification sign means a sign that identifies the name of the property, owner, resident or business on said property, with or without the street address. 
    Institutional sign means a sign containing a surface area upon which is displayed the name of a church, school, library, museum, day care center, cemetery, community center, and similar institutions and the announcement of its services or activities. 
    Interior signs means those signs located inside of a building. When located in a residential zone district and visible from a street they are to be considered a wall sign. 
    Marquee sign or hanging sign means a sign which is attached to the underside of a soffit or underside of a marquee, or other covered building structure, projecting from and supported by the building, and not more than 12 feet nor less than seven feet above the adjacent sidewalk or driveway, nor projecting beyond the perimeter of the marquee or soffit. 
    Monument sign means a freestanding yard sign, considered a pole sign and sometimes referred to as a ground mounted sign. 
    Nonconforming sign means any sign, which does not conform to the requirements of this section. 
    Off-premises advertising sign or billboard means any sign erected for the purpose of advertising a business, product, event, person or subject, not relating to the premises on which the sign is located. It has been determined by the city council that a maximum of three such signs could be supported within the city limits. The intent is to allow one sign near each end of Mitchell Street and one in the Cadillac West area in accordance with the following regulations: 
(1)  No sign shall have a total area of all faces in excess of 700 square feet or 350 square feet per sign face; 
(2)  Maximum height of 25 feet; 
(3)  Not closer than one mile to any other off-premises advertising sign; 
(4)  Minimum setback from any street right-of-way of 25 feet. 
    Pole sign means a freestanding sign which is supported by one or more uprights. Pole signs shall be set back from property lines a minimum of one-half the required yard setback in that particular district, or set back a minimum of 50 feet from the traveled paved portion of the abutting street, whichever is less; and in no case closer than the height of the sign to the traveled portion of a public street. This distance shall be measured from the outer-most edge of the sign. Pole signs are prohibited in B-1 and B-2 districts, except when approved by the planning commission as a decorative monument sign which blends with the district. 
    Portable or temporary sign means any sign designed or constructed to be easily moved from one location to another, including signs mounted upon or designed to be mounted upon a trailer, bench, wheeled carrier or other nonmotorized mobile structure; a portable sign which has its wheels removed shall still be considered a portable sign hereunder. For the purpose of this section, trailer signs and signs on benches are portable/temporary signs. 
    Projecting sign means a sign projecting from and supported by the wall of a building with the exposed faces of the sign not in a plane parallel to the building wall. 
    Public sign means a sign intended for the community and its people rather than a private commercial concern. 
    Required setback means the minimum setback as measured from the street right-of-way to the nearest portion of the sign or its supporting structure. 
    Roof sign means a sign which is erected, constructed and maintained upon or above the roof of a building, marquee or parapet wall and which is wholly or partially supported by the building, but not projecting more than five feet above a flat roof or above the highest portion of a sloped roof. Roof signs are prohibited in the B-1 and B-2 zoning districts. 
    Signs means and include every individual announcement, declaration, illustration, insignia, surface or space when erected or maintained in view of the general public on a public way for identification, advertisement or promotion of the interest of any person. This definition does not include small goods or products when displayed indoors, or when approved by the planning commission for outdoor display, or when displayed within three feet of the front of the building (see section 36-41, pertaining to merchandise display), or when displayed in a nonrequired yard. 
    Trailer sign means a sign supported on a mobile or portable chassis, including a motor vehicle, and is to be considered a temporary sign and installed for a 30-day or less period. Trailer signs shall have the owner's name and address clearly imprinted for identification purposes and must be unilluminated. 
    Wall sign means a sign which is attached directly to or painted lettering on a wall or mansard roof of a building with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the building wall, and which projects not more than 18 inches from the building or structure wall and which does not extend above the parapet, eaves or building facade of the building on which it is located. Wall signs located in the central business district, B-2 zoning, must be lower than the second floor window sills or 15 feet, whichever is lower. 
    Yard sign. See Pole sign. 
Note- Definition illustrations. For purposes of clarity, certain definitions found in this subsection are supplemented through illustration. In the event of discrepancies between the sign illustrations and sign text, the sign text shall prevail. 



(d)  General provisions. 
(1)  Prohibited signs. 
a.  Encroaching signs, as defined in subsection (c) of this section, are prohibited, except for signs located in the B-2 zoning district as authorized by this chapter and signs approved by the city council as authorized by this chapter. 
b.  Any sign, which is by reason of its size, location, content, coloring or manner of illumination, constitutes a traffic hazard or detriment to traffic safety by obstructing the vision of drivers, or by obstructing or detracting from the visibility of any traffic control device on public streets and roads. Illumination of signs must be directed away or shielded from the roadway (indirect or internally illuminated), and must not be blue, red or amber colored. 
c.  Signs which make use of words such as "Stop," "Look," "Danger," or any other words, phrases, symbols or characters, in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. 
d.  Signs and sign structures that are no longer in use as originally intended or have been abandoned; or are structurally unsafe, constitute a hazard to safety and health, or those not kept in good repair. 
e.  Any sign which obstructs free ingress to or ingress from a required door, window, fire escape or other required exit way. 
f.  Any sign or other advertising structure containing any obscene, indecent or immoral matter. 
g.  Any sign, from the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived (November 5, 1986), unlawfully installed, erected or maintained. 
h.  Signs having flashing, blinking or running type lights that are visible from the roadway are prohibited unless such flashing, blinking or running-type lighting is used solely for the purpose of electrically changing the copy of the sign, for example, time and temperature signs. 
i.  Any sign installed prior to this section without a sign permit, when in fact the prior ordinance required a sign permit. 
j.  Signs located on vacant zoning lots, except real estate for sale, rent or lease sign, pertaining to the property on which the sign is located, see subsection (f) of this section, pertaining to temporary use signs. 
k.  Signs that obstruct visual clearance by exceeding 30 inches in height or signs not raised above a height of at least ten feet, with no more than one pole not exceeding 12 inches in diameter, shall not be permitted within the triangular area formed at the intersection of the traveled portion of any street, driveway or alley by a straight line drawn between them at a distance 25 feet from their point of intersection. 
l.  All signs shall be designed and constructed in conformance with the materials, loads, stresses and fire safety requirements as outlined by the state construction code requirements. Signs not so designed and constructed shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Exempted signs. The following signs are exempt from the restrictions of this section: 
a.  Reserved. 
b.  Interior and exterior window signs on buildings located in nonresidential districts, and interior window signs located in residential districts for purposes of child safety; provided, however, window signs in the B-2 zone district shall comply with the design standards detailed in Schedule B set forth in this section. 
c.  Nameplates less than one square foot in area and located on a building. 
d.  Memorial signs or tablets with the building name and date, when cut into the masonry or made of bronze or similar material and located on a building. 
e.  Private directional, instructional or other noncommercial signs, such as entry, parking, restroom location, and similar functional signs, when horizontally painted on pavement and not to exceed four square feet in area when constructed and erected as pole signs and not to exceed four feet in height. When the height exceeds three feet, the sign must be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the traveled portion of a street, alley or sidewalk. A business identification sign or emblem, not exceeding 50 percent of the sign area, may be incorporated within the permitted private directional sign. Wall signs, not to exceed two square feet in area and not located more than eight feet above grade may also be placed for directional or instructional purposes. 
f.  A maximum of two on-premises institutional signs setting forth the name or any simple announcement for public, charitable, educational or religious purposes, not to exceed 18 square feet in area per sign. If ground mounted, the top of the sign shall not be more than six feet above grade level. 
g.  "No Trespassing," "No Hunting" and signs of a similar nature. 
h.  Address numbers with a numeral height not to exceed 12 inches when located on a building. 
i.  Flags bearing the official designation of a noncommercial organization and up to one free waving commercial flag, with a maximum area of 20 square feet, when displayed with an American flag. 
j.  Permanent signs affixed to equipment pertaining directly to the equipment or contents therein, i.e., gas pumps, vending machines. 
k.  Signs carried by an individual. 
l.  Credit card signs shall not exceed 18 inches by 18 inches when added to a conforming sign. 
(3)  Nonconforming signs. 
a.  Signs installed without a sign permit shall be considered illegal and nonconforming and shall be either removed or made to conform to this section and a legal permit be obtained. 
b.  Nonconforming signs shall not be changed, altered or enlarged unless such change, alteration, or enlargement is made to conform to this section. See note at the end of this subsection (d). 
c.  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the change of the business or product copy or message thereon. 
d.  Any lawful nonconforming sign damaged, worn or destroyed may not be repaired, rebuilt, restored or reinstalled, except in conformance with this Code. 
Exceptions: electrical, painting, tuck-pointing, sealing or other incidental repair or maintenance. 
e.  Signs for nonconforming uses of land and/or buildings must have approval from the city's zoning board of appeals. 
f.  No nonconforming signs shall be reestablished, maintained or resurfaced after the activity, business or usage to which it relates has been discontinued for 30 days or longer. Nonconforming signs of a discontinued activity, business or usage shall be considered a blighting nuisance and must be removed within 40 days of said discontinuation. 
g.  If the owner of a sign or the premises on which a sign is located changes the location of a building, property line or sign, or changes the use of a building so that any sign on the premises is rendered nonconforming, such sign must be removed or made to conform with this Code. 
Note: Change in copy or sign facing shall not be considered a structural change and shall not require a permit provided that no enlargement is made. 
(e)  Permitted signs by zoning districts. Sign regulations by their zoning districts are as follows: 
(1)  Residential districts. In all residential districts, the requirements of Schedule A shall govern sign use, area, type, height, and numbers, in addition to requirements elsewhere in this section. 
(2)  Commercial and office districts. In all commercial and office zoning districts, the requirements of Schedule B shall govern sign use, area, type, height and numbers, in addition to requirements elsewhere in this section. Pursuant to Schedule B, the sign standards for the B-2 zone district follow the Schedule B, groups 1 through 6, table of sign regulations. 
(3)  Industrial districts. In all industrial zoning districts, the requirement of Schedule C shall govern sign use, area, type, height and numbers, in addition to requirements elsewhere in this section, and any protective covenants for the specific industrial parks. 
(f)  Temporary use signs. Signs intended for use over a temporary period of time may be permitted. Temporary signs shall comply with all the requirements of this section and Schedule D. All temporary signs not listed in Schedule D are prohibited unless otherwise provided for in this chapter. 
Schedule A - Residential Districts 
Use Sign Type Pole Marquee Wall Projecting Sign Group 1 - Religious Day Care, Human Care, Cemeteries, Parks (public), Public Buildings and School > Maximum 
display area 6 square feet 6 square feet 6 square feet 6 square feet Maximum height 8 feet See sign type definition Not above wall line Not above wall line Sign purpose Identification Identification Identification Identification Maximum 
number 
of signs 1 pole sign or 1 projecting sign 1 per entrance 1 per wall 1 projecting sign or 1 pole sign Group 2 - Housing Developments, including Mobile Home Parks, Apartments, Subdivisions, Condominiums and Other Multi-Family Developments > Maximum 
display area 6 square feet plus a maximum increase of 50% for signs required by the government Maximum height 8 feet Sign purpose Identification Maximum 
number of signs 1 per street 
entrance Group 3 - Home Occupation, Name and/or Address of Occupant > Maximum 
display area 2 square feet 2 square feet 2 square feet Maximum height 4 feet Not above wall line 4 feet Sign purpose Identification Identification Identification Maximum 
number 
of signs 1 pole sign or 1 wall sign or 1 projecting sign per dwelling Group 4 - Off-Premises Signs > Maximum 
Display area *************************Prohibited************************ Maximum Height Sign purpose Maximum 
Number 
of Signs  
Schedule B - Commercial and Office Districts 
Use Sign Type Pole 1,2,3 Marquee Wall Projecting Sign Roof 
or Awning Group 1 - Individual Establishment (not located within a multiestablishment center) Maximum 
display area 32 square feet - OS zone 6 
square feet An aggregate sign area of 15% area of wall being served 32 square feet - B-1, OS zone See sign type definition 48 square feet - B-3 zone 48 square feet - B-3 zone 64 square feet - TS zone 64 square feet - TS zone Maximum height Not higher than the maximum height limitation of the use district in which located See 
definition Not above wall line Not higher than building See sign type definition Sign 
purpose Business or identification Business or identification Business or identification Business or identification Business or identification Maximum number of signs 1 pole sign or 1 projecting sign or 1 roof sign; plus awning, marquee and wall signs 1 per entrance 2 signs per wall, provided a wall with a projecting sign or roof sign shall not also contain wall signs plus one pole sign 1 projecting sign or 1 pole sign or 1 roof or awning sign, or 2 wall signs 1 roof or awning sign or 1 pole sign or 1 projecting sign Group 2 - Individual establishments located within a multiestablishment Maximum 
display area Individual pole signs are prohibited except that individual business tenants which are anchor stores with more than 25% of the total square footage in the multiestablishment (i.e., mall) may have 1 pole sign (complying with Group 1 of this schedule) in addition to the center sign. (See Group 3 of this schedule.) 6 square feet 15% area of wall to be served 18 square feet See sign type definition Maximum height See sign type definition Not above roof line Not above wall line See sign type definition Sign purpose Business or identification Business or identification Business or identification Business or identification Maximum number of signs 1 per entrance 1 per wall provided a wall with a projecting or roof sign shall not also contain a wall sign. 1 projecting sign or 1 roof or awning sign or 1 pole sign (if permitted - see pole sign requirements). 1 roof or awning sign or 1 projecting sign or 1 pole sign (if permitted - see pole sign requirements). Group 3 - Multiestablishment and/or professional center. (This regulation does not apply to individual establishments in a development such as a shopping center. See Group 2 of this schedule for these requirements.) Maximum display area 32 square feet - OS, zone 15% area of wall of establishment that sign is to be installed. 48 square feet - B-3 zone 64 square feet - TS zone Allowable increase of 15 square feet in B-3 zone and 20 square feet in TS zones for each individual 4 business (lease/deed) in the multiestablishment, up to a maximum of 144 square feet in B-3 zone and 192 square feet in TS zones. Maximum height Not higher than the maximum height limitation of the use district in which located. Not above front wall Sign purpose Identification of shopping center and/or identification of individual businesses in shopping center. Identification of shopping center Maximum number of signs 1 pole sign per center 1 per wall Group 4 - Auto service station Maximum display area 32 square feet - B-3 zone 15% area of wall of establishment that is to receive sign. 32 square feet - B-3 zone See sign type definition. 64 square feet - TS zone 64 square feet - TS zone Maximum height 30 feet Not above wall line. Not above wall line. See sign type definition. Sign purpose Business or identification Business or identification Business or identification Business or identification Maximum number of signs Corner lot - Total of 2 pole signs or 2 projecting signs or combination of each. 1 per wall, provided a wall having a roof sign shall not also contain a wall sign. Corner lot - Total of 2 projecting signs or 2 pole signs or combination of each. 1 per establishment Inside lot - 1 pole sign or 1 projecting sign. Inside lot - 1 projecting sign or 1 pole sign. Group 5 - Permanent off-premises signs. Organization or Agency Requesting Sign Sign Type/Purpose/Standards/Approval City, Michigan Department of Transportation and United States Federal Highway Administration Traffic Control Signs - Traffic control signs of the city, Michigan Department of Transportation and United States Federal Highway Administration are exempt from the provisions of the ordinance and may be designed and erected in accordance with applicable local, state, and federal guidelines. Public agencies and organizations including schools, public libraries, City of Cadillac, Wexford County Board of Commissioners, Cadillac-Wexford Transit Authority, Cadillac-Wexford Airport Authority, and other local, state and federal public agencies and organizations. Directional Signs - Off-premises encroaching signs are subject to review and approval by the city council based upon a demonstration of compliance with the following standards: 
1. Signs shall be for directional purposes only providing the name and location of the agency or organization they are intended to serve. 
2. Signs shall not conflict with traffic control signs and devices or pre-existing signs nor impact the safe and efficient circulation of pedestrians and motorists. 
3. Signs shall not impact the ability of people to safely and efficiently exit and enter parked vehicles. 
4. Signs shall not be internally or externally lighted. 
5. Signs shall be designed and located such that they are harmonious with the character of the surrounding area. 
6. Signs shall not result in the rerouting of vehicular traffic such that residential areas traversed by the sign's directional message experience significant increases in vehicular traffic levels, unless the city council determines said rerouting to be in the public interest. 
  
In approving these signs, city council has authority to regulate the design, number and location of the signs. Maximum display area 48 square feet 15% of area of wall served Maximum height 30 feet 30 feet > Sign purpose Name or location with directions to a business or activity. Name or location with directions to a business or activity. Maximum number of signs Only as approved by city council. Only as approved by city council. Group 6 - Off-premises advertising (see definition) Maximum display area 350 square feet face or 700 square feet total 350 square feet face or 700 square feet total Maximum height 25 feet 25 feet Sign purpose Advertising a business or service identification Advertising a business or service identification Maximum number of signs 3 pole signs or 3 wall signs or any combination of each. (See the zoning administrator.) 3 wall signs or 3 pole signs or any combination of each. (See the zoning administrator.)  
1 Prohibited in B-1 and B-2 zones (except when approved by the planning board). In a TS-2 zone, when located within 25 feet of the abutting street right-of-way, the bottom of the sign must be raised, on poles, and at least seven feet above the ground. 
2 In addition to the main sign face of a conforming pole sign, an additional sign face may be added to the pole as a secondary sign. The secondary sign must: 
a)  Be located below the main sign face; 
b)  Not exceed 18 square feet in display area; 
c)  Not be larger in display area than the main sign face; and 
3 The area of a pole sign may be increased one square foot per each additional one foot the sign is set back from the front property setback line. 
4 Each individual business must be separated with walls constructed in conformance with the building code. 
B-2 Central Business District Zone District 
Wall Signs - B-2 Zone District Location May be placed on any building elevation (wall) capable of being viewed from a public right-of-way such as a street, alley, sidewalk, or public parking lot. Number One sign per building elevation, provided, however, a building elevation with a canopy sign or awning sign may not also erect a wall sign on said elevation. (See also Notes 1 and 2.) Maximum Area Per Sign Fifteen percent of the gross area (in square feet) of the exterior building elevation (wall) on which the sign is to be placed. Projection from Wall No portion of a wall sign shall project more than 18 inches from the wall to which the sign is attached. Height Building Walls Adjacent To And Facing Mitchell Street (131BR) - Signs must be lower than the second floor windowsills or 15 feet, whichever is lower. Building Walls Adjacent To Other Streets And Alleys - No portion of a wall sign shall project above the wall to which the sign is attached. Illumination Wall signs may be externally or internally illuminated. Notes 1) A sign may include the names of multiple building tenants and businesses provided the sign is designed, constructed, and installed as a single, cohesive, unit.2) Any business having an exterior wall possessing a doorway allowing direct access to the outside may install a wall sign on the exterior wall. Other businesses (i.e. those in multi-tenant buildings) must share the space on a wall sign as provided for under Note 1). A business with an exterior (outside) wall shall be considered a building elevation for sign purposes provided:a) the exterior wall possesses a doorway leading directly to the outside; and,b) said doorway is for the exclusive use of the business and business patrons for which direct outside access is provided.For determining allowable sign size, the area of the building elevation as stated above shall be based on the area of that portion of the exterior wall which, if extended internally, would be coincident with the interior space of the business served by said wall. Projecting Signs(1) - B-2 Zone District Location May be attached to any building elevation (wall) fronting a street, alley, sidewalk, or public parking area. Number One permanent sign per building elevation (wall) and one temporary sign per building elevation (wall) in which their exists a public entry point. A building elevation with a permanent projecting sign may not also erect a hanging sign on said elevation. Maximum Area Per Sign Signs Projecting Into A Public Right-of-Way (2) - A projecting sign, with any portion of said sign extending into a public right-of-way, shall not exceed six square feet. Projecting Signs Outside Of A Public Right-of-Waya) Permanent - Shall not exceed 24 square feet.b) Temporary - Shall not exceed six square feet. Projection from Wall No portion of a projecting sign shall extend more than 42 inches from the wall to which the sign is attached. Minimum Height Permanent Projecting Signs - No portion of a permanent projecting sign shall be less than seven feet from the underlying ground surface. Temporary Projecting Sign a) The wall-mounting bracket for the sign pole shall be not less than five feet six inches from the underlying ground surface. b) No portion of a projecting sign face shall be less than six feet from the underlying ground surface if located within 36 inches of the wall to which the sign is attached. If located beyond 36 inches, no portion of a projecting sign face shall be less than seven feet from the underlying ground surface. Maximum Height No portion of a projecting sign shall be higher than 15 feet from the underlying ground surface, provided, however, in no case shall any portion of the sign extend above the wall to which the sign is attached. Illumination Projecting signs extending over a public right-of-way shall not be illuminated. Other projecting signs may be externally or internally illuminated. Notes (1) Projecting Signs: a) Permanent Projecting Signs - Signs classified as permanent refer to those in which a sign is permanently affixed to a building and with the sign support and face constructed of rigid materials such as wood, firm plastic or vinyl, and metal. b) Temporary Projecting Signs - Signs classified as temporary refer to those in which the components of the sign (pole and sign face) are commonly placed and removed on a daily basis. The sign face is constructed of non-rigid material such as cloth, canvas, or flexible plastic and vinyl. Temporary signs commonly include "Open for Business" banners placed by merchants during the hours of business operation.(2) No portion of a projecting sign extending over a public right-of-way shall interfere with the safe movement of pedestrians. > Hanging (Suspended) Signs (Including Marquee Signs) - B-2 Zone District Location Hanging signs shall be located beneath, and suspended from, a canopy, marquee, soffit, or similar building feature. Number One sign per building elevation (wall). A building elevation with a hanging sign may not also erect a permanent projecting sign on said elevation. Maximum Area Per Sign Four square feet. Projection from Wall No portion of a hanging sign shall extend beyond the perimeter of the building feature to which the sign is attached. Minimum Height No portion of a hanging sign shall be less than seven feet from the underlying ground surface. Maximum Height No portion of a hanging sign shall be higher than 15 feet from the underlying ground surface. Illumination None. > Pole Signs (1) - B-2 Zone District Location No portion of the sign, including the sign pole (support members) or sign face, may be located in or over a public right-of-way. Maximum Sign Area Thirty-two square feet. Number One (1) sign per parcel. Minimum Height Except for the pole upon which the sign is mounted, no portion of the sign shall be less than seven feet from the underlying ground surface. Maximum Height No portion of the sign shall be higher than 40 feet from the underlying ground surface. Illumination Signs may be externally or internally illuminated. Notes 1) Pole signs are subject to review and approval by the City Planning Board as a Special Land Use. > Ground Mounted (Monument) Signs - B-2 Zone District Location The sign shall be located not less than ten feet from any property line. In no case shall a sign be located in a clear vision area. Maximum Sign Area Twenty-four square feet. Number One sign per parcel. Maximum Height No portion of the sign shall be greater than four feet in height as measured from the underlying ground surface. Illumination May be externally or internally illuminated. > Portable A-Frame (Sandwich Board) Signs on a Public Sidewalk - B-2 Zone District Location The sign may be placed on the public sidewalk located adjacent to, and extending between, the front building elevation (i.e. building wall) and street curb line, provided, however, signs may not be placed in or on: a) decorative brick pavers; b) clear vision areas; c) locations that interfere with normal pedestrian movement and/or safety; d) curbside locations interfering with vehicular movement and passenger loading and unloading; or, e) any location representing a potential safety hazard. (See Note 1.) Maximum Sign Area Six square feet per side with a maximum of two sides. Number One sign per building entry commonly used by business patrons (See Note 2.) Maximum Height Not to exceed 42 inches, as measured from the sidewalk to the uppermost part of the sign when fully opened for display purposes. Illumination None. Placement Hours Coincident with the hours of the business operation to which the sign relates. At all other times the sign shall be placed in-doors. Notes 1) In no case shall the standards of this chapter regarding the location of portable a-frame signs in a public right-of-way override or preclude compliance with any standards, regulations, and/or permit requirements imposed by the Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT) pursuant to the use and occupancy of right-of-way under MDOT ownership and/or control.2) Only one sign is permitted per building entry regardless of the number of tenants or businesses that use said entry. The sign may include copy referencing multiple tenants or businesses. > Canopy and Awning Signs - B-2 Zone District Location As an integral part (design) of a canopy or awning. Maximum Sign Area A canopy or awning sign shall not exceed 15 percent of the gross area (in square feet) of the exterior building elevation (wall) on which the canopy or awning is to be placed. Number One sign per canopy or awning, provided, however, a building elevation (wall) with a wall sign may not also erect a canopy or awning sign on said elevation. Projection from Canopy or Awning No portion of a canopy or awning sign shall extend more than three inches beyond the underlying surface of the canopy or awning to which the sign is attached. Minimum Height No portion of a canopy or awning sign shall extend below the canopy or awning. Maximum Height No portion of a canopy or awning sign shall extend above the canopy or awning. Illumination Canopy or awning signs may be illuminated internally. > Window Signs - B-2 Zone District Location The exterior or interior of a window. Maximum Sign Area Signs shall be placed such that a clear vision area of not less than 50 percent of the window surface, as measured by the exterior window surface, shall be maintained. Clear vision area refers to that portion of a window not blocked by any sign treatment thereby allowing views through the window. Number Not applicable. Projection from Window No portion of a window sign shall extend more than one-half inch from an underlying exterior window surface. Not applicable to interior window surfaces. Minimum Height Not applicable. Maximum Height Not applicable. Illumination Not applicable.  
Schedule C - Industrial 
Use Sign Type Pole Marquee Wall Projecting 
Sign > Group 1 - Individual Establishments (see footnote 1) > Maximum 
display area 32 square feet 6 square feet 15% of area of wall served. Maximum height Not higher than the maximum height limitation of the use district in which located. Affixed to the underside of the building overhang. Not above front wall Sign purpose Identification or business Maximum 
number 
of signs 1, provided that a wall sign shall not also be erected on the wall adjacent to a pole sign. 1 per entrance 1 per wall, provided that a wall sign shall not also be erected on a wall adjacent to a pole sign Group 2 - Individual park entrances (see protective covenants for specific park restrictions). > Maximum 
display area 32 square feet Maximum height Not higher than the maximum height limitations of the use district in which located. Sign purpose Industrial Park Identification Maximum 
number 
of signs 1 sign per drive Group 3 - Off-Premises Signs Maximum 
display area *******************Prohibited********************** Maximum height Sign purpose Maximum 
number 
of signs  
1 Individual establishments within the city's industrial parks are covered by protective covenants. Pole signs are not permitted. Refer to covenants for requirements and standards. 
Schedule D - Temporary Use Signs 
Sign Type Maximum Size
Per Face Maximum
Height Maximum
Duration Real estate: sale, rent, or lease and construction signs in residential zones. (No permit required.) 4 sq. ft. (single-family) 
10 sq. ft. (multiple-family). 6 feet 5 days after purpose of sign fulfilled. 1 Above signs, all other districts. (No permit required.) 32 sq. ft. 6 feet 10 days after purpose of sign fulfilled. 1 Political signs. Must be located on private property with permission of owner or agent. (No permit required.) 4 sq. ft. (residential districts) 
32 sq. ft. - (other districts) 6 feet Must be removed within 10 days following election. Must be self-supporting. Trailer/Mobile sign in Commercial and Industrial Districts. 2 (Permit required.) 32 sq. ft. 6 feet 30 days during any calendar year and no more than 1 every 6 months. Interior signs (visible from the street). (No permit required.) No maximum Not applicable Not applicable. Off-premises encroaching signs of non-profit agencies and organizations registered with the Internal Revenue Service as such and other charitable agencies and organizations exempt from paying income and property taxes that are centered on religious, educational or other public interest activities that are philanthropic in nature. City council approval required for signs. Refer to footnote 3. 6 sq. ft. per side with a maximum of two sides. (Permitted in all districts) Subject to council approval. Subject to council approval.  
Notes: 
1 For single-family subdivisions under development, sign(s) shall be removed within the year after sale of 90 percent of all lots. 
2 Trailer signs shall have owner's name and address clearly imprinted for identification purposes. See definition (x). 
3 Off-premises encroaching signs are subject to review and approval based on compliance with the following: 
a)  Signs shall not conflict with traffic control signs and devices or pre-existing signs nor impact the safe and efficient circulation of pedestrians and motorists. Signs shall not be placed in clear vision zones as required by the city or Michigan Department of Transportation. 
b)  Signs shall not impact the ability of people to safely and efficiently exit and enter parked vehicles. 
c)  Except as noted, signs shall not be placed in a public right-of-way, such as a public sidewalk, on which that portion of public right-of-way has been authorized by the ordinance for the placement of an off-premises sign by a business located in a building abutting said right-of-way. Exception: an above business may permit the placement of an approved temporary sign associated with a governmental, non-profit or charitable agency or organization activity or event. In doing so, said business shall refrain from also exhibiting their business sign during the period at which the sign of the governmental, non-profit or charitable agency or organization is displayed. 
d)  Signs shall be designed and located such that they are harmonious with the character of the surrounding area. 
e)  Signs shall not result in the rerouting of vehicular traffic such that residential areas traversed by the sign's directional message experience significant increases in vehicular traffic levels, unless the city council determines said rerouting to be in the public interest. 
f)  Signs shall be placed no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and removed by 9:00 p.m. each day, unless different times for said placement have been approved by the city council. 
g)  In approving these signs, city council has authority to regulate the design, number and location of the signs. 
(g)  Special land uses. All signs connected with a special land use or planned unit development as outlined in the zoning ordinance must be reviewed and approved by the planning commission. The board must use the requirements of the underlying zoning district as a guide. 
(h)  Administrative and enforcement. 
(1)  Administrative. The provisions of this section shall be administered by the zoning administrator or his or her designee, who shall have the authority to issue sign permits. It shall be unlawful to erect or replace any sign, whether freestanding, mounted on, applied to or painted on a building or other structure, without first obtaining a permit, except temporary signs. Painting, repainting, repairing, servicing or cleaning of a sign or the changing of the business or product copy of a message thereon shall not be considered an erection or alteration which requires a sign permit, unless a structural change is made. 
(2)  Enforcement. If the zoning administrator or his or her designee shall find any of the provisions of this section are being violated, he shall notify, in writing, the persons responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. If compliance is not accomplished within a prescribed 30 days, the city attorney shall be contacted for appropriate enforcement action. 
(3)  Penalties. Any violation of the provisions of this section is punishable as a municipal civil infraction. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(i)  Sign permits. 
(1)  Application for a permit to erect or replace a sign shall be made to the zoning administrator or his or her designee, by submission of the required forms, fees, exhibits and information by the owner of the property on which the sign is to be located, or by his or her agent, or lessee. The applications shall contain the following information: 
a.  The property owner's name and address in full. 
b.  Applicant's name and address. 
c.  Address of property on which sign is to be situated. 
d.  Business to which sign belongs or relates. 
e.  Total display area in square feet. 
f.  Proposed setback from the right-of-way. 
g.  Sign type. 
h.  Sign purpose. 
i.  Sign height. 
j.  Height and width of building to be served, if applicable. 
k.  Drawing of proposed sign indicating proposed copy. 
(2)  Sign permits issued on the basis of plans and applications authorize only the design and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other design. 
(3)  No sign permit for any sign which does not conform to the provisions of this section shall be issued. 
(4)  The zoning administrator or his or her designee may require the Wexford County building inspector to certify that all expected loadings are anticipated. If the zoning administrator determines that an electrical permit or building permit may be required, the zoning administrator shall direct the applicant to contact the Wexford County building inspector, and the applicant shall be required to obtain all required permits. 
(5)  The city shall maintain a record of all sign permits issued, and the record shall be open for public inspection. 
(6)  Permit fees shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time. 
(7)  Illegal signs. For all signs hereafter erected without issuance of a required sign permit, the zoning administrator or his or her designee shall inform, by certified mail, the property owner upon whose property the sign is situated of the alleged violation of this section. Seventy-two hours shall be allowed for compliance with this section, with the permit fee charged at five times the standard permit fee. 
If compliance is not accomplished in the prescribed 30-day period, the city attorney shall be contacted for appropriate enforcement action. 
(j)  Appeals and variances. 
(1)  Appeals. Any person allegedly aggrieved by a decision of a city official relative to the placement, area, height or construction of a sign may appeal such decision to the city zoning board of appeals. Such appeal shall be taken as a normal appeal through the zoning administrator. 
(2)  Variances. Whenever the strict application of the requirements of this section may pose demonstrable hardship or practical difficulty with regard to placement, area, height and construction of a sign, a request for variance from such requirements may be filed with the zoning administrator on a form provided for such purpose. 
(3)  Standards. The standards for granting variances shall be that all of the following conditions must be met: 
a.  Variances may be granted only when it can be clearly demonstrated that hardship or practical difficulty will in fact exist if the variance is not granted. 
b.  The mere fact that other larger signs constructed under prior sign ordinances do exist in the area shall not be sufficient reason to declare hardship nor practical difficulty. 
c.  In no case shall a variance be granted if it is determined by the board of appeals that the appellant has created the hardship or practical difficulty. 
d.  Before a variance is granted, it must be shown that the alleged hardships or particular peculiar difficulties of the person requesting the variance result from conditions which do not exist generally throughout the city. 
e.  The applicant for a variance shall be prepared to furnish a site drawing, photographs, and/or any other means of proof to the board of appeals to so indicate that hardship or practical difficulty does in fact exist. 
f.  The term "hardship" shall not be deemed financial hardship relating to the cost of the sign or the size of the sign or to the fact that the sign has already been constructed, or the fact that the sign is only available in standardized sizes and/or materials. 
Example: franchised business signs. 
g.  The alleged hardships and practical difficulties, or both, which will result from a failure to grant the variance must include substantially more than mere inconvenience, or mere inability to attain a higher financial return. 
h.  It must be shown that allowing the variance will result in substantial justice being done, considering the public benefits intended to be secured by this section, the individual hardships that will be suffered by a failure of the board to grant a variance, and especially the rights of others whose property would be affected by the allowance of the variance. 
i.  The above findings of fact shall be made by the board of appeals, which is not empowered to grant a variance without finding of fact in each of the categories above. Every finding of fact shall be supported in the record of the proceedings of the board. 
j.  Nothing contained herein shall be construed to empower the board of appeals to change the terms of this section or to add to the types of signs permitted on any premises. 
(4)  Fees. Any person filing for a variance or taking an appeal with the zoning board of appeals shall fill out the necessary appeal variance form provided by the zoning administrator and shall pay a filing fee at the time of filing as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time. The city clerk shall then place the matter on a regular meeting agenda of the board of appeals within 30 days of filing. Within 90 days of receipt, the board of appeals shall render a final decision in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 5.191; Ord. No. 86-16, 10-6-1986; Ord. No. 88-18, 10-17-1988; Ord. No. 91-14, 10-21-1991; Ord. No. 92-16, 10-5-1992; Ord. No. 95-14, 7-17-1995; Ord. No. 95-21, 8-7-1995; Ord. No. 97-12, 8-4-1997; Ord. No. 2007-05, § 1, 6-4-2007; Ord. No. 2009-04 § 1, 5-4-2009; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 18, 8-2-2010; Ord. No. 2013-05, § 2, 6-17-2013) 
State Law reference- Highway advertising act, MCL 252.301 et seq. 
Sec. 46-665. - Exterior lighting. 
(a)  All outdoor lighting in all use districts used to light the general area of a specific site shall be shielded to reduce glare and shall be so arranged as to reflect lights away from all adjacent residential districts or adjacent residences. 
(b)  All outdoor lighting in all use districts shall be directed toward and confined to the ground areas of lawns or parking lots. 
(c)  All lighting in nonresidential districts used for the external illumination of buildings, so as to feature said buildings, shall be placed and shielded so as not to interfere with the vision of persons on adjacent highways or adjacent property. 
(d)  Illumination of signs shall be directed or shaded downward so as not to interfere with the vision of persons on the adjacent highways or adjacent property. 
(e)  All illumination of signs and any other outdoor feature shall not be of a flashing, moving or intermittent type. Artificial light shall be maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when in use. 
(Prior Code, § 5.192) 
Sec. 46-666. - Residential entranceway. 
    In all residential districts, so called entranceway structures including, but not limited to, walls, columns, and gates marking entrances to single-family subdivisions or multiple housing projects may be permitted and may be located in a required yard, except as provided in section 46-667; provided that such entranceway structures shall comply to all codes of the municipality, and shall be approved by the zoning administrator or his or her designee. 
(Prior Code, § 5.193; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 19, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 46-667. - Corner clearance. 
(a)  Visual triangle area. No fence, wall, shrubbery, sign or other visual obstruction above a height of 30 inches from the established street grades shall be permitted within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any streets by a straight line drawn between said streets/alleys at a point 25 feet from their point of intersection. 
(b)  Exceptions. The following exceptions from the corner clearance restrictions: 
(1)  Buildings located in the B-2 zone and complying with the requirements for that zone. 
(2)  Signs complying with section 46-664. 
(Prior Code, § 5.194; Ord. No. 87-17, 10-9-1987) 
Sec. 46-668. - Obscuring walls. 
(a)  For those use districts and uses listed below, there shall be provided and maintained on those sides abutting or adjacent to a residential district an obscuring wall as required in this subsection, except as otherwise required in subsection (d) of this section. 
Use Requirements P-1 Vehicular parking district 4'-6" high wall Off-street parking area (other than P-1 districts) 4'-6" high wall B-1, B-2, B-3, OS-1 and OS-2 districts 4'-6" high wall I-1 and I-2 districts - open storage areas, loading or unloading areas 4'-6" to 8' high wall, height shall provide the most complete obscuring possible. See sections 46-490(d) and subsection (d) of this section. Auto wash, drive-in restaurants, hospital - ambulance and delivery areas, utility buildings, stations and/or substations 6'-0" high wall  
(b)  Required walls shall be located on the lot line except where underground utilities interfere and except in instances where this chapter requires conformance with front yard setback lines in abutting residential districts. Upon review of the site plan, the building inspector may approve an alternate location for the wall or may waive the wall requirement if in specific cases it would not serve the purposes of screening the parking area effectively. Required walls may, upon approval of the board of appeals, be located on the opposite side of an alley right-of-way from a nonresidential zone that abuts a residential zone when mutually agreeable to affected property owners. The continuity of the required wall on a given block will be a major consideration of the board of appeals in reviewing such request. 
(c)  Such walls and screening barrier shall have no openings for vehicular traffic or other purposes, except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except such openings as may be required by the chief of police and the building inspector. All walls herein required shall be constructed of materials approved by the building inspector to be durable, weather resistant, rust proof and easily maintained; and wood or wood products shall be specifically excluded. Masonry walls may be constructed with openings which do not in any square section (height and width) exceed 20 percent of the surface. Where walls are so pierced, the openings shall be so placed as to maintain the obscuring character required, and shall not reduce the minimum height requirement. The arrangement of the openings shall be reviewed and approved by the building inspector. 
(d)  The requirement for an obscuring wall between off-street parking areas, outdoor storage areas, and any abutting residential district shall not be required when such areas are located more than 200 feet distant from such abutting residential district. 
(e)  The building inspector may waive or modify the foregoing requirements where cause can be shown that no good purpose would be served; provided that in no instance shall a required wall be permitted to be less than four feet six inches in height, except where section 46-667 applies. 
(1)  In consideration of a request to waive wall requirements between nonresidential and residential districts, the building inspector shall refer the request to the planning commission for a determination as to whether or not the residential district is considered to be an area in transition and will become nonresidential in the future. 
(2)  In such cases as the planning commission determines the residential district to be a future nonresidential area, the building inspector may temporarily waive wall requirements for an initial period not to exceed 12 months. Granting of subsequent waivers shall be permitted; provided that the planning commission shall make a determination as hereinbefore described, for each subsequent waiver prior to the granting of such waiver by the board. 
(Prior Code, § 5.195) 
Sec. 46-669. - Planning commission approval. 
(a)  In cases where the planning commission is empowered to approve certain uses of land and/or buildings under the provisions of this chapter, and, in cases where planning commission review and recommendation is required prior to city council approval, the applicant shall furnish such surveys, plans, or any other information as may be reasonably required by the planning commission for proper consideration of the matter as set forth in section 46-29(a), site plan. 
(b)  The planning commission shall investigate the circumstances of each such case and shall notify such parties, who may, in their opinion, be affected thereby of the time and place of any hearing which may be held relative thereto as required under its rules of procedures. 
(c)  The planning commission may impose such conditions or limitations in granting approval as may in its judgment be necessary to fulfill the spirit and purpose of this chapter. 
(d)  In cases where planning commission review and recommendation is required prior to city council action, the planning commission may recommend to the city council such conditions or limitations as it deems necessary to fulfill the spirit and purpose of this chapter. 
(e)  Any approval given by the planning commission under which the premises are not used or work not started within 12 months or when such work has been abandoned for a period of six months, shall lapse and cease to be in effect. 
(Prior Code, § 5.196; Ord. No. 95-16, 7-17-1995) 
Sec. 46-670. - Frontage on a public street. 
    No lot shall be used for any purpose permitted by this chapter unless said lot abuts an improved public street, unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, except a zoning lot may be occupied or developed, if access to the lot is provided from an improved street by a private easement not less than 20 feet in width. Under this provision, no more than one lot may be served by such a private easement. Additional lots, however, may be served by a single private access upon application for and receipt of a special use permit as provided for in article VI of this chapter, pertaining to special land use. 
(Prior Code, § 5.197; Ord. No. 95-16, 7-17-1995) 
Sec. 46-671. - Access to major thoroughfare or collector street. 
    For uses making reference to this section, vehicular access shall be provided only to an existing or planned major thoroughfare, freeway service drive, or collector street; provided, however, that access driveways may be permitted to other than a major thoroughfare, freeway service drive, or collector street where such access is provided to a street where the property directly across the street from such driveway and all property abutting such street between the driveway and the major thoroughfare, freeway service drive, or collector street is zoned for multiple-family use or any nonresidential uses, is developed with permanent uses other than single-family residences or is an area which, in the opinion of the planning commission, will be used for other than single-family purposes in the future. This exception shall only apply if the planning commission finds that there are special circumstances which indicate that there will be a substantial improvement in traffic safety by reducing the number of driveways to a thoroughfare. 
(Prior Code, § 5.198) 
Sec. 46-672. - Airport overlay zone 
(a)  Zone intent and resolution of conflict with underlying zoning district standards. The airport overlay zone has been established to reduce the hazards to, and provide additional safety for, the users of the airport and to the people who live, work and use property in its vicinity. It is the intent of the airport overlay zone to reduce said hazards and to enhance the safety through the regulations and standards of this section which shall be in addition to the regulations and standards of the underlying zoning district. In the event of conflict between the regulations and standards of the airport overlay zone and those of the underlying zoning district, the more stringent shall apply. 
(b)  Airport overlay zone area limits. The airport overlay zone shall encompass the corporate limits of the city and any lands under the direct control of the city pursuant to the provisions of Public Act No. 425 of 1984 (MCL 124.21 et seq.). 
(c)  Plan review prior to issuance of a building permit. A project proposed for construction, including construction associated with modifications to existing structures, shall be reviewed for conformance with the regulations and standards of the airport overlay zone. 
(d)  Regulations and standards within the limits of the airport overlay zone. No use or structure shall: 
(1)  Create electrical or other interference with radio communication between the airport and aircraft or create interference with navigational aids employed by aircraft. 
(2)  Make it difficult for fliers to distinguish between airport lighting or result in glare in the eyes of fliers using the airport. 
(3)  Create smoke, mist, fog, smog or air pollution in such amounts as to impair the visibility of fliers using the airport. 
(4)  Attract birds or other wildlife so as to constitute a hazard to aircraft. 
(5)  Endanger the landing, taking off or maneuvering of aircraft. 
(6)  Exceed a height in excess of the limitations prescribed by the provisions of the county airport zoning manual. Said height limitation shall apply to trees and other vegetation and all structures. In the event a specific height is not referenced in the above stated manual, the required height limitation shall be calculated by the building inspector through interpolation of the aerial contours as provided by said manual. In making said interpolation, the city may seek the assistance of the county airport authority. 
(e)  Appeals. Appeals of decisions or actions by the building inspector pursuant to enforcement of the provisions of the airport overlay zone shall be made subject to division 2 of article II of this chapter, pertaining to the board of appeals; provided, however, that all applications for appeal shall be submitted to the county airport authority for review and recommendation. 
(f)  Conflict with federal regulations. The provisions of the airport overlay zone are not intended to conflict with existing federal approach protection regulations. The Federal Aviation Administration requires that it be given notice of any construction or alterations that: 
(1)  Would be more than 200 feet above ground level at its site. 
(2)  Would be above an imaginary surface extending outward and upward at a ratio of 100:1 slope, within 20,000 feet of the nearest point of a runway more than 3,200 feet in length. 
(3)  Would be above an imaginary surface extending outward and upward at a ratio of 50:1 slope within 10,000 feet of the nearest point of a runway less than 3,200 feet in length. 
(Prior Code, § 5.199; Ord. No. 90-26, 11-5-1990) 
State Law reference- Aeronautics code, MCL 259.1 et seq.; airport zoning act, MCL 259.431 et seq. 
Sec. 46-673. - Commercial wireless telecommunication services (CWTS) and towers. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to permit the siting of communication towers and antennas within the municipal boundaries of the city. The city finds that there is a need for such towers, however, the need to protect the public health, safety and welfare is paramount. The city's intent is to minimize the number of towers in the city, exclude their location in residential districts, and to encourage users of towers and antennas to configure/design them in a way that minimizes their adverse visual impact. 
(b)  Towers in excess of 40 feet in height for commercial wireless telecommunication services shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  Antennas for commercial wireless telecommunication services shall be required to locate on any existing approved tower or structure within a one-mile radius of the proposed tower, unless one or more of the following conditions exist: 
a.  The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or building, as documented by a qualified and registered professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable. 
b.  The planned equipment would cause interference materially affecting the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower or building as documented by a qualified and registered professional engineer and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost. 
c.  Existing or approved towers and buildings within a one-mile radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably as documented by a qualified and registered professional engineer. 
d.  Other unforeseen reasons that make it infeasible to locate the planned equipment upon an existing tower or building. 
(2)  Any proposed CWTS tower shall be designed, structurally, electrically and in all other respects, to accommodate both the applicant's equipment and comparable equipment for at least two additional users. Towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of equipment upon the tower and to accept equipment mounted at varying heights. 
(3)  CWTS towers shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment through the use of color and architectural treatment, except in instances where color is dictated by other state or federal authorities. Towers shall be of a monopole design unless the planning commission determines that an alternative design would better blend into the surrounding environment. 
(4)  Any part of the structure or equipment placed on the ground pertaining to the CWTS towers shall comply with the following setbacks: 
a.  Residential districts. CWTS towers are not permitted in residential districts and must be located such that any part is not within 200 feet of any residential district lot line. 
b.  Nonresidential districts. Any part of a CWTS tower or associated equipment shall be set back for a distance equal to the setbacks for main buildings for the district in which it is located, except that in no case shall such structures or equipment be located less than 25 feet from any adjacent lot line, nor less than 200 feet from any residential district lot line, nor less than a distance equal to at least 75 percent of the height of the tower from the lot line. 
c.  These provisions shall not apply to antennas located on existing buildings, towers or other existing structures. 
(5)  The planning commission may require such structures or equipment on the ground to be screened with landscaping, berms, walls or a combination of these elements, to minimize their adverse visual impact. 
(6)  Towers and antennas shall not be illuminated unless required by other state or federal authorities. No signs or other advertising not related to safety or hazard warnings shall be permitted on any part of the tower or associated equipment or buildings. 
(7)  Towers and antennas shall be designed and constructed so as not to pose a threat to pedestrians or vehicles accessing the land upon which the tower is located. 
(8)  Towers and antennas shall meet all applicable state and federal height regulations and clearance zone requirements resulting from the presence of the city airport. 
(9)  Towers and antennas which are abandoned or unused shall be removed, along with any associated structures or equipment, within 12 months of the cessation of operations, unless a time extension is granted by the zoning administrator. One three-month extension shall be permitted only if the zoning administrator finds that the owner or former operator of the facility is taking active steps to ensure its removal. 
(10)  A building permit must be obtained before the installation of any tower or related building. 
(11)  A building permit must be obtained before the installation of any antenna on an existing structure when greater than two feet in diameter or greater than 12 feet in height or which weights more than 40 pounds. 
(12)  The maximum height of towers shall be prescribed by the planning commission with section 46-629, the schedule of regulations, used as a guide. Structures taller than the height limitations listed in section 46-629 shall be designed to be aesthetically compatible with the district in which it is located. 
(13)  Towers and related buildings shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet and not more than eight feet in height. The fencing must be provided with appropriate anticlimbing devices as required by the planning commission. 
(14)  Towers and antennas constructed in conformance with this Code shall not be deemed to constitute an expansion of a nonconforming use or structure. 
(15)  The use of city owned properties or rights-of-way by the telecommunication service provider or backhaul network shall be through a franchise or lease agreement. 
(Prior Code, § 5.200; Ord. No. 98-01, 3-2-1998) 
Secs. 46-674-46-704. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL EXCEPTIONS 

Sec. 46-705. - Area, height and use exceptions. 
    The regulations in this chapter shall be subject to the interpretations and exceptions in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 5.221) 
Sec. 46-706. - Setbacks. 
(a)  Where, within the R-1 through R-4 residential districts, the front yard setback for existing dwellings in the vicinity of, and in the same zoning district as, a vacant subject lot are less than the required front yard setback for the zoning district of the subject lot, the required front yard setback for the subject lot shall be the average of the actual front yard setbacks of existing dwellings on the same side of the street and entirely or partially within 100 feet of the side lot lines of the subject parcel, subject to subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(b)  The front yard setback permitted in subsection (a) of this section shall only be permitted if there are two or more lots occupied by dwelling units within the area described in subsection (a) of this section for computing the average front yard setback. 
(c)  In no case shall the average front yard setback resulting from the application of subsections (a) and (b) of this section be less than ten feet. 
(Prior Code, § 5.11; Ord. No. 80-006, 12-1-1980; Ord. No. 88-06, 6-6-1988; Ord. No. 89-01, 1-9-1989; Ord. No. 90-28, 12-3-1990; Ord. No. 98-23, 11-16-1998; Ord. No. 2005-13, 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 46-707. - Essential services. 
    Essential services, as defined in section 46-4, shall be permitted as authorized by the city manager and regulated by law and other ordinances of the city. It is the intention to exempt essential services from the application of this chapter. Commercial telecommunications are not considered essential services. 
(Prior Code, § 5.222; Ord. No. 98-01, 3-2-1998) 
Sec. 46-708. - Voting place. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not be so construed as to interfere with the temporary use of any property as a voting place in connection with a municipal or other public election. 
(Prior Code, § 5.223) 
Sec. 46-709. - Height limit. 
(a)  Except as noted in subsection (b) of this section, the height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to farm buildings, chimneys, church spires, flagpoles or public monuments. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Unless approved by the board of appeals, the height of the structures/building features referenced in subsection (a) of this section shall not exceed the limits as proscribed by the airport overlay zone. 
(2)  If the structures/building features, referenced in subsection (a) of this section, require authorization as, or are associated with, a use permitted subject to special conditions or as a special land use, the planning commission may specify height limits for same. In determining said height limits, the provisions of the airport overlay zone shall not be exceeded unless so authorized by the board of appeals. 
(Prior Code, § 5.224; Ord. No. 90-26, 11-5-1990; Ord. No. 98-01, 3-2-1998) 
Sec. 46-710. - Lot area. 
(a)  Any existing lot and lot of record on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may be used for any principal use permitted in this chapter in the district in which such lot is located whether or not the lot complies with the lot area requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  No more than one main structure shall occupy any lot unless each structure meets the lot area requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  The following uses must comply with the lot area requirements outlined in this chapter: 
(1)  Nonconforming lots, structures, premises, uses of land, and uses of structures as stated in section 46-655. 
(2)  Conditional uses as defined in this chapter under special land uses or under principal uses permitted subject to planning commission approval. 
(Prior Code, § 5.225; Ord. No. 90-18, 11-5-1990) 
Sec. 46-711. - Yard regulations. 
    When yard regulations cannot reasonably be complied with, or where their application cannot be determined on lots of peculiar shape, topography or due to architectural or site arrangement, such regulations may be modified as determined by the board of appeals. 
(Prior Code, § 5.226) 
Sec. 46-712. - Porches. 
    An open, unenclosed and uncovered porch or paved terrace may project into a front yard for a distance not exceeding ten feet, but this shall not be interpreted to include or permit fixed canopies. 
(Prior Code, § 5.227) 
Sec. 46-713. - Projections into yards. 
    Architectural features, not including vertical projections, may extend or project into a required side yard not more than two inches for each one foot of width of such side yard; and may extend or project into a required front yard or rear yard not more than three feet, except those architectural embellishments such as cornices, eaves, lintels, sills, awnings, canopies and signs, when located on buildings in the B-2 zone and in conformance with the state construction code and all other requirements of this Code, may extend over public property. 
(Prior Code, § 5.228; Ord. No. 87-24, 12-7-1987) 
Sec. 46-714. - Access through yards. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, access drives may be placed in the required front or side yards so as to provide access to rear yards and/or accessory or attached structures. These drives shall not be considered as structural violations in front and side yards. Further, any walk, terrace or other pavement servicing a like function, and not in excess of nine inches above the grade upon which placed, shall, for the purpose of this chapter not be considered to be a structure, and shall be permitted in any required yard. 
(Prior Code, § 5.229) 
Sec. 46-715. - Lots having water frontage on Lakes Cadillac and Mitchell. 
(a)  Waterfront setback. Those residential lots and/or parcels having water frontage and abutting a public thoroughfare shall maintain the front yard on the water side as an open, unobstructed yard, except that a boat well and boat hoist (but not a boathouse) shall be permitted after review and approval of plans by the zoning administrator or his or her designee. All structures located in the waterfront yard must be set back from the water's edge (as established by a lake level of 1,290 feet) a minimum distance equal to the average setback of the neighboring four main buildings on the two lots on each side of the subject property, providing that this distance is 35 feet or greater. 
(b)  Road front yard setback. Detached accessory structures shall be permitted in the road front yard, with the minimum three-foot setback from the abutting road right-of-way and three-foot setback from the side lot line being maintained, and the guidelines in subsection (c) of this section are also maintained. 
(c)  Guidelines for approval of accessory structures. Exterior designs of all accessory structures shall be regulated by the zoning and building department to assure orderly, reasonable and harmonious developments which shall maintain the essential character and quality of the surrounding neighborhood. This shall also be intended to prevent the harmful effects of inappropriate exterior design of accessory structures in relation to the exterior designs prevailing throughout the neighborhood. 
(Prior Code, § 5.230; Ord. No. 88-05, 1-9-1989; Ord. No. 99-02, 4-5-1999; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 20, 8-2-2010) 
Secs. 46-716-46-743. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SPECIAL LAND USES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Special land uses, MCL 125.3502 et seq. 

Sec. 46-744. - Purpose. 
    Special land uses are those uses of land which are not essentially incompatible with 
the uses permitted in a zoning district, but possess characteristics or locational qualities which require individual review and legislation in order to avoid incompatibility with the natural environment of the site, the character of the surrounding area, public services and facilities, and adjacent land uses. The purpose of this article is to establish equitable procedures and criteria, which shall be applied in the determination of requests to establish special land uses. In addition, special land uses are a means of implementing changes in land use as envisioned and outlined in the long-range comprehensive plan and shall be utilized as such. The standards for approval and requirements provided for under the provisions of this article shall be in addition to those required elsewhere in this chapter, which are applicable to the special land use under consideration. 
(Prior Code, § 5.278; Ord. No. 88-02, 3-12-1988) 
Sec. 46-745. - Authorization. 
    This article hereby authorizes the city planning commission to consider special land uses. The following uses of land and structures are eligible to be permitted under this article in the district enumerated, as in any proposed use that is listed in this chapter as an eligible special land use: 
Special Use Districts Allowed Newly constructed multiple-family under five acres R-3, R-4, RT, TS-2, RMH, OS-1, OS-2, B-3 Newly constructed two-family under five acres R-2, R-3, R-4, RT, TS-2, RMH Private recreational activities R-2, R-3, R-4, RT Office and/or business and residential mix in one dwelling R-2, R-3, R-4, RT, RM-1, RM-2, RMH, MH, OS-1, OS-2, TS-1, TS-2, P-1, B-1, B-2, B-3 Business and/or office in an existing building R-2, R-3, R-4, RT, RM-1, RM-2, RMH, MH, OS-1, OS-2, B-1, B-2, B-3, TS-1, TS-2, P-1 Two-family residential in existing building R-2, R-3, R-4, B-3, RT, RMH Multiple-family in existing building R-3, R-4, B-3, RT, RMH Family shelter R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, RM -1, RM-2, RMH, MH, R-PUD Group shelter RM-1, RM-2, OS-1, OS-2, B-1, B-2, B-3 Combination Group/Family shelter RM-1 and RM-2  
(Prior Code, § 5.279; Ord. No. 88-02, 3-12-1988; Ord. No. 90-28, 12-3-1990; Ord. No. 95-24, 8-7-1995; Ord. No. 2017-05, § 10, 4-17-2017; Ord. No. 2018-14, § 4, 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 46-746. - Application procedures. 
    An application to establish a special land use shall be submitted and acted upon in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  Any person owning or having an interest in the subject property may file an application for one or more special land use authorizations as provided for in this article. Applications will be available from the zoning administrator and two completed copies, along with all required materials, must be submitted to the zoning administrator, accompanied by the required fee as established by ordinance. No part of any fee shall be refundable and no incomplete application shall be processed. All incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant. 
(2)  The applicant must submit and sign a checklist stating the requirements that will be met to assure the board of present and future compliance with the standards required for approval in this chapter and other standards by this chapter affecting the special land use under consideration. 
(3)  It is required that a sketch plan be submitted to the zoning administrator to ensure that the zoning administrator and applicant can reach an understanding of what is being proposed and what is required. The sketch plan should be drawn to approximate scale and shall follow the guidelines set forth in section 46-29, pertaining to site plans. 
(4)  A detailed site plan will be submitted through the zoning administrator to the planning commission for approval in conformance with section 46-29. 
(5)  Hearing. After a preliminary review by the zoning administrator of the sketch plan, and application for a special land use authorization, the planning commission shall hold a hearing on the site plan and special land use request. Notice of the hearing shall be given as required by MCL 125.3502. Any person or individual representing a group, which may be affected by a special land use authorization may present any petition or document providing support for or opposition to the application in question. 
(6)  Review and approval. The review and approval of an application and site plan requesting a special land use shall be made by the planning commission in accordance with the procedures and standards specified in this article. If an application and site plan do not meet the requirements of the article, they must be denied for a special land use. However, if the applicant agrees to make changes to the site plan and application in order to bring them into compliance with the article, such changes shall be allowed and shall be either noted on the application or site plan itself, or attached to it, or these documents shall be resubmitted incorporating said changes. A site plan and application for a special land use must be approved if they comply in all respects with the requirements of this article or other applicable county, state or federal laws, rules or regulations. The site plan, application and any statements of conditions and modifications shall become part of the special land use and shall be enforceable as such. The decision to approve or deny a special land use request shall be retained as a part of the record of action on the request and shall incorporate a statement of conclusion, which specifies: 
a.  The basis for the decision; 
b.  Any changes to the originally submitted application site plan necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter; 
c.  Any conditions imposed with approval. 
(7)  Rehearing. A rehearing of a case shall be subject to the same rules and costs as an original hearing, and must be based on new information. 
(8)  If authorized by the board, the zoning administrator shall document the special land use and retain all pertinent information. It shall be the responsibility of the zoning administrator to monitor compliance with the terms, conditions and restrictions of any special land use and take any enforcement action necessary in the event of a violation of a special land use authorization. 
(9)  Once a special land use is approved by the board, all site development and use of land on the property affected shall be consistent with the approved special land use unless a change conforming to chapter requirements receives the mutual agreement of the landowner and the planning commission and is documented as such. 
(10)  Performance guarantee. In authorizing a special land use, the planning commission may require that a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or surety bond be furnished by the developer to ensure compliance with an approved site plan and the special land use requirements. Such guarantee shall be deposited with the city clerk at the time of the issuance of the special land use authorization. In fixing the amount of such performance guarantee, the board shall limit it to reasonable improvements required to meet the standards of this chapter and to protect the natural resources or the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city and future users or inhabitants of the proposed project or project area including, but not limited to roadways, utilities, sidewalks, screening and drainage. The term "improvements" does not include the entire project which is the subject of zoning approval nor to improvements for which a performance guarantee has been deposited pursuant to Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.). The board and the project developers shall establish an agreeable procedure for the rebate of any cash deposits required under this section, in reasonable proportion to the ratio of the work completed on the required improvements as work progresses. Said agreement shall be written as an element of the conditions surrounding the approval of the special land use. 
(Prior Code, § 5.280; Ord. No. 88-02, 3-12-1988; Ord. No. 95-24, 8-7-1995) 
State Law reference- Performance guarantee, MCL 125.3505. 
Sec. 46-747. - Basis of determination. 
    Prior to the approval of a special land use, the planning commission shall review all facts submitted to ensure compliance with the following standards as well as applicable standards established elsewhere in this Code: 
(1)  General standards. The planning commission may approve a special land use upon a finding of compliance with the following standards: 
a.  The special land use shall be designed, constructed, operated and maintained in a manner harmonious with the character of adjacent property and the surrounding area. 
b.  The special land use shall not inappropriately change the essential character of the surrounding area. 
c.  The special land use shall not interfere with the general enjoyment of adjacent property. 
d.  The special land use shall represent an improvement to the use or character of the property under consideration and the surrounding area in general, yet also be in keeping with the natural environment of the site. 
e.  The special land use shall not be hazardous to adjacent property, or involve uses, activities, materials or equipment which will be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of persons or property though the excessive production of traffic, noise, odor, fumes, or glare. 
f.  The special land use shall be adequately served by essential public facilities and services, or it shall be demonstrated that the person responsible for the proposed special land use shall be able to continually provide adequately for the services and facilities deemed essential for the special land use under consideration. 
g.  The special land use shall not place demands on public services and facilities in excess of current capacity. 
h.  The special land use shall be consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter, and the objectives of the currently adopted long range comprehensive plan. 
i.  Outdoor play areas must be secured by a fence with a minimum height of 30 inches, or equivalent structure, such that children will be deterred from unauthorized access to adjacent streets, alleys or other locations which may pose a safety threat, as well as protecting adjoining property. Landscaping may be used in place of a structure, provided said landscaping is determined by the planning commission to be of a character suitable to achieve the desired level of security. 
(2)  Specific standards relating to two-family and multiple-family use requests. The following guidelines shall be used when evaluating multiple-family use requests in single-family zones: 
a.  Lot size. Fifty percent of the underlying zoning will be added for each additional unit that is proposed. 
b.  Lot coverage. The lot coverage for a special land use request shall meet the requirement set forth in the underlying zoning of the area. 
c.  Living space. The minimum square footage for the following apartment types shall be: 
1.  For a studio apartment, 350 square feet, plus bath. 
2.  For a one-bedroom apartment, 550 square feet. 
3.  For a two-bedroom apartment, 750 square feet. 
4.  For a three-bedroom apartment, 950 square feet. 
d.  Parking. Each unit shall have appropriate parking spaces for two vehicles. These spaces must have clear ingress and egress. They also cannot be developed in the required front or side yard setbacks. 
e.  Density. Two-family and multiple-family uses in single-family zones shall not be within three times the required lot width of the underlying zoning of each other. 
(3)  Specific standards relating to family shelters. In addition to the general standards required in this section, the following additional requirements shall apply when evaluating requests for family shelters: 
a.  A family consisting of persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or no more than four individuals occupying a dwelling unit who are committed to living together as a single housekeeping unit, in harmony with the surrounding neighborhood, responsible for maintaining a common household. 
b.  A minimum of 300 feet shall be maintained between family shelters unless within a combination group/family shelter. 
c.  A current and unrevoked housing maintenance certificate shall be required for all family shelters. 
(4)  Specific standards relating to group shelters and combination group/family shelters. In addition to the general standards required in this section, the following additional requirements shall apply when evaluating requests for group shelters or combination group/family shelters: 
a.  Group shelters and combination group/family shelters shall not be permitted in the Downtown Development Authority District or the Historic Districts. 
b.  Group shelters and combination group/family shelters shall not be permitted on any property having lake frontage or within 500 feet of Lake Cadillac. 
c.  Group shelters and combination group/family shelters shall comply with all applicable federal and Michigan statutory requirements. 
d.  Group shelters and combination group/family shelters shall comply with all applicable Uniform Building and Fire Codes, including maximum occupancy restrictions. 
e.  Community need, development and operational standards. In addition to the application requirements, group shelters and combination group/family shelters shall comply with all community need, development and operational standards provided in this section. 
1.  Community need standards. Any application for a group shelter or combination group/family shelter must demonstrate that the group shelter or combination group/family shelter is needed to take care of the homeless needs that exist within the greater Cadillac area. 
2.  Development standards. 
i.  Location and separation. 
(A)  Group shelters and combination group/family shelters shall be located in an enumerated zoning district where such use is permitted by special land use or special conditions. 
(B)  A minimum distance of 1,000 feet shall be maintained between all group shelters and combination group/family shelters. 
ii.  Physical characteristics. 
(A)  The maximum number of beds, including those of caretakers or resident managers shall be 16 for group shelters. For combination group/family shelters, the maximum number of beds including those of caretakers or resident managers shall be 60. 
(B)  Smoke detectors in accordance with the international fire code shall be installed. 
(C)  The facility shall provide adequate private living space in accordance with the International Property Maintenance Code. 
(D)  All bedrooms shall have emergency escape openings that comply with the building code. 
(E)  Adequate bathroom facilities shall be provided. 
(F)  A shared/communal area for socializing shall be provided in accordance with the International Property Maintenance Code. For combination group/family shelters containing both a men's and a women's group shelter, a separate shared/communal area shall be provided for both the men's and women's shelter areas in accordance with the International Property Maintenance Code. 
(G)  Secure storage areas for the intended residents shall be provided. 
(H)  Laundry facilities shall be provided. 
(I)  Bicycle racks shall be provided. 
(J)  A designated location should be provided for waste receptacles and such receptacles shall be screened from view. 
(K)  The size of a group shelter shall be in character with the surrounding buildings in the neighborhood. 
(L)  Group shelters shall not be permitted within a commercial multi-tenant shopping center. 
3.  Operational and design standards. 
i.  If located within 150 feet of a single family residential zoning district, all outdoor activity shall be screened from public view and from the view of adjacent properties. 
ii.  If the group shelter or combination group/family shelter plans to offer drug or alcohol abuse counseling to residents of the shelter, the applicant shall advise the city on any state licensing that may be required and demonstrate compliance as appropriate. 
iii.  Lighting shall be sufficient to provide illumination and clear visibility to all outdoor areas, with minimal shadows or light leaving the property. Lighting shall be stationary, directed away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way, and of intensity compatible/comparable with the neighborhood. 
iv.  Off-street parking shall be provided at a rate of one vehicle parking space per employee/volunteer plus one vehicle parking space for every six beds. 
v.  Adequate management, support staff and security must be present during the hours of operation of the group shelter. A minimum of one supervisory level staff member must be present on the site during hours of operation. Management staff must make best efforts to ensure that loitering does not occur on the property during off-hours and must ensure that clients are not creating a nuisance to the neighborhood. 
vi.  The group shelter or combination group/family shelter shall have a minimum of 18 hours per day of operation and the hours of operation shall be posted in a publicly visible and accessible location. Hours of operation means that the shelter is available for occupancy by homeless persons. 
vii.  Group shelters and combination group/family shelters shall require that [their] residents participate in wrap-around services which involve individual case management. 
viii.  The intake process for new residents should be handled from an internal office within the group shelter or combination group/family shelter. 
f.  Management policies. An applicant for a group shelter or combination group/family shelter, as part of the application process, shall prepare and file with the city its management policies as they relate to the following: 
1.  A resident identification process; 
2.  Timing and placement of outdoor activities; 
3.  Standards governing expulsions; 
4.  Hours of operation and standard lights-out; 
5.  Policies regarding safety and security and to include emergencies; 
6.  Smoking policy to include identification of areas where smoking is to be permitted; 
7.  Volunteer and donation procedures; 
8.  Communications with the city and the neighborhood. 
g.  Group shelter or combination group/family shelter approval. The city may deny a proposed group shelter or combination group/family shelter if it makes findings that: 
1.  The proposed shelter fails to meet one or more of the required standards of this section or other applicable state or federal law. 
2.  The proposed shelter would have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development of the shelter financially infeasible. As used in this subsection, a "specific, adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
If an application is denied, the reasons for that denial shall be recorded in the motion to deny. If an application is approved with conditions, the conditions shall be included in the motion to approve. 
(Prior Code, § 5.281; Ord. No. 88-02, 3-12-1988; Ord. No. 89-11, 6-5-1989; Ord. No. 95-24, 8-7-1995; Ord. No. 95-32, 1-15-1996; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 4, 12-19-2016; Ord. No. 2017-05, § 11, 4-17-2017; Ord. No. 2018-14, § 5, 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 46-748. - Effective date. 
    The special land use shall become effective when the application has been approved by the planning commission. 
(1)  A building permit shall not be issued until approval of such special land use permit by the board. 
(2)  Until a building permit has been granted pursuant to the special land use authorization, there shall be no construction or excavation on said land, nor shall use of the land be made toward the intended purposes of such special land use. 
(3)  Land subject to a special land use authorization may not be used or occupied for purposes of such special land use until after a certificate of occupancy for same has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 5.282; Ord. No. 88-02, 3-12-1988; Ord. No. 95-24, 8-7-1995) 
Sec. 46-749. - Permit validity. 
(a)  Approval of a special land use shall be valid regardless of change of ownership, provided that all terms and conditions of the authorization are met. Should the property fail to be used in accordance with the authorization land use or activity, the property will revert to the original zoned use and the special land use will be invalid. If invalidated by the board, the applicant has a right to seek relief from circuit court within 30 days. 
(b)  In instances where development authorized by a special land use has not commenced within one year from the date of issuance or the last date of review authorized by this subsection, the planning commission shall review the authorization in relation to the applicable standards and requirements of this chapter. Upon a finding that there has been a change in conditions on the property or the surrounding area or in the provisions of this chapter applicable to the special land use under review, such that the authorization is no longer in conformance with the requirements of this chapter, the authorization shall become null and void upon action by the board. Where it is determined that such authorizations are in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, and there has not been a change in conditions affecting the validity of the authorization, the special land use shall remain valid, subject to periodic review in accord with the provisions of this subsection. 
(c)  All special land use authorizations with respect to the approval of a land use or activity, shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds at the expense of the applicant to be considered valid, and a copy filed with the zoning administrator. 
(Prior Code, § 5.283; Ord. No. 88-02, 3-12-1988; Ord. No. 95-24, 8-7-1995) 
Sec. 46-750. - Requirement for compliance; penalties. 
    It shall be the duty and obligation of the owners and occupants or operators of land and uses subject to a special land use authorization, to ensure the continued use of such land shall at all times be in compliance with the use requirements of this chapter. Failure to comply shall be a violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties and remedies provided in section 1-14 and the continuance thereof may be declared to be a public nuisance per se. 
(Prior Code, § 5.284; Ord. No. 88-02, 3-12-1988; Ord. No. 95-24, 8-7-1995) 
Sec. 46-751. - Special land use authorization deemed conforming use. 
    Any special land use authorization that has been granted shall be deemed a conforming use permitted in the district in which such use is located, provided such authorization: 
(1)  Was issued in conformity with the provisions of this chapter; 
(2)  Shall be deemed to effect only the lot or portion thereof and uses thereupon for which the special land use authorization shall have been explicitly granted; and 
(3)  Permits a use, which is subsequently built, operated and maintained in compliance with the chapter the special land use authorization, and all conditions established with its approval. 
(Prior Code, § 5.285; Ord. No. 88-02, 3-12-1988; Ord. No. 95-24, 8-7-1995) 
Secs. 46-752-46-770. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ADULT BUSINESSES 

Sec. 46-771. - Purpose. 
    In the development and execution of this chapter, it is recognized that there are some uses which, because of their very nature, have serious operational characteristics, particularly when one or more of them are located in near proximity to residential zones, thereby having a deleterious effect upon adjacent areas. Regulation of these uses through location is necessary to ensure that the adverse effects of such uses will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood. The provisions of this chapter are intended to prevent deterioration or blighting of residential neighborhoods. 
(Prior Code, § 5.300; Ord. No. 94-15, 10-3-1994) 
Sec. 46-772. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult bookstore means an establishment which has in excess of 50 percent of its stock-in-trade for sale or rent, which stock-in-trade consists of books, magazines, newspapers, videotapes, video discs and motion pictures which are characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or which establishment excluded admission to minors by virtue of age. 
    Adult business means and includes, but is not limited to, adult bookstores, adult video stores, adult personal service businesses, adult cabarets, adult novelty businesses, massage parlors, nude and/or semi-nude modeling studios and tattoo parlors. 
    Adult cabaret means a cafe, restaurant or bar where patrons are entertained by dancers, strippers or male or female impersonators, whether accompanied by music or not, whose conduct is characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motion picture theatre means any establishment, or part thereof, used for presenting material distinguished or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult novelty business means a business which has as a principal activity, the sale of devices which stimulate human genitals or devices designed for sexual stimulation. 
    Adult personal service business means a business having as its principle activity a person, while nude or while displaying specified anatomical areas, providing personal services for another person. Such businesses include, but are not limited to, modeling studios, body painting studios, performances or entertainment, and lingerie parlors using nude or semi-nude models. 
    Adult store means an establishment which has in excess of 50 percent of its stock-in-trade for sale or rental to the public or patrons, video cassettes or video tapes, having, as a dominant theme an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activity or specified anatomical areas. 
    Buttock means and includes the anus and perineum of any person. 
    Church means a building used for regular public worship services and exempt from taxation under the general property tax act of the state. 
    Massage means the manipulation of body muscle or tissue by rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping or vibrating, through the use of a physical, mechanical or other device, of the body of another, for a fee. 
    Massage parlor means an establishment wherein private massage is practiced, used or made available as a principle use of the premises. 
    Nude modeling studio means any building, structure, premises or part thereof used primarily as a place which offers, as its principal activity, the providing of models to display specified anatomical areas for artists and photographers for a fee and/or modeling clothing in a nude or semi-nude state. 
    Protected use means a church, school or public park. 
    Public park means any park owned and maintained by the city. 
    School means a public or private school offering education to students enrolled in pre-kindergarten, kindergarten, one or more grades of one through 12, or post secondary education. 
    Sexual intercourse means and includes fellatio, cunnilingus, anal intercourse and any other intrusion, however slight, of any part of a person's body, or of any object into the genital or anal openings of another's body. 
    Sodomy means sexual bestiality. 
    Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Human genitalia and pubic region; 
b.  Buttock; or 
c.  Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means: 
(1)  The stimulation or arousal of human genitalia; 
(2)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitalia, pubic region, buttock or female breast. 
    Tattoo parlor means a business having, as its principal activity, the application or placing, by any method, of designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or other marks upon or under the human skin with ink or any other substance resulting in the coloration of the skin by the aid of needles or any other instrument designed to touch or puncture the skin. 
(Prior Code, § 5.301; Ord. No. 94-15, 10-3-1994) 
Sec. 46-773. - Authorization. 
    The planning commission may, by the issuance of a special use permit, authorize the uses specified within this article only in the B-3 zoning district and after finding that the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The parcel upon which the use is intended is located outside a 300-foot radius of any parcel upon which is located any residence, dwelling place, daycare facility, church, public park, or school unless a petition requesting waiver of this requirement is received and certified by the city clerk/treasurer signed by 51 percent of those adult persons or institutions residing within or owning residential, daycare, school, or church property within a 300-foot radius of the proposed location in which case the planning commission may waive this requirement. 
(2)  The use is not located within a 300-foot radius of one other such use except that such restriction may be waived by the planning commission if the following findings are made: 
a.  That the proposed use will not be contrary to the interest or injurious to nearby properties and that the spirit and intent of this section will be observed. 
b.  That the proposed use will not enlarge or encourage the development of a blighted or deteriorating area in its immediate surroundings. 
c.  That the establishment of a regulated use in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation, nor will it interfere with any program or urban renewal. 
d.  That all applicable state laws and local ordinances will be observed. 
(Prior Code, § 5.302; Ord. No. 94-15, 10-3-1994) 
Sec. 46-774. - Limitation on reapplication. 
    No application for a regulated use which has been denied wholly or in part shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of said order of denial, except on the grounds of new evidence not previously available or proof of changed conditions. 
(Prior Code, § 5.303; Ord. No. 94-15, 10-3-1994) 
Sec. 46-775. - Miscellaneous requirements. 
(a)  The height, yard, lot area, lot width, building coverage, sign and parking requirements of an adult business shall conform to the requirements for the zone in which it is located and with the standards for special land use approval contained within this chapter. 
(b)  The distance between an adult business and a protected use shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the lot line of the adult business or building containing an adult business to the nearest lot line of the protected use. 
(c)  No person shall reside in or permit any person to reside in the premises of an adult business. 
(Prior Code, § 5.304; Ord. No. 94-15, 10-3-1994) 
Sec. 46-776. - Procedure. 
    The procedure and requirements established for special uses as contained in this chapter shall be followed to process an application for an adult business. 
(Prior Code, § 5.305; Ord. No. 94-15, 10-3-1994) 
Sec. 46-777. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this chapter regarding massage parlors shall not apply to a licensed masseuse for fitness clubs, hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes or medical clinics, or to the offices of a physician, surgeon, podiatrist, chiropractor, osteopath or physical therapist, duly licensed by the state, or to barbershops or beauty salons in which massages are administered only to the scalp, face, neck or shoulders of patrons. 
(Prior Code, § 5.306; Ord. No. 94-15, 10-3-1994) 
Chapter 48 - FEE SCHEDULE AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 48-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to set forth and confirm the fees and insurance requirements as they relate to the various chapters and sections of the Code of the City of Cadillac. 
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1, 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 48-2. - Administration fees. 
Code 
Section Fee 2-260 Handgun registration ..... $ 5.00 2-261 Security escorts ..... 10.00 2-262 Accident report fees ..... 5.00 2-263 Funeral escorts ..... 15.00  
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1, 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 48-3. - Buildings and building regulation fees. 
Code 
Section Fee 8-47 Fence permit ..... $ 15.00 8-47 Failure to obtain fence permit ..... 75.00 8-86 to 8-90 Rental unit fees:   Renewals and new ..... 35.00 (single family)   Multi-family, per unit ..... 20.00   Rooming/boarding houses, per bedroom ..... 20.00   Failure to appear (per property)    First offense ..... 50.00    Second offense ..... 100.00    Third offense ..... 250.00  Exterior violation after July 1, 2015 ..... 100.00  Appeals hearing application fee ..... 100.00  
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1, 11-16-2009; Ord. No. 2014-07, § 1, 7-21-2014; Ord. No. 2015-15, § 2, 8-3-2015) 
Sec. 48-4. - Business regulation fees. 
Code 
Section Fee 10-29(a) Business permit and license fees All new businesses ..... $ 35.00 (one time permit fee) Exceptions requiring annual license: Amusement riding and moving devices ..... 25,000 bond; $50.00 annual fee; proof of insurance ..... 500,000.00 each person, 
1,000,000.00 each occurrence Commercial entertainment services (e.g. pool rooms, video 
arcades, dance halls not otherwise licensed) ..... 50.00 Going out of business sales (see Michigan P.A. 39 of 1961 
for specific requirements) ..... 50.00 per 
application and renewal Home occupations (see chapter 46, section 46-163(8) 
for specific requirements) ..... 35.00 Junk and second hand dealers ..... 35.00 Peddlers/transient merchants/concessionaires ..... 100.00; proof insurance ..... 300,000.00 each person, 
100,000.00 property damage (unless otherwise determined by city risk analysis) Precious gem and metal dealers ..... 35.00 Public entertainment not otherwise licensed ..... 35.00 Taxicabs, each vehicle ..... 50.00; proof of insurance at the level determined by administrative policy  
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1, 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 48-5. - Emergency services fees. 
Code 
Section Fee 14-20(a) False alarm fee, for second and each subsequent false alarm ..... $ 25.00  
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1, 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 48-6. - Environment fees. 
Code 
Section Fee 16-53 Soil removal and erosion control permit application fee: Application fee ..... $ 20.00 per anticipated inspection Penalty for work started prior to obtaining permit: Twice the normal permit fee may be charged to cover administration costs, with a minimum increase of $100.00.  
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1, 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 48-7. - Land divisions and subdivisions fees. 
Code 
Section Fee 20-36(8) Nonplatted divisions and exempt splits ..... $ 50.00 20-68(b)(2) Preliminary plat review application ..... 200.00  
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1, 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 48-8. - Oil, gas and mineral wells fees. 
Code 
Section Fee 24-2(b) Oil, gas, mineral well application fee ..... $ 500.00 24-2(e) Liability guidelines for oil/gas well drilling bond Maximum total liability for loss or damage, either to persons 
or property ..... 200,000.00 Able to reduce to $50,000.00 once all drilling activity is complete. 24-2(f) Oil/gas well permit fee ..... 500.00 ($400.00 refundable if permit not granted) 24-2(g) Oil/gas well annual administrative charge ..... 100.00 24-5(d) Pipe or pipeline burying permit, per foot ..... 0.30 24-7 Oil/Gas well deepening/reworking application:   Within 60 days of completion or abandonment of the original 
  drilling operation ..... 200.00   61 days or later ..... 500.00  
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1, 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 48-9. - Peddlers, solicitors and transient merchant fees. 
Code 
Section Fee 28-25 Peddlers/transient merchants license fee: Addressed in business licenses above. 28-31 Peddlers/transient merchants insurance guidelines: Addressed in business licenses above.  
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1, 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 48-10. - Secondhand goods and precious metals, gems dealer fees. 
Code 
Section Fee 30-54(d) Precious metals and gems annual license fee: Addressed in business licenses above.  
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1, 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 48-11. - Streets, sidewalks and other public places fees. 
Code 
Section Fee 36-21(a) Street construction insurance guidelines ..... $100,000.00 bodily injury 
and $50,000.00 property damage 36-21(c) Street construction cash deposit ..... 100.00 36-32(a) Tree-lawn parking permit ..... 20.00 36-37 Curb cut/driveway approach permit fee ..... 20.00 36-44(a) Permit to move building, etc. ..... 25.00 36-44(a) Moving a building, insurance guidelines Moving building, etc. ..... 100,000.00 injury to one person; 
300,000.00 injury to more than one person Property damage insurance ..... 15,000.00 36-44(b) Moving a building, increase to permit fee as penalty for beginning work without permit: Twice the normal permit fee with minimum increase of $100.00. 36-70 Line and grade stakes placement (for sidewalk work), per stake ..... 1.00  
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1, 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 48-12. - Traffic and vehicles fees. 
Code 
Section Fee 40-86 Overnight parking permits:   Annual permit ..... $ 82.00   Monthly permit ..... 22.00   Weekly permit ..... 6.50 40-185 Bike license fees ..... 1.00  
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1, 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 48-13. - Utilities fees. 
Code 
Section Fee 42-198(c) Fee for special condition irrigation permit ..... $ 15.00 42-201 Water service rates: Included in chapter 42. 42-202(3) Private fire protection; sprinkling systems rates: Included in chapter 42. 42-203 Water service charges: Included in chapter 42. 42-204 Public fire protection rates: Hydrant rental rates included in chapter 42. 42-300 Sewer connection permit fees: No charge. 42-374 Monthly wastewater user service charges: Included in chapter 42.  
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1, 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 48-14. - Building inspection service fees. 
BUILDING INSPECTION SERVICES FEES 
RESIDENTIAL ONE & TWO FAMILY 
*Determinant Fee 0-1,000 $53.00 + number of inspections required 1,000-10,000 $53.00 + $9.40 per 1,000 over 1,000 10,001-100,000 $137.00 + $2.70 per 1,000 over 10,000 100,001 and up $373.00 + $2.10 per 1,000 over 100,000  
Michigan Approved Home Per Construction Cost Table (CCT) HUD Approved Home on Existing Slab $168.00 + improvements (i.e., garage, basement, deck, etc.) HUD Approved Home on New Slab $168.00 + $53.00 footing inspection + 
improvements (i.e., garage, basement, deck, etc.) Demolition $53.00 per occurrence For work not involving square foot computation, a $53.00 base fee plus $53.00 per inspection, or the estimated cost of the project is used as the determinant, whichever yields the greater fee.  
COMMERCIAL 
Building Permit Fee Calculation (Based on Determinant Value) 
*Determinant Fee 0-1,000 $53.00 + inspections required 1,001-10,000 $53.00 + $1.10 per 100 over 1,000 10,001 and up $137.00 + $2.60 per 1,000 over 10,000  
BUILDING PERMIT PLAN REVIEW FEE (Based on Determinant Value) 
*Determinant Fee 0-500,000 $1.30 per 1,000 500,001 and up $630.00 + $0.21 per 1,000 over 500,000  
REINSPECTION CHARGE ..... $53.00 
SINGLE PERMIT FEE ..... $53.00 
ZONING PERMIT FEE ..... $35.00 
ADMINISTRATIVE PROJECT MANAGEMENT ..... $105.00 per hour 
SERVICE HOURLY RATE ..... $53.00 
per hour 
INVESTIGATION FEE ..... $53.00 
per hour 
RESIDENTIAL TRADE PERMIT FEES 
Electrical Single Inspection Permit Fee $53.00 Service Upgrade $53.00 Addition/Remodel up to two Inspections $152.00 Addition/Remodel with Service Upgrade up to Three Inspections $205.00 New Residence $205.00  
Mechanical Single Inspection Permit Fee $53.00 Addition/Remodel up to Two Inspections $152.00 Addition/Remodel with Underground up to Three Inspections $205.00 New Residence up to Three Inspections $205.00  
Plumbing Single Inspection Permit Fee $53.00 Addition/Remodel up to Two Inspections $152.00 Addition/Remodel with Underground up to Three Inspections $205.00 New Residence up to Three Inspections $205.00  
REINSPECTION CHARGE ..... $53.00 
per inspection 
SPECIAL SERVICES ..... $53.00 
per hour 
INVESTIGATION FEE ..... $53.00 
per hour 
COMMERCIAL TRADE PERMIT FEES 
Electrical Plan Review, Administration Base Fee, and All Required and Final Inspections $105.00 Services:  Thru 200 amp $10.50  200 amp-600 amp $15.75 600 amp-800 amp $21.00 800 amp and over $26.25 Circuits $5.25 each Lighting Fixtures - per 25 and Fraction of $6.25 each Dishwasher, Garbage Disposal, and Range Hood $5.25 each Furnace - Unit Heater $5.25 each Electric Heating Units (Baseboard Heaters) $4.25 each Power Outlets (Including Ranges, Dryers) $7.50 each Signs - per Circuit $10.50 each Feeders $6.25 each Mobile Home Park Sites $6.25 each Recreational Vehicle Park Sites $4.25 each KVA or HP:  Each Unit up to 20 KVA or HP $6.25  21-50 KVA or HP $10.50  51 KVA or HP and Over $12.50 Fire Alarm:  up to 10 Stations and Horns $53.00  11-20 Stations and Horns $105.00  Over 21 Stations and Horns $5.25 each Data/Telecommunications Outlets:  1-19 Devices $5.25 each  20-300 Devices $105.00  Over 300 Devices $315.00  
Mechanical Plan Review, Administration Base Fee, and All Required and Final Inspections $105.00 Gas/Oil Burning Equipment - New and/or Conversion Units $31.50 each Chimney, Factory Built (Class A) $26.25 each Duct System/Hydroponic Piping $26.25 each Solar Equipment System and Piping $21.00 each Gas Piping (New Installation) $5.25 Exhaust Fan/Vent Damper $5.25 each LPG & Fuel Oil Tanks, Piping Fee Included $21.00 each Central Air Conditioning and Heat Pump $31.50 each Piping Systems (Including Process Piping) minimum $25.00 $0.07 per foot Air Handlers/Heat Wheels - Under 10,000 CFM $21.00 each Air Handlers/Heat Wheels - Over 10,000 CFM $15.75 each Commercial Hoods $63.00 each Heat Recovery Units $10.50 each VA V Boxes $10.50 each Unit Ventilators $10.50 each Fire Suppression/Protection minimum $20.00 $0.84 per head Evaporator Coils $31.50 each Refrigeration (Split System) $31.50 each Chillers $31.50 each Cooling Towers $31.50 each Compressors $31.50 each  
Plumbing Plan Review, Administration Base Fee, and All Required and Final Inspections $105.00 Fixtures, Water Connected Appliances, Floor Drains, Special Drains, Mobile Home Unit Site $5.25 each Stacks (Soil, Waste, Vent, Conductor) $3.15 each Sewers (Sanitary, Storm, Combined) $5.25 each Water Service $10.50 each Connection-Building Drain/Building Sewer $5.25 each Sub-Soil Drains $5.25 each Sewage Ejectors, Manholes, Sumps $5.25 each Water Distribution Pipe System:  Pipe Less Than 1" $10.50 each  Pipe 1" or Greater $21.00 each Reduced Pressure Zone Back Flow Preventer $5.25 each  
*  DETERMINANT CALCULATION 
The determinant is calculated based on the "Bureau of Construction Codes Square Foot Construction Cost Table" (CCT), which became effective April 1, 2013. The CCT is hereby adopted by reference, and will automatically update upon the effective date of a revised CCT, or other subsequent document establishing construction costs or otherwise serving as a basis for calculation of building permit fees collected by the State of Michigan. Commercial demolition will be based on the State of Michigan fee schedule in effect at the time of application. 
(Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1, 11-16-2009; Ord. No. 2014-07, § 2, 7-21-2014) 
Sec. 48-15. - Fire department fees. 
Code
Section Fee  18-19 to 18-25 Fire Code review:  0-2,000 ft 2 $ 100.00  2,001-5,000 ft 2 150.00  5,001-10,000 ft 2 200.00  10,001-50,000 ft 2 225.00  50,001-100,000 ft 2 300.00  100,001-500,000 ft 2 500.00  500,001+ ft 2 750.00 *Two inspections (50% and final) included. Additional inspections charged at $50.00 per hour. Minimum one-hour charge. Fee can be waived at the discretion of the reviewer for minor projects. Fire sprinkler systems:  1-100 heads 150.00  101-200 heads 200.00  201-300 heads 250.00  301-400 heads 300.00  401-500 heads 350.00  500 heads+ 350.00 + .25 per head *Two inspections (50% and final) included. Additional inspections charged at $50.00 per hour. Minimum one-hour charge. Fee can be waived at the discretion of the reviewer for minor projects. Fire pumps and standpipe systems:  Fire pump 150.00 per  Standpipe 50.00 per  Hose connection 3.00 per *Two inspections (50% and final) included. Additional inspections charged at $50.00 per hour. Minimum one-hour charge. Fee can be waived at the discretion of the reviewer for minor projects. Commercial cooking systems, per control box/release assembly 100.00 *Two inspections (50% and final) included. Additional inspections charged at $50.00 per hour. Minimum one-hour charge. Fee can be waived at the discretion of the reviewer for minor projects. Special hazards systems 250.00 *Two inspections (50% and final) included. Additional inspections charged at $50.00 per hour. Minimum one-hour charge. Fee can be waived at the discretion of the reviewer for minor projects. Fire alarm and detection systems:  Device connections, per connection 5.00  Control panels, per panel 75.00  Annunciators, per annunciator 15.00  Power boosters, per booster 15.00  Devices, per device 3.00 *Two inspections (50% and final) included. Additional inspections charged at $50.00 per hour. Minimum one-hour charge. Fee can be waived at the discretion of the reviewer for minor projects. Special event plan review (tents/membrane structures in excess of 400 ft 2 , fireworks displays, carnivals/fairs, exhibits/trade shows, or any other large assembly function), per event 75.00 *One plan review and one inspection included. Inspection shall be during business hours. For inspections during non-business hours, inspections are charged at $100.00 per hour with a minimum two-hour charge. Additional inspections charged at $50.00 per hour during business hours and $100.00 per hour during non-business hours. Site plan review 50.00 *Includes two reviews. Additional reviews charged at $50.00 per hour, minimum one-hour charge. Safety trailer rental: The fire department offers its smoke trailer to both non-profit and for-profit events. To maintain public safety, only fire department personnel using the appropriate vehicle will be allowed to tow the trailer to and from the event, as well as assemble the trailer for operation at the event. To help offset long-term maintenance and repair costs, the following fee schedule has been derived:  Non-profit organization (within city or Clam Lake Township)    ? Cleaning fee 30.00    ? Tow vehicle mileage 0.00/mile    ? Labor 0.00/hour  For-profit organization (within city or Clam Lake Township)    ? Cleaning fee 30.00    ? Tow vehicle mileage 0.00/mile    ? Labor 25.00/hour  Non-profit organization (outside of city or Clam Lake Township)    ? Cleaning fee 30.00    ? Tow vehicle mileage-current federal rate for mileage to and from charity events as established by the Internal Revenue Service    ? Labor 25.00/hour  For-profit organization (outside of city or Clam Lake Township)    ? Cleaning fee 30.00    ? Tow vehicle mileage-current federal rate for mileage to and from business affairs as established by the Internal Revenue Service    ? Labor 25.00/hour *$30.00 is the base fee for cleaning and is assessed to all organizations *Labor is charged at $25.00/hour and is billed at a two-hour minimum (transport, prep, set-up) *Two CFD personnel are required for operation of the trailer. One is required for trailering and set-up. *After the first two hours, labor is billed by the quarter hour. *The cleaning fee, roundtrip mileage (from the fire department), and the two-hour labor fee shall be paid by the organization at least three days prior to the event. Any additional labor fees incurred will be billed after the event. False alarm fees:  1 st false alarm 0.00  2 nd false alarm 0.00  3 rd false alarm 250.00  4 th false alarm 500.00  All subsequent alarms 1,000.00 *The alarm user shall be required to pay to the city the sum as currently established or as hereafter adopted by ordinance from time to time in any given calendar year. No alarm user shall be required to pay said fee on the first or second occasion of a false alarm during any one calendar year, but shall be advised, in writing, of said false alarm(s) and of the existence of this fee structure. *Alarm conditions caused by the following extenuating circumstances shall not constitute a false alarm and no false alarm fee shall be charged by the city. It shall be the responsibility of the alarm user to notify the fire department by filling out the alarm notification form and returning it to the fire department within ten days of receipt of the alarm notification form. Failure to notify the fire department will result in an automatic billing to the user.  Alarm system malfunctions, if corrective measures have been instituted with 96 hours of notification by the fire department; provided that the alarm user presents documentation of repair service having been performed by the alarm company to remedy a malfunction.  Alarms activated by storm conditions shall not constitute a false alarm.  Alarm conditions being activated by persons working on the alarm system with prior notification to the fire department shall not constitute a false alarm.  Alarms activated by disruption or disturbance of telephone or other communication systems shall not constitute a false alarm.  Alarms activated by cooking shall not constitute a false alarm. *Upon the response of a fire department to an alarm call, a representative of the fire department shall mail an alarm notification form to the alarm user. *Within ten days of the date of receipt of the alarm notification form, the alarm user shall return the completed form to the fire department. Failure by the alarm user to return the form shall cause an automatic billing of the false alarm fee to be sent to the alarm user. *If, upon receiving a false alarm fee notice, the alarm user wishes to request a waiver of the assessment of the fee due to extenuating circumstances, he may do so in writing within ten days of the assessment date. The notice to the fire department shall contain documentation of the extenuating circumstances involved. Within ten days of the receipt of the waiver request by the fire department, the fire marshal or his designee shall make a determination on the waiver request and shall notify the alarm user of the decision. Appeals hearing application fee, per application of appeal 100.00  
(Ord. No. 2015-13, § 2, 8-3-2015) 
APPENDIX A - FRANCHISES 
    The following franchises granted by the city are currently in effect: 
Franchisee Ord. No. Date Term (1) DTE (Gas) 93-27 11-1-1993 30 years (2) DTE (Electricity) 2000-11 8-21-2000 10 years (3) CC Michigan, d/b/a Charter Communications (Cable TV) 2004-19 12-20-2004 15 years  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - PRIOR CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the Prior Code, as supplemented, which are included herein. Sections of the Prior Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances included herein, see the table immediately following this table. 
Prior Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1.2 1-7 1.5 1-1 1.6 1-3 1.7 1-15 1.8 1-2 1.9-1.11 1-4-1-6 1.12 1-2 1-14 1.13 1-13 1.15 1-16 1.41-1.47 2-67-2-73 1.68-1.74 12-40-12-46 1.91-1.94 2-105-2-108 1.101, 1.102 2-130, 2-131 1.121-1.124 2-161-2-164 1.141-1.144 2-182-2-185 1.151-1.154 2-209-2-212 1.161 2-233 1.202-1.209 12-96-12-103 1.210(1)-1.210(11) 12-122-12-132 1.221-1.227 34-1-34-7 1.228-1.246 34-13-34-31 1.262-1.286 2-290-2-314 2.1-2.19 32-19-32-37 2.41-2.65 42-183-42-207 2.81-2.85 42-238-42-242 2.86-2.89 42-256-42-259 2.90-2.94 42-271-42-275 2.95-2.104 42-299-42-308 2.105-2.110 42-335-42-340 2.111-2.117 42-369-42-375 2.119 42-394 2.122, 2.123 42-421, 42-422 2.124, 2.125 42-443, 42-444 2.126.1-2.126.5 42-445-42-449 2.127 42-450 2.131-2.137 42-469-42-475 2.137.1, 2.137.2 42-476, 42-477 2.138.1-2.138.4 42-478-42-481 2.139.1, 2.139.2 42-482, 42-483 2.140.1-2.140.8 42-484-42-491 2.141.1-2.141.4 42-492-42-495 2.141.5 42-495 2.142, 2.143 42-496, 42-497 2.144.1-2.144.3 42-498-42-500 2.145 42-501 2.146.1-2.146.8 42-502-42-509 2.147.1, 2.147.2 42-527, 42-528 2.220, 2.221 42-395, 42-396 2.237-2.252 42-40-42-55 2.255 42-56 2.257-2.274 42-86-42-103 2.277 42-104 2.279-2.296 42-122-42-139 2.299 42-140 2.300 42-164 ch. 3, art. I 12-19 3.1-3.6 26-1-26-6 3.7 22-100 3.8-3.12 26-7-26-11 3.13 26-11 3.20, 3.21 26-41, 26-42 3.26-3.33 26-73-26-80 3.34-3.42 26-104-26-112 4.1-4.20 36-19-36-38 4.26-4.28 36-39-36-41 4.31, 4.32 36-42, 36-43 4.34 36-44 4.36-4.38 36-45-36-47 4.61-4.72 36-68-36-79 4.93-4.96 16-18-16-21 4.97(a)-(g) 16-22 4.97(h) 16-23 4.98-4.105 16-24-16-31 4.151-4.153 36-102-36-104 4.171-4.188 38-116-38-133 4.190, 4.191 38-134, 38-135 5.1, 5.2 46-1, 46-2 5.5 46-3 5.6 46-657 5.6-5.12 46-4 5.11 46-706 5.21 46-65 5.21-5.26 46-134-46-139 5.31-5.34 46-162-46-165 5.35-5.38 46-313-46-316 5.40 46-603 5.40.1, 5.40.2 46-604, 46-605 5.41-5.44 46-184-46-187 5.51-5.56 46-213-46-218 5.61-5.68 46-275-46-282 5.81-5.84 46-245-46-248 5.91-5.96 46-336-46-341 5.101-5.105 46-371-46-375 5.111-5.115 46-394-46-398 5.121-5.124 46-425-46-428 5.131-5.136 46-455-46-460 5.141-5.144 46-489-46-492 5.151-5.153 46-523-46-525 5.161-5.165 46-544-46-548 5.166-5.168 46-575-46-577 5.170-5.173 46-629-46-632 5.181-5.184 46-653-46-656 5.185-5.200 46-658-46-673 5.221 46-705 5.222-5.230 46-707-46-715 5.241-5.247 46-27-46-33 5.252-5.259 46-66-46-73 5.261-5.265 46-34-46-38 5.271-5.276 46-105-46-110 5.278-5.285 46-744-46-751 5.300-5.306 46-771-46-777 5.401-5.412 16-51-16-62 5.501-5.503 20-1-20-3 5.504 20-3 5.505-5.509 20-35-20-39 5.515, 5.516 20-68, 20-69 5.520, 5.521 20-97, 20-98 5.525-5.527 20-125-20-127 5.530 20-4 5.540 20-5 5.542-5.544 20-6-20-8 5.600-5.603 12-163-12-166 5.610-5.626 12-167-12-183 6.1-6.5 10-69-10-73 7.1-7.8 10-22-10-29 7.8 28-55 7.9, 7.10 10-30, 10-31 7.11 10-1 7.12-7.17 10-32-10-37 7.18-7.21 10-37-10-40 7.31-7.44 28-19-28-32 7.55-7.57 30-19-30-21 7.58-7.61 30-23-30-26 7.62-7.65 30-29-30-32 7.70, 7.71 30-53, 30-54 7.72-7.74 30-56-30-58 7.75, 7.76 30-60, 30-61 7.80-7.84 28-53-28-57 7.101, 7.102 44-23, 44-24 7.105 44-25 7.108-7.110 44-26-44-28 7.115--7.117 10-29 8.2, 8.3 8-19, 8-20 8.31-8.43 8-44-8-56 8.81-8.85 8-86-8-90 9.1 16-83 9.2-9.5 16-112-16-115 9.7 16-84 9.20-9.22 16-144-16-146 9.28, 9.29 16-176, 16-177 9.41-9.50 16-208-16-217 9.61-9.66 16-243-16-248 9.67 16-248 9.101 22-1 9.102 22-94 9.102(2) 22-136 9.102(3) 22-49 9.102(4) 22-2 9.102(5) 22-95 9.102(6) 22-135 9.102(8) 22-96 9.102(9) 22-137 9.102(10), 9.102(11) 22-3, 22-4 9.102(12), 9.102(13) 22-97, 22-98 9.103 22-99 9.104, 9.105 22-101, 22-102 9.105 22-103 9.106 22-160 9.107 22-138 9.108 22-72 9.109 22-5 9.110 22-73 9.111 22-75 9.116-9.119 22-189-22-192 9.122 22-74 9.123-9.125 22-278-22-280 9.131-9.133 6-1-6-3 9.136-9.141 6-27-6-32 9.146, 9.147 6-84, 6-85 9.171 6-4 9.172-9.176 6-47-6-51 9.176-9.178 6-52-6-54 9.179 6-1 9.180 6-55 9.193-9.196 4-1-4-4 9.211 22-253 9.212-9.214 22-255-22-257 9.220, 9.221 22-29, 22-30 9.280-9.287 24-1-24-8 9.289 2-260 9.291-9.293 2-261-2-263 9.294, 9.295 14-19, 14-20 9.300, 9.301 4-27, 4-28 9.400-9.407 40-150-40-157 10.2-10.7 40-19-40-24 10.9 40-25 10.31-10.45 40-183-40-197 10.61-10.63 40-218-40-220 10.81-10.87 40-80-40-86 10.110 40-116 10.112, 10.113 40-117, 40-118 ch. 22 42-182 ch. 71 10-21  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances adopted since the Prior Code, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 941  6-16-1980 46-314, 46-315 942  7-14-1980 34-16 80-004 12- 1-1980 46-4 46-630 46-656 80-006 12- 1-1980 46-4 46-706 81-01  2-16-1981 16-18-16-31 81-03  3- 2-1981 40-116-40-118 81-04  5- 4-1981 8-19, 8-20 81-06  6-15-1981 40-19-40-22 40-24, 40-25 81-08  8-31-1981 24-1-24-8 81-10  8-31-1981 46-659 82-08  6-14-1982 34-31 82-11  8- 5-1982 40-19-40-22 40-24, 40-25 83-04  3- 7-1983 40-19-40-22 40-24, 40-25 83-03 11- 5-1984 40-85 85-06  4- 1-1985 46-656 85-09  7- 8-1985 46-65 85-11  9- 9-1985 36-102-36-104 85-12 10- 7-1985 36-19 36-32-36-35 40-85 85-13 11- 4-1985 36-102 85-17 12- 2-1985 46-546 85-18 12-16-1985 22-278-22-280 86-03  6- 2-1986 46-38 86-04  6- 2-1986 14-19, 14-20 86-05  6- 2-1986 2-260-2-263 86-06  6- 2-1986 40-183-40-196 86-11  7-21-1986 2-290-2-314 86-16 10- 6-1986 46-664 87-01  1-12-1987 46-655 87-02  2- 7-1987 32-36 87-04  3- 2-1987 36-102 87-05  3-23-1987 36-102 87-08  5- 4-1987 16-145 87-11  6- 1-1987 34-31 87-12  6-15-1987 12-100 87-13  7-20-1987 2-260 87-14  8- 3-1987 26-11 87-15  9-21-1987 36-36 87-17 10- 2-1987 46-427 10- 5-1987 46-371-46-375 46-394-46-398 10- 9-1987 46-134, 46-135 46-658 46-660, 46-661 46-667 87-20 10-19-1987 36-102 87-21 10-19-1987 46-575 46-630 87-23 10-19-1987 36-19 36-33-36-35 87-24 12- 7-1987 46-713 88-02  3-12-1988 46-744-46-751 88-03  3-21-1988 26-104-26-110 88-04  4-18-1988 46-65 88-07  5- 2-1988 42-40-42-56 42-86-42-104 42-122-42-140 42-164 88-06  6- 6-1988 46-4 46-706 88-10  6-20-1988 36-102 85-08  7- 8-1988 46-73 88-15  8-15-1988 36-102 88-17  9-19-1988 36-102 88-19 10- 3-1988 8-86-8-90 88-18 10-17-1988 46-664 88-22 10-17-1988 40-190 88-23 11- 7-1988 36-102 88-24 11- 7-1988 36-102 88-25 12- 5-1988 36-102 89-01  1- 9-1989 46-4 46-706 88-05  1- 9-1989 46-715 89-02  2- 6-1989 36-102 89-06  3-20-1989 36-102 89-11  6- 5-1989 46-747 89-15  9- 9-1989 2-292 2-302 89-14  9-18-1989 36-102 89-20 11- 6-1989 46-4 46-163 89-21 12- 4-1989 40-84, 40-85 90-07  4-16-1990 36-102 90-10  5-21-1990 8-44-8-56 90-11  5-25-1990 36-71 90-12  6- 4-1990 36-102 90-13  7- 5-1990 40-85 90-14  8-20-1990 46-658 90-15  8-20-1990 46-656 90-16  9-10-1990 36-102 90-19 10- 1-1990 46-491 90-17 11- 5-1990 36-102 90-18 11- 5-1990 46-710 90-23 11- 5-1990 6-1 6-47-6-55 90-26 11- 5-1990 46-672 11-15-1990 46-709 90-27 12- 3-1990 8-86 90-28 12- 3-1990 46-4 46-134 46-706 46-745 91-04  2- 4-1991 12-99 91-11 10- 7-1991 36-102 91-12 10-21-1991 36-102 91-14 10-21-1991 46-664 91-16 12- 2-1991 6-1 6-47-6-55 92-02  2- 3-1992 36-102 92-03  2- 3-1992 2-260 92-05  2- 3-1992 4-27, 4-28 92-06  2- 3-1992 16-51-16-62  2-17-1992 40-85 92-07  2-17-1992 40-85 92-04  3- 2-1992 8-87, 8-88 92-08  4-20-1992 32-19 32-37 92-13  8- 3-1992 36-102 92-14  9-14-1992 36-102 92-16 10- 5-1992 46-664 92-17 10- 5-1992 36-102 92-18 10- 5-1992 36-102 92-22 12- 7-1992 46-427 46-458 92-24 12-21-1992 36-102 93-03  1-18-1993 12-122-12-132 93-07  5- 3-1993 36-102 93-10  5- 3-1993 42-40-42-56 93-09  5-17-1993 28-19-28-32 30-19-30-21 30-23-30-26 30-29-30-32 30-53, 30-54 30-56-30-58 30-60, 30-61 93-22 10- 4-1993 36-102 93-19 10-18-1993 32-35 93-31 12- 6-1993 36-102 93-32 12-20-1993 36-102 93-24  3- 7-1994 36-102 94-03  3-21-1994 36-102 94-07  6- 6-1994 40-190 94-09  8-15-1994 36-102 94-15 10- 3-1994 46-771-46-777 94-16 12- 7-1994 36-102 95-01  1-16-1995 40-150-40-157 95-04  3- 6-1995 46-629, 46-630 95-11  6- 5-1995 8-90 36-32 36-37 36-44 46-38 46-68 95-12  6- 5-1995 40-86 95-14  7-17-1995 46-664 95-16  7-17-1995 16-25 46-4 46-631, 46-632 46-669, 46-670 95-17  7-17-1995 46-313-46-316 95-21  8- 7-1995 1-14 1-16 6-48 6-53 16-144, 16-145 16-176 16-248 22-5 22-99 22-101-22-103 22-257 26-2 26-4 26-7, 26-8 26-11 26-104 32-25 36-32 36-77-36-79 46-105 46-664 95-22  8- 7-1995 4-1 95-24  8- 7-1995 46-745-46-751 95-25 10- 2-1995 40-86 95-27 10- 2-1995 4-1 95-26 10-16-1995 46-397 46-658 95-30 10-16-1995 36-102 95-32  1-15-1996 46-747 96-01  5- 6-1996 36-102 96-04  6- 3-1996 36-102 96-09  7- 1-1996 2-297-2-299 96-11  8- 5-1996 46-425-46-428 46-455-46-460 96-18  1- 6-1997 46-603-46-605 96-19  1-20-1997 46-28 46-134 46-184-46-187 46-213, 46-214 46-216-46-218 46-629  1-27-1997 46-29 97-01  3- 3-1997 36-102 97-12  8- 4-1997 46-664 97-14  8- 4-1997 36-102 97-10 11- 3-1997 1 42-164 97-19 11- 3-1997 40-190 97-21 12-15-1997 36-102 98-01  3- 2-1998 46-4 46-656, 46-657 46-662 46-673 46-707 46-709 98-03  5- 4-1998 36-102 98-09  7-20-1998 20-1-20-8 20-35-20-39 20-68, 20-69 20-97, 20-98 20-125-20-127 98-11  8-17-1998 36-102 98-17 10-19-1998 36-102 98-22 11- 2-1998 8-48 98-23 11-16-1998 46-4 46-657 46-706 98-25  1- 4-1999 46-656 98-26  1- 4-1999 46-658 46-663 99-03  3- 1-1999 42-86-42-104 99-02  4- 5-1999 46-629 46-715 99-10  6-21-1999 8-44-8-56 99-09  7-19-1999 36-102 99-13  7-19-1999 36-102 99-14  8-16-1999 36-102 99-17 10-18-1999 40-22, 40-23 99-16 11- 1-1999 36-102 2000-01  2-21-2000 20-2, 20-3 20-35-20-37 20-68, 20-69 20-98 2000-03  2-21-2000 36-102 2000-04  2-21-2000 4-4 2000-08  5-15-2000 42-182 1(2.41)-1(2.65) 42-183-42-207 2000-09  5-15-2000 42-238-42-242 42-256-42-259 42-271-42-275 42-299-42-308 42-335-42-340 42-369-42-375 42-394-42-396 42-421, 42-422 42-443-42-450 42-469-42-509 42-527, 42-528 2000-17  1-15-2001 4-1 22-2-22-4 22-49 22-94-22-98 22-135-22-137 2001-03  5-21-2001 42-201-42-203 2001-04  5-21-2001 42-374 2001-07  6- 4-2001 42-122-42-129 42-131-42-140 2001-08  7- 2-2001 46-457 2001-10  9-17-2001 36-102 2001-12 10-15-2001 36-102 2001-13 11- 5-2001 46-629 46-656 2002-01  2-18-2002 36-102 2002-02  2-18-2002 36-102 2002-03  2-18-2002 36-102 2002-07  4- 1-2002 36-102 2002-08  5- 6-2002 36-102 2002-09  5- 6-2002 42-201-42-203 2002-10  5- 6-2002 42-374 2002-11  5-20-2002 6-4 2002-12  5-20-2002 8-19 2002-16  5-20-2002 1-16 2002-14  6- 3-2002 36-102 2002-19  8- 5-2002 36-102 2002-20  8- 5-2002 36-102 2002-21  9-16-2002 40-19 2002-22 10-21-2002 38-116-38-135 2002-25 12-16-2002 46-336-46-341 2002-27  1- 6-2003 36-102 2003-10  5- 5-2003 36-102 2003-11  5-19-2003 42-201-42-203 42-207 2003-12  5-19-2003 42-374 42-421 2003-14  5-19-2003 16-244 2003-19  9-15-2003 36-102 2004-02  2- 2-2004 16-52-16-55 16-58, 16-59 16-61 2004-03  2- 2-2004 16-55  4- 5-2004 36-102 2004-09  4-19-2004 42-201, 42-202 2004-10  4-19-2004 42-374 2004-11  5- 3-2004 40-197 2004-14  6-21-2004 16-144, 16-145 22-2-22-4 22-49 22-94-22-98 22-135-22-137 2004-13  7-19-2004 36-102 2005-05  3- 7-2005 26-104-26-107 26-109-26-112 2005-06  4-18-2005 12-163-12-183 2005-07  4-18-2005 40-86 2005-08  5- 2-2005 42-201, 42-202 2005-09  5- 2-2005 42-374 2005-11  6- 6-2005 22-29, 22-30 2005-13  8-15-2005 46-4 46-395 46-397 46-706 2005-16 10- 3-2005 40-19-40-25 2005-17 10- 3-2005 40-150-40-157 2006-01  2- 6-2006 26-110 2006-04  3-20-2006 8-19, 8-20 2006-06  5- 1-2006 42-201, 42-202 2006-07  5- 1-2006 42-374 2006-08  5-15-2006 16-208-16-217 2006-12  8- 7-2006 1(1.75)-1(1.85) 12-66-12-76 2006-17 11- 6-2006 1 36-102 2006-18 11- 6-2006 36-102 2006-19 12- 4-2006 1(9.400)-1(9.407) 40-150-40-157 2006-20 12-18-2006 1 16-243 2006-22  4-16-2007 1-4 12-122-12-125 2006-23  4-16-2007 2 12-99 2007-2  4-16-2007 1(9.500)-1(9.505) 16-275-16-280 2007-03  5- 7-2007 42-201 42-202 2007-04  5- 7-2007 1 42-374 2007-05  6- 4-2007 1 46-664 2007-08  7-16-2007 1-19 42-143-42-161 2007-14 12-17-2007 3(7.201)-3(7.211) 38-19-38-29 2007-16  1- 7-2007 1 26-104 2 26-109 2008-02  3-17-2008 1 10-22 2(7.101), 2(7.102) 44-23, 44-24 2(7.103) 44-25 2(7.104)-2(7.107) 44-26-44-29 2008-03  4-21-2008 1-3 42-201-42-203 2008-04  4-21-2008 1 42-374 2008-10 10-20-2008 1 40-86 2009-01  3- 2-2009 1 46-4 2 46-395(6) 3       Added 46-395(7) 2009-02  4- 6-2009 1-8 Adopt. Ord, p. xi 2009-04  5- 4-2009 1 46-664 2009-05  4-20-2009 1, 2 42-201, 42-202 2009-06  4-20-2009 1 42-374 2009-16 11-16-2009 1       Added 48-1-48-14 2010-04  4-19-2010 1       Added 8-21 2       Rpld 8-19, 8-20 2010-05  4-19-2010 1 42-201 2 42-202(3) 2010-06  4-19-2010 1 42-374 2010-10  8- 2-2010 1 1-16 2 6-30 3 8-46 4 8-52 5 8-86-8-89 6 10-35 7, 8 12-173, 12-174 9 16-55 10 20-98 11 20-127 12 30-31 13 36-34 14 42-202 15 46-27-46-29 46-31-46-33       Rpld 46-67 16 46-164 17 46-660 18 46-664 19 46-666 20 46-715 2010-12 10- 4-2010 1 32-32 2010-14 11- 1-2010 1       Added 8-121-8-126 2011-01  4-18-2011 1 42-201 2 42-202(3) 2011-02  4-18-2011 1 42-374 2011-05  6-20-2011 2 12-166 3 12-163 2011-08 10-17-2011 1 18-19       Added 18-20-18-25 2011-09 12-19-2011 1 40-152 2012-03  5-21-2012 1 2-302 2012-04  5-21-2012 1 8-124 2012-05  5-21-2012 1 16-243-16-246       Rpld 16-247       Added 16-247 2012-08  6-18-2012 1-1-1-3       Added 2-341-2-343 2-1-2-12       Added 2-361-2-372 3-1       Added 2-391 4-1-4-4       Added 2-392-2-395 2013-02  3- 4-2013 1 16-247 2013-05  6-17-2013 2 46-664 2013-08  9- 3-2013 1-6       Added 18-41-18-46 2013-09  9- 3-2013 2       Added 22-104 2013-10  9-16-2013 3 32-19-32-22 32-24, 32-25 32-27, 32-28 32-32, 32-33 32-35, 32-36 2013-12 11- 4-2013 2 12-164 3 12-166 4       Added 12-174(m) 5       Added 12-174(c)(6) 6 12-174(j) 7 12-180 8, 9 12-182, 12-183 10       Added 12-184 2014-03  2-17-2014 1       Added 2-165 2014-04  3-17-2014 1 42-199 2014-07  7-21-2014 1 48-3 2 48-14 2014-08  7-21-2014 1       Rpld 8-21 2       Added 8-22 2014-09  8-18-2014 1, 2 18-21, 18-22 2014-11 10-20-2014 1 8-22 2014-12 11-17-2014 1       Rpld 2-341-2-395 2       Added 2-396 2014-13 11-17-2014 1 36-77(a) 2015-02  1-20-2015 1       Dltd 16-112-16-115       Added 16-112-16-119 2015-04  2- 2-2015 1       Added 8-23 2015-06  4-20-2015 1 42-374 2015-07  4-20-2015 1 42-201 2 42-202(3) 2015-09  6- 1-2015 1 42-203 2 42-206 3 42-445(3) 2015-12  8- 3-2015 2 18-19-18-25 2015-13  8- 3-2015 2 48-15 2015-14  8- 3-2015 2 8-121-8-126 2015-15  8- 3-2015 2 48-3 2015-16 10 -5-2015 1       Added 18-47-18-55 2015-17  1- 4-2016 1       Added 46-641-46-645 2016-02  3-21-2016 1 22-96 2016-03  3-21-2016 1 42-443-42-450 2016-06  5- 2-2016 1 42-374 2016-07  5- 2-2016 1 42-201 2 42-202(3) 2016-08  9- 6-2016 1 6-28-6-31 2016-09  9- 6-2016 1 12-19 2016-10  9- 6-2016 1       Added 12-77-12-86 2016-11  9-19-2016 1 26-104 2016-13 12-19-2016 1 46-4 2 46-491(7) 3       Added 46-526 4 46-747(4) 2017-02  2- 6-2017 1 42-206(c) 2017-03  3-20-2017 1 10-21-10-38 2       Rpld 28-19-28-32 28-53-57 2017-04  3-20-2017 1 8-87-8-89 2       Added 8-127 3       Added 18-26 2017-05  4-17-2017 1 46-4 2 46-164 3 46-186(4), (5) 4 46-216(5), (6) 5 46-314(1)h. 6 46-339(11) 7 46-374(4) 8 46-397(6) 9 46-427(8) 10 46-745 11 46-747 2018-03  4- 2-2018 1 42-201 2 42-202(3) 2018-04  4- 2-2018 1 42-374 2018-05  4- 2-2018 1 8-121, 8-124, 8-127 2 18-19, 18-22 3 16-208 4 16-209 5       Rpld 16-210, 16-213 6       Rpld 16-243-16-274 2018-08  7-16-2018 1       Added 12-87-12-95 2018-09  8-20-2018 1 12-84 2018-10  9- 4-2018 1 42-164       Added 42-165-42-172 2018-11  9-17-2018 2       Added 2-397-2-403 2018-14 12-17-2018 1 46-4 2 46-186 3 46-216 4 46-745 5 46-747 Special Instruction  1- 2-2019 8-122 8-123 8-125 8-126 18-20 18-21 18-23-18-26  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
MCL Section  
this Code 8.3 et seq. 1-2 8.3u 1-9 8.4 1-12 8.4b 1-3 12.1501-12.1531 12-174 15.181 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 15.231 et seq. Char. § 4.3 Ch. 2, Art. II- 
Ch. 2, Art. IV 12-176 38-119 38-132 15.261 et seq. Char. § 3.4 Ch. 2, Art. II Ch. 2, Art. IV 12-172 15.321 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 2-396 15.341 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 2-396 15.401 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 2-396 15.601 et seq. Char. § 2.5 15.602(3) Char. § 2.5 24.201 et seq. 40-19 28.451-28.471 18-42 29.1 et seq. Ch. 18 29.1b 18-42 29.41 et seq. Ch. 18 29.417 et seq. Ch. 32 37.2102 Ch. 2, Art. III 54.231 et seq. 20-3 117.1 et seq. Char. Arts. 1-20 Ch. 2 117.3(a) Char. Art. 3 Char. § 3.1 Char. Art. 7 Char. § 11.5 117.3(b) Char. § 8.9 117.3(c) Char. §§ 8.1-8.3 117.3(d) Char. Art. 3 Char. Art. 7 117.3(g) Char. § 11.1 117.3(h) Char. Art. 11 117.3(i) Char. § 11.2 117.3(j) Char. § 1.2 Char. § 6.1 117.3(k) Char. Art. 5 Char. § 5.3 40-20, 40-21 40-150 117.4a Char. Art. 13 117.4i(g) Char. § 8.13 Char. Art. 9 117.5(d) Char. § 3.8 117.5(i) Char. § 17.2 117.5b 1-1 Char. § 5.3 117.5c Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 4 117.18 et seq. Char. § 4.2 123.51 et seq. Ch. 26 123.361 et seq. Ch. 32 123.1104 22-160 124.1 et seq. Char. Art. 19 124.21 et seq. 46-672 124.281 et seq. Ch. 42 124.531 et seq. Char. Art. 19 125.31 et seq. Char. § 6.3, 
Char. § 6.4 20-1 20-3 125.51 et seq. 20-1 20-3 125.71 et seq. Ch. 12 125.401 et seq. 46-30 125.538 et seq. Ch. 16, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 16-112 125.601 et seq. Ch. 12 125.651 et seq. 2-161 2-163 Ch. 12 125.661a(1) 2-165 125.661a(3) 2-165 125.901 et seq. Ch. 12 125.1401 et seq. Ch. 12 12-77 12-40, 12-41 12-66, 12-67 12-87 125.1415a(5) 12-44 12-71 125.1508b(6) 8-22 125.1514 8-23 125.1514(2) 8-23 125.1601 et seq. Ch. 12 125.1651 et seq. Ch. 12 12-96 125.2301 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. III, 
Div. 6 46-280 125.3101 et seq. Char. § 6.4 Ch. 46 46-35 46-645 125.3103 46-71 125.3206 46-163 125.3208 46-655 125.3301 46-34 125.3306 46-645 125.3501 46-29 125.3502 46-746 125.3502 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. VI 125.3503 46-645 125.3505 46-746 125.3601 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. II, 
Div. 2 46-65 125.3604 46-71 125.3801 et seq. 2-130 Ch. 46 129.11 et seq. Char. § 10.6 129.131-129.135 42-44 42-90 42-126 42-149 141.101 et seq. 42-207 42-369 42-421 141.261 et seq. Char. Art. 12 141.421 et seq. Char. § 6.2 Char. Art. 10 Ch. 2, Art. V 141.1001 et seq. Char. Art. 10 141.1201 et seq. Char. Art. 10 141.2101 et seq. Char. Art. 10 Ch. 2, Art. V 168.1 et seq. Char. Art. 8 Char. § 8.1 168.24a Char. § 8.12 168.25 Char. § 8.5 168.491 et seq. Char. § 8.2 168.544c Char. § 8.10 168.631 et seq. Char. § 8.4 168.646a Char. § 8.9 168.861 et seq. Char. § 8.12 168.951 et seq. Char. § 8.13 201.37 Char. § 3.6 211.1 et seq. Char. § 11.1, 
Char. § 11.2 34-11 12-85 211.1-211.157 16-118 211.7 et seq. Char. § 11.3 211.10 et seq. Char. § 11.4 211.28 et seq. Char. § 11.5 211.39 Char. § 11.7 211.43b Char. § 10.6 Ch. 2, Art. V 211.44 et seq. Char. § 11.8 211.55 et seq. Char. § 11.13 211.741 34-7 211.741 et seq. Char. § 6.5 Char. Art. 12 211.742, 211.743 34-8, 34-9 211.744 34-25 211.745, 211.746 34-10, 34-11 211.761 et seq. Char. § 6.5 Char. Art. 12 34-12 211.762 34-12 247.61 et seq. Ch. 16, Art. V 247.241 et seq. Ch. 16, Art. II 247.321 et seq. 20-3 247.651 et seq. 38-128 252.201 et seq. Ch. 30, Art. II 252.301 et seq. 46-664 257.1 et seq. 8-124 Ch. 40 40-20 40-151 257.1-257.82 40-20 257.225 40-20 257.228 40-20 257.243, 257.244 40-20 257.255 40-20 257.256.8 40-20 257.310e 40-20 257.311 40-20 257.312a 40-20 257.324-257.326 40-20 257.328 40-20 257.601-257.601b 40-20 257.602-257.606 40-20 257.605, 257.606 Ch. 40 257.606(1)(a) Ch. 40, Art. III 257.610 Ch. 40 257.611-257.616 40-20 257.617a-257.622 40-20 257.624a-257.624b 40-20 257.625 40-20 257.625a 40-20 257.625m 40-20 257.626-257.626b 40-20 257.627-257.627b 40-20 257.629b 40-20 257.631, 257.632 40-20 257.634-257.645 40-20 257.647-257.655 40-20 257.656-257.662 40-20 257.667-257.675d 40-20 257.672 et seq. Ch. 40, Art. III 257.674a 22-96 257.676-257.682b 40-20 257.683-257.710e 40-20 257.707 et seq. Ch. 16, Art. IV, 
Div. 3 257.716-257.724 40-20 257.904-257.904a 40-20 257.904e 40-20 257.905 40-20 257.951 40-19 259.1 et seq. 46-672 259.431 et seq. 46-672 286.251 et seq. 16-27 286.471 et seq. 32-19 287.261 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. IV 287.266 et seq. 6-85 324.101 et seq. Ch. 16 324.3031 et seq. 46-315 324.4101 20-3 324.4301 et seq. Ch. 32 Ch. 42 324.8901 et seq. 10-72 32-34 324.9101 et seq. Ch. 16, Art. III 16-52 16-58 20-3 324.9301 et seq. Ch. 16, Art. III 324.11101 et seq. Ch. 32 324.11501 et seq. Ch. 32 32-19 324.14501 et seq. Ch. 32 324.19101 et seq. Ch. 32 324.20101 et seq. 42-165 324.30101 et seq. 46-315 324.32501 et seq. 16-53 324.52701 et seq. Ch. 16, Art. II 324.61001 et seq. Ch. 24 324.80101 et seq. Ch. 26 324.80110 et seq. Ch. 26 324.81101 et seq. 40-150 324.82101 et seq. Ch. 40, Art. IV 40-150 333.5501 et seq. 32-19 333.7101 et seq. 22-279 333.13801 et seq. 32-19 333.20901 et seq. Ch. 14 333.26201 et seq. Ch. 32 338.1051 et seq. Ch. 14 339.2001 et seq. 20-3 399.201 et seq. 12-163, 12-164 12-167 12-171 12-173 399.201a 12-163 399.202 12-164 399.204 12-167, 12-168 399.205 12-174 399.211 12-177 399.213 12-173 399.2501-399.2505 16-113 408.681 et seq. Ch. 26 433.51 et seq. 6-32 436.1-436.58 2-399 436.1101 et seq. Ch. 4 436.1701 4-2 436.1703 4-1 4-3 22-279 436.1915 26-8 442.211 et seq. 10-22 445.401 30-22 445.401 et seq. Ch. 30, Art. II 445.404-445.407 30-26-30-29 445.471 et seq. Ch. 30, Art. II 445.481 et seq. Ch. 30, Art. III 30-19 30-54 30-56 30-60 445.482, 445.483 30-53, 30-54 445.483 30-55 445.484-445.486 30-57-30-59 446.201 et seq. Ch. 30, Art. II 460.701 et seq. 38-24 484.2101 et seq. Ch. 38 484.2102 38-118 484.2251 38-119 484.2361 38-24 484.3101 et seq. Ch. 38 38-19 38-21 38-116 38-118 484.3103(1) 38-21 484.3104(2) 38-131 484.3104(3) 38-122 484.3105(1) 38-119 484.3105(3), 
484.3105(4) 38-119 484.3106(1) 38-19 38-119, 38-120 484.3106(2) 38-119, 38-120 484.3106(5), 
484.3106(6) 38-119, 38-120 484.3106(7) 38-123 484.3106(7), (8) 38-23 484.3106(8) 38-123 484.3108 38-125-38-127 484.3110(4), 
484.3110(5) 38-128, 38-129 484.3113(1) 38-126 484.3113(4), 
484.3113(5) 38-126, 38-127 484.3113(6) 38-130 484.3115 38-120 484.3115(2) 38-133 484.3115(3) 38-27 484.3115(3), 
484.3115(4) 38-120 484.3115(3), 
484.3115(4) 38-120 484.3115(5) 38-124 484.3201 et seq. Ch. 38 484.3301 et seq. Ch. 38 Ch. 38, Art. II 38-19 38-21 500.100 et seq. 40-21 500.3102 40-21 559.101 et seq. 46-4 560.101 et seq. Ch. 20 20-1 20-3 20-35 46-746 560.108 20-3 560.109 20-3 560.111 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. III 560.112-560.119 20-97 560.113 20-67 560.113-560.118 20-67 560.114 20-67 560.115-560.117 20-67 560.118 20-67 560.125 20-126 560.131 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. IV 600.3801 et seq. Ch. 16, Art. IV 600.8302 2-401 600.8395 40-80 600.8701 et seq. 1-2 1-14 691.1401 et seq. Char. § 4.5 691.1408 Ch. 2, Art. III 722.751 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. IX, 
Div. 2 750.1 et seq. Ch. 22 750.50 6-1 750.167(1)(c) 22-49 750.167(1)(d) 22-2 750.167(1)(e) 22-95 750.167(1)(f) 22-135 750.167(1)(h) 22-96 750.167(1)(j), 
750.167(1)(k) 22-3, 22-4 750.167(1)(l) 22-97 750.169 22-101 750.170 22-100 750.200 et seq. Ch. 18 750.240 et seq. Ch. 18 750.243a et seq. 26-6 750.301 et seq. 22-138 750.377a et seq. 22-72 26-42 36-20 42-197 750.437 6-2 750.493d 16-212 750.522 22-74 752.525 22-101 764.9c 1-16  
